For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application of Community First Bankshares, Inc., Fargo, North Dakota, to merge with Mountain Parks Financial Corp., and thereby indirectly acquire Mountain Parks Bank, both of Denver, Colorado. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Community First Bankshares, Inc. Fargo, North Dakota Order Approving the Acquisition of a Bank Holding Company Community First Bankshares, Inc., Fargo, North Dakota ("Applicant"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has applied for the Board's approval under section 3 of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1842) to merge with Mountain Parks Financial Corp. ("MPF"), and indirectly acquire MPF's wholly owned subsidiary bank, Mountain Parks Bank ("MP Bank"), both of Denver, Colorado. Notice of this proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (61 Federal Register 46,650 (1996)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the proposal and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 3 of the BHC Act. Applicant, with total consolidated assets of $2.3 billion, operates subsidiary banks in seven states. Applicant is the fourteenth largest banking or thrift organization ("depository institution") in Colorado, controlling $401.1 million in deposits, representing 1.2 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in the state. MPF is the sixteenth largest depository institution in Colorado, controlling $361.7 million in deposits, representing 1.1 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in Colorado. On consummation of this proposal, and taking into account proposed divestitures, Applicant would become the eighth largest depository institution in the state, controlling $644.2 million in deposits, representing 2 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in Colorado. Section 3(d) of the BHC Act, as amended by section 101 of the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act of 1994, allows the Board to approve an application by a bank holding company to acquire control of a bank located in a state other than the home state of such bank holding company, if certain conditions are met. For purposes of the BHC Act, the Applicant's home state is North Dakota, and Applicant would acquire a bank in Colorado. The conditions for an interstate acquisition under section 3(d) are met in this case. In view of all the facts of record, the Board is permitted to approve this proposal under section 3(d) of the BHC Act. The BHC Act prohibits the Board from approving an application under section 3 of the BHC Act if the proposal would result in a monopoly, or if the proposal would substantially lessen competition in any relevant market, unless such anticompetitive effects are clearly outweighed in the public interest by the probable effect of the transaction in meeting the convenience and needs of the community to be served. Applicant and MPF compete in the Grand County banking market, the Summit County banking market, and the Denver-Boulder banking market, all in Colorado. On consummation of this proposal, concentration would not significantly increase in the Denver-Boulder banking market. The Herfindahl-Hirschman Index ("HHI"), for the Denver-Boulder banking market would increase by 1 point to a level of 1057. In order to mitigate the potential adverse competitive effects of the proposal in the Grand County and Summit County banking markets, Applicant has committed to make divestitures in each of these banking markets. In the Grand County banking market, Applicant proposes to divest the Grandby, Colorado, branch of MP Bank to an out-of-market acquirer. In the Summit County banking market, Applicant proposes to divest its controlling interest in Vail Banks, Inc., Vail, Colorado ("Vail Banks"), to Vail Banks or to an out-of-market acquirer. After the divestiture in the Grand County banking market, four competitors would remain in the market, including a new competitor controlling 24.8 percent of market deposits. The HHI would increase by no more than 53 points to a level of 3142. After the divestiture in the Summit County banking market, market concentration, as measured by the HHI, would remain unchanged. In accordance with the BHC Act, the Board sought comments from the Department of Justice on the competitive effects of the proposal in the relevant banking markets. The Department of Justice has indicated that, subject to completion of the proposed divestitures, consummation of the proposal would not likely have any significantly adverse effect on competition in any relevant banking market, and has not objected to consummation of the proposal. The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency also has not objected to the proposal. Based on all the facts of record, and subject to Applicant's divestiture commitments, the Board concludes that consummation of this proposal would not have a significantly adverse effect on competition or the concentration of banking resources in any relevant banking market. The Board has carefully reviewed the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of Applicant and MPF in light of all the facts of record, including relevant supervisory reports of examination. The Board also concludes that the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the institutions involved in this proposal, and considerations relating to the convenience and needs of the communities to be served, are consistent with approval of this application. The other supervisory factors the Board must consider under section 3 of the BHC Act also are consistent with approval. Based on the foregoing and all other facts of record, the Board has determined that the application should be, and hereby is, approved. The Board's approval is expressly conditioned on compliance by Applicant with its divestiture commitments and other commitments made in connection with this proposal. For purposes of this action, the commitments and conditions relied on by the Board in reaching this decision are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The acquisition of MPF shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day following the effective date of this order, or later than three months following the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective December 2, 1996. Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes Asset data are as of June 30, 1996. State deposit data are as of June 30, 1995, but are adjusted to take into account mergers and acquisitions through October 31, 1996. Pub. L. No. 103-328, 108 Stat. 2338 (1994). A bank holding company's home state is the state in which the operations of the bank holding company's banking subsidiaries were principally conducted on July 1, 1966, or the date on which the company became a bank holding company, whichever is later. See 12 U.S.C. §§ 1842(d)(1)(A) and (B) and 1842(d)(2)(A) and (B). Applicant is adequately capitalized and adequately managed. On consummation of this proposal, Applicant and its affiliates would not control more than 10 percent of the total amount of deposits of insured depository institutions in the United States or more than the state limit of 25 percent of the total amount of deposits in all federally insured financial institutions in Colorado. There is no minimum age requirement for subsidiary banks acquired as a result of the purchase of a Colorado bank holding company. Colo. Rev. Stats. § 11-6.4-103 (2), (4) (Supp. 1996). 12 U.S.C. § 1842(c). The Grand County banking market is approximated by Grand County, Colorado, and the Summit County banking market is approximated by Summit County, Colorado. The Denver-Boulder banking market is approximated by the Denver RMA and the remaining portions of Adams and Arapahoe Counties, Boulder County, and the towns of Erie, Frederick, and Keensburg in Weld County. Market data are as of June 30, 1995. Market deposit data are based on calculations in which the deposits of thrift institutions are included at 50 percent. The Board previously has indicated that thrift institutions have become, or have the potential to become, significant competitors of commercial banks. See Midwest Financial Group , 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 386 (1989); National City Corporation , 70 Federal Reserve Bulletin 743 (1984). Thus, the Board has regularly included thrift deposits in the calculation of market share on a 50-percent weighted basis. See, e.g., First Hawaiian, Inc. , 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 52 (1991). Under the revised Department of Justice Merger Guidelines, 49 Federal Register 26,823 (June 29, 1984), a market in which the post- merger HHI is between 1000 and 1800 is considered moderately concentrated and a market in which the post-merger HHI is over 1800 is considered highly concentrated. The Justice Department has informed the Board that a bank merger or acquisition generally will not be challenged (in the absence of other factors indicating anticompetitive effects) unless the post-merger HHI is at least 1800 and the merger increases the HHI by more than 200 points. The Justice Department has stated that the higher than normal threshold for an increase in the HHI when screening bank mergers and acquisitions for anticompetitive effects implicitly recognizes the competitive effects of limited- purpose lenders and other non-depository financial entities. Applicant would become the largest depository institution in both banking markets, and would control deposits of $50.9 million (representing 69.4 percent of market deposits) in the Grand County banking market, and $108.2 million of deposits (representing 55.9 percent of market deposits), in the Summit County banking market. The HHI would increase by 2261 points to a level of 5350 in the Grand County banking market and by 1085 points to a level of 5069 in the Summit County banking market Applicant has committed to execute a sales agreement to accomplish the divestitures before consummation of the proposal and to complete the divestitures within 180 days of consummation. Applicant also has committed that, if it is unsuccessful in completing the divestitures within 180 days of consummation, it will transfer all interests necessary to effect the divestitures to an independent trustee that is acceptable to the Board and that will be instructed to sell the assets promptly. In addition, Applicant has committed to submit executed trust agreements acceptable to the Board stating the terms of the divestitures prior to consummation of the proposal. Applicant currently owns 24.6 percent of the voting shares of Vail Banks. Applicant acknowledged that its ownership of these shares constituted a controlling interest for purposes of the BHC Act when it acquired them in 1994. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Lindsey, Phillips, and Meyer. Absent and not voting: Governor Yellen.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the applications of Royal Bank of Canada, Montreal, Canada; Norwest Corporation, Minneapolis, Minnesota; Stichting Prioriteit ABN AMRO Holding, Stichting Administratiekantoor ABN AMRO Holding, ABN AMRO Holding N.V., ABN AMRO Bank N.V., all of Amsterdam, The Netherlands, and ABN AMRO North America, Inc., Chicago, Illinois, each to acquire more than 5 percent of the voting interests in Integrion Financial Network, LLC, White Plains, New York, and thereby engage in data processing and data transmission activities pursuant to the Board's Regulation Y. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Royal Bank of Canada Montreal, Canada Norwest Corporation Minneapolis, Minnesota Stichting Prioriteit ABN AMRO Holding Stichting Administratiekantoor ABN AMRO Holding ABN AMRO Holding N.V. ABN AMRO Bank N.V. all of Amsterdam, The Netherlands ABN AMRO North America, Inc. Chicago, Illinois Order Approving Notices to Engage in Nonbanking Activities Royal Bank of Canada, Montreal, Canada, a foreign banking organization that is subject to the Bank Holding Company ("BHC") Act; Norwest Corporation, Minneapolis, Minnesota; Stichting Prioriteit ABN AMRO Holding, Stichting Administratiekantoor ABN AMRO Holding, ABN AMRO Holding N.V., ABN AMRO Bank N.V., and ABN AMRO North America, Inc., bank holding companies within the meaning of the BHC Act, have requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8)) and section 225.23 of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.23) each to acquire more than 5 percent of the voting interests in Integrion Financial Network, LLC, White Plains, New York ("Integrion"), and thereby engage in data processing and data transmission activities pursuant to section 225.25(b)(7) of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.25(b)(7)). Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (61 Federal Register 54,441 (1996)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the notice and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. RBC, with total consolidated assets of approximately $131.6 billion, is the largest commercial banking organization in Canada, and operates a branch in New York, New York; agencies in Los Angeles, California, and Miami, Florida; and a representative office in Chicago, Illinois. Norwest, with total consolidated assets of $77.8 billion, is the 12th largest commercial banking organization in the United States, and controls banks in Minnesota and 14 other states. ABN AMRO, with total consolidated assets of $339.4 billion, is the largest commercial banking organization in the Netherlands, and controls seven depository institutions in Illinois and one commercial bank in New York. ABN AMRO Bank N.V. also operates branches in Boston, Massachusetts; Chicago, Illinois; New York, New York; Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; and Seattle, Washington; and agencies in Atlanta, Georgia; Miami, Florida; Houston, Texas; and Los Angeles and San Francisco, California. Each Notificant also engages in a number of nonbanking activities in the United States. Proposed Activities Integrion is a joint venture among Notificants, 12 national banks, one savings and loan holding company, and Gemini Management Corporation, a subsidiary of International Business Machines Corporation ("IBM"). Integrion will design, develop, and operate a data processing and transmission system through which depository institutions and their affiliates would make available home banking and other financial services to their respective customers. Integrion will not itself provide home banking or other financial services. Instead, the data processing and data transmission system ("gateway") Integrion designs and operates will serve as a switch or interface, electronically connecting customers of member depository institutions with the member depository institutions themselves. Customers would connect to Integrion's gateway, and thus a member depository institution, using a variety of devices, including personal computers ("PCs"), touch-tone telephones, or other electronic communication devices. Once a customer is connected to the gateway, Integrion would electronically route and connect the customer to the appropriate member depository institution, using software developed by Integrion that would facilitate communications between the customer's PC (or other device) and the depository institution's hardware and software. In this manner, the Integrion gateway will provide customers with access to the menu of electronic banking and financial services offered by their respective member depository institutions, including remote banking services; bill-payment functions; and access to stock quotations. The proposed activities appear to be data processing and transmission activities that are permissible for bank holding companies under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act and section 225.25(b)(7) of the Board's Regulation Y. The Board previously has determined by regulation that certain data processing and transmission activities are closely related to banking and therefore permissible for bank holding companies under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Regulation Y permits bank holding companies to provide data processing and transmission services, facilities, data bases, or access to such services, facilities, or data bases by any technological means, if the data to be processed or furnished are financial, banking, or economic in nature. Regulation Y also provides that bank holding companies may engage in incidental activities that are necessary to carry on an activity that is closely related to banking. Internet Access In addition to providing these services, Integrion's gateway will provide customers of member depository institutions with a means of connecting to the Internet, a non-proprietary computer network that contains significant amounts of data that are not financial, banking, or economic in nature. As an accommodation to its member depository institutions and their customers, Integrion proposes to provide an electronic link to an Internet access provider. The Board previously has permitted bank holding companies providing permissible data processing and transmission services to financial institutions to process and transmit a limited amount of nonfinancial data for such institutions as an incidental activity. Notificants contend that member depository institutions desire to offer Internet access to their customers in order to make their package of banking and financial services more marketable, and to permit the institutions to compete more effectively with nonbank financial service providers. Notificants have indicated that providing Internet access to customers of member depository institutions would constitute a small part of Integrion's overall data processing and transmission activities, and would not require modification of the gateway's capabilities or systems. In addition, as noted above, Integrion would provide Internet access only as an accommodation to its member depository institutions, which in turn would offer Internet access to their customers only as part of a broader package of banking or financial services. In light of the foregoing, and based on all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that Integrion's provision of Internet access to customers of its member depository institutions is incidental to its permissible data processing and transmission activities. Other Considerations In order to approve this notice, the Board also must find that the performance of the proposed activities by Integrion "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public, such as greater convenience, increased competition, or gains in efficiency, that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices." As part of the Board's evaluation of these factors, the Board considers the financial and managerial resources of the notificants and their subsidiaries and the effect the transaction would have on such resources. The Board notes that the capital ratios of Norwest and ABN AMRO North America, Inc. meet applicable risk-based capital standards and that each of the foreign bank Notificants maintains capital equivalent to the capital levels that would be required of a U.S. banking organization. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that financial and managerial considerations are consistent with approval. The Board believes that consummation of the proposal would enhance consumer convenience by expanding the availability of remote banking services and by making these services available in new ways. Consummation of the proposal would permit member depository institutions and their affiliates to deliver remote banking services to their customers more efficiently, and would establish a joint venture that pools the resources of a number of banking organizations for the purpose of developing data processing and transmission systems that would facilitate the creation and distribution of additional remote banking products that respond to consumer needs. In addition, the communications gateway operated by Integrion would allow member depository institutions and their affiliates to make existing remote banking services available to consumers through additional means, such as through personal financial software programs, screen phones, and the public Internet. There is no evidence in the record to indicate that consummation of the proposal would result in any significantly adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices, that are not outweighed by the public benefits of this proposal. On the basis of the foregoing and all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that the public benefits reasonably to be expected from Integrion's proposed activities outweigh any possible adverse effects from the proposal, and, therefore, that the activities are a proper incident to banking under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Conclusion Based on the foregoing and all the facts of record, including the commitments discussed in this order and all other commitments and representations made by Notificants in connection with the notices, and subject to the terms and conditions set forth in this order, the Board has determined that the notices should be, and hereby are, approved. The Board's determination is subject to all the conditions set forth in Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.23(g) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.7 and 225.23(g)), and to the Board's authority to require such modification or termination of the activities of a bank holding company or any of its subsidiaries as the Board finds necessary to ensure compliance with, and to prevent evasion of, the provisions of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders issued thereunder. The Board's decision is specifically conditioned on Notificants' compliance with the commitments made in connection with this notice and the conditions discussed in this order. The commitments and conditions relied on in reaching this decision shall be deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. By order of the Board of Governors, effective December 2, 1996. Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes Royal Bank of Canada ("RBC"), Norwest Corporation ("Norwest") and Stichting Prioriteit ABN AMRO Holding ("ABN AMRO") and its subsidiaries listed above are hereafter collectively referred to as "Notificants". Except as otherwise noted, asset and ranking data are as of December 31, 1995, and use exchange rates then in effect. Asset and ranking data for Norwest are as of June 30, 1996. The following national banks would become members of Integrion on consummation of the proposal: Bank of America NT & SA; NationsBank, N.A.; KeyBank, N.A.; Bank One, Columbus, N.A.; Mellon Bank, N.A.; Barnett Bank, N.A.; First Bank N.A.; PNC Bank, N.A; Michigan National Bank; The First National Bank of Chicago; Comerica Bank - Ann Arbor, N.A.; and Fleet National Bank. Each of these national banks has applied to the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency to invest in Integrion through an operating subsidiary of the bank. Washington Mutual Inc., a savings and loan holding company, also would become a member of Integrion and has provided notice of its intent to invest in Integrion to the Office of Thrift Supervision. Notificants do not currently anticipate that Integrion's facilities would be used by member depository institutions to store customer account data. Notificants do expect that Integrion would store limited amounts of data related to transactions conducted through the gateway, such as information relating to bill payment instructions transmitted to member depository institutions. Integrion is permitted to store and transmit data to the extent permissible under section 225.25(b)(7) of the Board's Regulation Y. 12 C.F.R. 225.25(b)(7). Customers using a PC may connect to the Integrion gateway through dedicated, private communications networks; through personal financial software programs; or through the Internet. Integrion has contracted with IBM to provide the telecommunications and data network infrastructure necessary for Integrion to electronically link member depository institutions with their customers. Under this contract, communications between Integrion and member depository institutions will be transmitted through an existing, proprietary IBM telecommunications and data network. It is expected that the remote banking services offered by a member depository institution would include the ability to gain access to account information, transfer funds between accounts, obtain information on available loan or deposit products, apply for a loan, establish additional accounts, order checks, or communicate electronically with a customer service representative. The individual banking and financial services that a customer would be able to gain access to through Integrion's gateway would depend on the products offered by the member depository institution. Such products and services would be offered by the member depository institution in its own name, and would be displayed to the customer using the graphics, logo, and service marks chosen and developed by the depository institution. Thus, it would appear to customers connecting to their depository institutions through the Integrion gateway that they are connected directly to the depository institution, and the data processing and transmission services provided by Integrion would be essentially transparent to consumers. See 12 C.F.R. 225.25(b)(7); see also Cardinal Bancshares, Inc. , 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 674 (1996); and The Royal Bank of Canada , 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 363 (1996) (bank holding companies may provide data processing and transmission services to financial institutions for purposes of allowing such institutions to offer electronic banking, bill payment, and stock quotation services). Notificants must provide these financial data processing and transmission services through Integrion in accordance with the limitations set forth in section 225.25(b)(7) of Regulation Y. See 12 C.F.R. 225.21(a)(2). Notificants must consult with the Federal Reserve System prior to providing, through Integrion, data processing or transmission services to any non-depository organization, or providing access to non-financial databases other than as described in this order, in order to permit the System to determine whether such activities are permissible under section 4 of the BHC Act and Regulation Y. Integrion could, for example, provide access to the Internet through an electronic link to IBM's proprietary network, which maintains connections to a wide variety of public and proprietary databases and computer networks, or to other Internet access providers. See BNCCORP, INC ., 81 Federal Reserve Bulletin 295 (1995); see also First National of Nebraska, Inc ., 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 82 (1996). Notificants expect that less than 10 percent of Integrion's revenues would be derived from providing Internet access to customers of member depository institutions. Notificants have committed that Integrion will provide nonfinancial data processing and transmission services in accordance with the limitations in Regulation Y and relevant Board orders. 12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8). See 12 C.F.R. 225.24; see also The Fuji Bank, Limited , 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 94 (1989); Bayerische Vereinsbank AG , 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 155 (1987). The Board notes that, pursuant to the terms of Integrion's charter, Notificants and other members of Integrion will remain free to compete with each other and Integrion in the development and marketing of data processing and transmission networks similar to the Integrion gateway, as well as remote banking and other financial services. In considering the public interest factors in this case, the Board has carefully considered the measures that Integrion and member financial institutions will take to protect the account data and other financial information that will be transmitted through the gateway from electronic interception, interference, or fraud. The Board previously has noted that the nature of the risks associated with providing electronic banking services is not different from those associated with more traditional forms of banking. See Cardinal Bancshares, Inc ., 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 674, 676 (1996). Among other security measures, Integrion and member depository institutions will use log-in passwords and encryption procedures to attempt to maintain the privacy and integrity of data transmitted. In addition, as part of its operations, Integrion will transmit data to member institutions through a private communications network. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Lindsey, Phillips, and Meyer. Absent and not voting: Governor Yellen.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today approved a notice by two U.S. and six Canadian banking organizations to acquire the voting shares of Multinet International Bank, New York City, a limited purpose trust company now in formation. Multinet would serve as a clearinghouse for multilateral netting of foreign exchange transactions conducted by its participants. The Board also approved the application by Multinet, a state-chartered institution, to become a member of the Federal Reserve System. Banking organizations making the request to acquire Multinet are The Chase Manhattan Corporation, New York City; First Chicago NBD Corporation, Chicago; Bank of Montreal, National Bank of Canada, and Royal Bank of Canada, all of Montreal; and The Bank of Nova Scotia, Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, and The Toronto Dominion Bank, all of Toronto. A copy of the Board's Order is attached. Bank of Montreal Montreal, Canada The Bank of Nova Scotia Toronto, Canada Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce Toronto, Canada The Chase Manhattan Corporation New York, New York First Chicago NBD Corporation Chicago, Illinois National Bank of Canada Montreal, Canada Royal Bank of Canada Montreal, Canada The Toronto Dominion Bank Toronto, Canada Order Approving a Notice to Engage in Certain Nonbanking Activities and Application to Become a Member of the Federal Reserve System Bank of Montreal, Montreal, Canada; The Bank of Nova Scotia, Toronto, Canada; Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, Toronto, Canada; The Chase Manhattan Corporation, New York, New York; First Chicago NBD Corporation, Chicago, Illinois; National Bank of Canada, Montreal, Canada; Royal Bank of Canada, Montreal, Canada; and The Toronto Dominion Bank, Toronto, Canada (collectively, "Notificants"), bank holding companies within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), have requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1843(c)(8)) and section 225.23 of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.23) each to acquire up to 13.3 percent of the voting shares of Multinet International Bank, New York, New York ("Multinet"). Notificants propose that Multinet, a de novo uninsured state licensed trust company, would serve as a clearinghouse for multilateral netting of foreign exchange transactions. Multinet would provide the proposed services to all qualifying participants worldwide. In addition, Multinet has applied under section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act to become a member of the Federal Reserve System. As a state member bank, Multinet would have an account at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York ("Reserve Bank") and would use Federal Reserve System payment services to clear and settle U.S. dollar payments to and from the clearinghouse. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (61 Federal Register 39,660 (1996)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the notice and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act and section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act. Notificants are large commercial banking organizations headquartered in Canada and the United States. They engage directly and through subsidiaries in a broad range of banking and permissible nonbanking activities in the United States. Proposed Activities Multinet would address the risks inherent in foreign exchange clearing and settlement by establishing a clearinghouse for financial institutions that enter into foreign exchange contracts. Multinet would net spot and forward foreign exchange contracts between participants in the clearinghouse, and condition payments to a participant under a foreign exchange contract on strict compliance by the participant with the clearinghouse rules. Those procedures would reduce the volume of settlement payments among participants and have the potential to reduce significantly the credit, liquidity, and other risks and the transaction costs associated with clearing and settling foreign exchange contracts. Multilateral netting would be achieved through the legal technique of novation and substitution, whereby Multinet would become the counterparty to each participant in every contract accepted for netting and would receive payments from and make payments to each participant in the proper currencies. Multinet would charge participants a fee for each trade that it cleared. As a member of the Federal Reserve System, Multinet would open an account with, and receive payment services from, the Reserve Bank. Multinet would have access to Fedwire to make and receive U.S. dollar payments, which, among other things, would be used to conduct U.S. dollar settlements and would have a book-entry securities account, which would be used to hold and manage U.S. Treasury securities pledged by participants as collateral. Multinet's key service provider would be International Clearing Systems, Inc. ("ICSI"), a wholly owned subsidiary of The Options Clearing Corporation ("Options Clearing"), both of Chicago, Illinois. ICSI would operate VALUNETï¿½, a proprietary netting, settlement, and risk management software system developed and tested with the direction and support of Options Clearing and currently in use by ICSI to effect bilateral netting of foreign exchange contracts. In addition, two representatives of ICSI would serve on Multinet's 12-member board of directors, and one of ICSI's representatives also would serve on the board's executive committee and risk management committee. Closely Related to Banking Analysis Section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act provides that a bank holding company may, with Board approval, engage in any activity that the Board determines to be "so closely related to banking or managing or controlling banks as to be a proper incident thereto." Multinet proposes to engage in trust company activities (including activities of a fiduciary, agency, or custodial nature) related to the maintenance of the collateral pool to be pledged by participants; foreign exchange transactions (through the substitution of Multinet as the counterparty to both sides of every accepted contract); and processing and transmitting financial, banking, and economic data. All these activities are permissible for bank holding companies under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act, and would be performed by Multinet in the manner authorized by the Board. Proper Incident to Banking Analysis In order to approve the proposal, the Board also must determine that the proposed activities are a proper incident to banking; that is, that the activity "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public, such as greater convenience, increased competition, or gains in efficiency, that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices." As part of its evaluation of these factors, the Board has carefully reviewed the financial and managerial resources of the Notificants and Multinet and the effect the proposed transaction would have on these resources. Based on all the facts of record, the financial and managerial resources of the Notificants and Multinet are consistent with approval of the proposal. The Board also has reviewed the proposal in light of its Policy Statement on Privately Operated Large-Dollar Multilateral Netting Systems ("Policy Statement"). Multinet would take multiple steps to control the risks inherent in its operations, including imposing membership criteria on participants, evaluating all foreign exchange contracts before acceptance on the basis of several risk-related criteria, withholding payments due a defaulting participant, and using a line of credit secured by withheld payments and the securities pledged by participants to fund settlement payments when a participant defaults. To address the risk that financially weak institutions or institutions that lack experience in foreign exchange transactions would default or be unable to fulfill their obligations on a timely basis, Multinet would subject potential and active participants to stringent and objective membership requirements, including minimum requirements with respect to capital, credit rating, and experience in the foreign exchange dealer market. Applicants also would be required to complete successfully a trial period as a subscriber to Multinet's bilateral netting service. Multinet would continue to monitor the performance of participants after they became members. To address the risk to Multinet arising from the potential default of a qualified participant, Multinet would establish and continually update for each participant a series of exposure measurements and collateral requirements based on Multinet's expected loss if the participant failed to perform on any of its outstanding foreign exchange contracts. Each contract submitted would be evaluated to determine whether it would cause either party to the contract to exceed its exposure limits or collateral requirement. Contracts that would cause any of the exposure limits to be exceeded, or that required additional collateral that was not timely provided, would not be accepted for netting. Participants also would be required to contribute collateral to cover Multinet's estimated exposure to settlement losses in the clearinghouse as a whole and to the risk that a settlement agent might fail to deliver a currency under Multinet's multi-currency line of credit. Multinet also would monitor the risk profile of participants to identify possible future limit violations or the need to call for additional collateral. Multinet proposes to establish several standard clearinghouse techniques to control and allocate the risk associated with the failure by a participant to settle on a timely basis its payment obligations on accepted foreign exchange contracts. In general, if a participant failed to pay Multinet, Multinet would withhold payments due the defaulting participant and use the withheld payments, along with securities in the collateral pool, to secure an advance under Multinet's line of credit in the currencies and in the amounts that the defaulting participant failed to deliver. As currently structured, Multinet would use the loan to pay the parties that performed their payment obligations to the clearinghouse. In the event the collateral pool was drawn down, participants would be required to replenish the pool by pledging additional collateral. A participant's failure to make a required pledge would constitute a default and enable Multinet to withhold settlement payments due that participant, thereby providing additional collateral to the pool. Multinet would minimize its operating risk through its reliance on the back-office support staff of ICSI and the use of comprehensive disaster recovery facilities and procedures. The risk management policies and procedures that Multinet proposes to implement in providing foreign exchange clearinghouse services are consistent with the Board's Policy Statement. Based on all the facts of record, the Board finds that the risk management policies and procedures are consistent with approval of the proposal. The risk management techniques of Multinet also can reasonably be expected to produce notable public benefits by increasing the reliability of clearing and settlement in foreign exchange transactions. All participants would be subject to clearinghouse standards concerning their financial condition and operational capabilities, their volume of payments would be reduced, and the multi-party collateral, loss-sharing, and credit arrangements would ensure prompt payment to performing parties. Moreover, the proposal can reasonably be expected to increase competition in the provision of foreign exchange services. Multinet would be the first clearinghouse for multilateral netting of foreign exchange transactions in the United States and only the second such clearinghouse in operation worldwide. By increasing the availability of clearing and settlement services, these services should be available at lower cost and to a larger number of financial institutions and their customers. For these reasons, and in reliance on all the commitments made in connection with the proposal, the Board concludes that the proposal can reasonably be expected to produce public benefits that would outweigh the potential of the proposal for adverse effects, if any, under the proper incident to banking standard of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. The Board also has considered the factors it is required to consider when reviewing an application to become a member bank under section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act. Multinet has provided the Board with several commitments intended to ensure that the Board would have adequate enforcement authority over Multinet as an uninsured state member bank. Based on all the facts of record, the Board finds that Multinet's application for membership is consistent with approval. Conclusion Based on all the facts of record, including all the commitments, stipulations, and representations made by the Notificants and Multinet, and subject to all the terms and conditions set forth in this order, the Board has determined that the notices and the application should be, and hereby are, approved. Approval of the notices and application is specifically conditioned on compliance by Notificants with the commitments and stipulations made in connection with the notices and application. The Board's determination also is subject to all the terms and conditions set forth in Regulation Y, including those in section 225.7 and 225.23(g) (12 C.F.R. 225.7 and 225.23(g)), and to the Board's authority to require such modification or termination of the activities of a bank holding company or any of its subsidiaries as the Board finds necessary to ensure compliance with and to prevent evasion of the provisions of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders thereunder. The Board's decision is specifically conditioned on compliance with all the commitments, stipulations, and representations made in the notices and application, including the commitments and conditions discussed in this order. The commitments, stipulations, representations, and conditions relied on in reaching this decision shall be deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision, and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. These activities shall not be commenced later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good.cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago or New York, pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective December 4, 1996. Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes Multinet would not accept deposits and would not be insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. On August 21, 1996, Multinet received an Organizational Certificate and conditional Authorization Certificate from the New York State Banking Department. The Authorization Certificate is conditioned on Multinet's becoming a member of the Federal Reserve System and addressing certain other organizational and operational matters. Forward contracts would have a maturity of not more than two years. Multinet also would provide bilateral netting services to subscribers outside the clearinghouse. Because Multinet would not be a party to those transactions, its assets and the collateral pledged by participants in the clearinghouse would not be at risk with respect to the transactions. Multinet has committed that it will not net or settle obligations created by or through any other bilateral or multilateral netting service without prior notice to the Federal Reserve System. Operations are expected to begin in U.S. and Canadian dollars only, with transactions in other currencies to be added thereafter. Multinet has committed that it will not clear foreign exchange contracts in any additional currencies, and will not make any change in the overall currency liquidity limit or level of available credit facilities in any eligible currency, without prior notice to the Federal Reserve System. Multinet has committed that it will not incur any overdrafts in its account at the Reserve Bank. Options Clearing is a registered clearing agency that is owned by several U.S. stock and commodity exchanges and regulated by the Securities and Exchange Commission. Options Clearing is the largest clearinghouse for options contracts in the world, and has developed complex risk management and settlement techniques for the numerous products it clears. ICSI staff would monitor participants' positions and submitted contracts for compliance with Multinet's policies and procedures, and, under the direction of Multinet staff, would make and receive all settlement payments. ICSI staff also would help to assess the operational capabilities of potential and active participants, train applicants in the use of VALUNET®, and provide participants with telephone support. Nine of the 10 other members of the board of directors would be representatives of Notificants. The tenth member would be a representative of Multinet. 12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8). Regulation Y also provides that bank holding companies may engage in incidental activities that are necessary to carry on an activity that is closely related to banking. See 12 C.F.R. 225.21(a)(2). Multinet would not be a bank, would not make loans or investments, and would not accept deposits other than of funds generated from trust activities that were not currently invested and were properly secured, and would satisfy the other limitations of Regulation Y with respect to trust company activities. See 12 C.F.R. 225.25(b)(3). Foreign exchange trading has been approved by the Board by order. See The Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation , 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 217 (1989); The Long-Term Credit Bank of Japan, Limited , 74 Federal Reserve Bulletin 573 (1988). Multinet also would provide data processing and transmission services pursuant to a written agreement, and would observe certain limitations on the facilities and hardware provided with its data processing and transmission services, as required by Regulation Y. See 12 C.F.R. 225.25(b)(7). 12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8). Each of the Notificants would have a representative on the board of directors of Multinet, who may be an officer or director of the Notificant. Under the Depository Institution Management Interlocks Act (12 U.S.C. § 3201 et seq .) ("Interlocks Act") and the Board's Regulation L (12 C.F.R. Part 212), certain management interlocks between depository institutions or depository holding companies, as defined in the Interlocks Act, that are not affiliated for purposes of the Interlocks Act are prohibited. The general purpose of the Interlocks Act is to promote competition between depository institutions in the provision of credit to the general public. See H.R. Rep. No. 95-1383, at 14 (1978), reprinted in 1978 U.S.C.C.A.N. 9273, 9286. In view thereof, the Board previously has determined that a management interlock between a depository institution and a limited purpose trust company that does not have the power to accept deposits or make personal or commercial loans is not prohibited by the Interlocks Act. See Letter from General Counsel to Charles M. Thompson, Esq., dated July 13, 1994; Letter from General Counsel to Mr. John A. O'Conner, Jr., dated July 8, 1994. See 59 Federal Register 67,534 (December 29, 1994). The Policy Statement also incorporates the minimum standards for multilateral netting systems set forth in the Report of the Committee on Interbank Netting Schemes of the Central Banks of the Group of Ten Countries. Multinet has committed that it will not admit a foreign financial institution as a member of the clearinghouse without prior notice to the Federal Reserve System, unless the System has previously approved the admission to Multinet of the identical type of financial institution from the same foreign country. All Notificants have successfully completed this trial period. Contracts that were not accepted would remain bilateral contracts and would be settled outside Multinet. Multinet's credit exposure on accepted forward contracts would be fully collateralized by U.S. government obligations, and additional collateral would be required to cover the potential volatility of the accepted forward contracts over five business days. Multinet also would be authorized to close out a participant's forward contracts in whole or in part to cover any collateral deficiencies resulting from changes in exchange rates or the value of the collateral or from the maturation of accepted forward contracts and the shift of collateral to the settlement collateral pool. Based on these collateral requirements, the Board has determined that Multinet's credit exposure on forward foreign exchange transactions would not be significant. Multinet has committed that it will notify the Federal Reserve System of all proposed changes to its rules and user manual, and that it will provide the System with a copy of any final agreement or legal opinion related to its netting and settlement services and related collateral arrangements, or any amendment to such documents before using or acting in reliance on such documents or amendments thereto. Multinet also has stipulated that it is subject to the supervisory, examination, and enforcement powers of the Board under the BHC Act as if it were a subsidiary of a bank holding company, and to the supervisory, examination, and enforcement powers of the Board under the Federal Deposit Insurance Act ("FDI Act") as if Multinet were an insured depository institution for which the Board is the appropriate Federal banking agency under the FDI Act. See 12 U.S.C. § 322; 12 C.F.R. 208.5. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Lindsey, Phillips, Yellen, and Meyer.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its decision denying the notice filed by BancSecurity Corporation to acquire Marshalltown Financial Corporation and its thrift subsidiary, Marshalltown Savings Bank, FSB, all of Marshalltown, Iowa. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. BancSecurity Corporation Marshalltown, Iowa Order Denying Acquisition of a Thrift Holding Company BancSecurity Corporation, ("BancSecurity"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8)) and section 225.23 of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.23) to acquire Marshalltown Financial Corporation ("MFC"), and MFC's wholly owned thrift subsidiary, Marshalltown Savings Bank, FSB ("Savings"), all of Marshalltown, Iowa, and thereby to engage in operating a savings association. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (61 Federal Register 42,251 (1996)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the notice and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. BancSecurity is the 12th largest depository institution in Iowa, controlling deposits of $415 million, representing approximately 1.1 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in the state. MFC, with deposits of $103 million, is the 57th largest depository institution in the state, representing less than 1 percent of deposits in depository institutions in the state. On consummation of the proposal, BancSecurity would become the ninth largest depository institution in Iowa, controlling total deposits of $518 million, representing approximately 1.4 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in the state. The Board previously has determined by regulation that the operation of a savings association by a bank holding company is closely related to banking within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. 12 C.F.R 225.25(b)(9). Competitive Considerations Under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act, the Board is required to consider whether a proposal is likely to result in any significantly adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices. The Board concludes that consummation of this proposal would result in significantly adverse effects on competition in the relevant banking market. In reaching this conclusion, the Board carefully considered the entire record, including information, analysis and arguments provided by BancSecurity. The Board and the courts have found that the relevant geographic banking market for analyzing the competitive effects of a proposal must reflect commercial and banking realities and should consist of the local area where the depository institutions involved offer their services and where local consumers can practicably turn for alternatives. In making a determination on the geographic market in this case, the Board has considered worker commuting patterns (as indicated by census data), shopping patterns and other indicia of economic integration and the transmission of competitive forces among depository institutions, and relevant banking data. In addition, the Board has reviewed information from on-site investigations of the area conducted by staff of the Board and the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago in connection with the proposal ("Federal Reserve Survey"), which included interviews with bankers, consumers, and owners of small businesses in Marshall County and adjacent areas. The Board has determined that the relevant market for analyzing the competitive effects of this proposal is a rural area in central Iowa approximated by Marshall County plus the townships of Spring Creek, Carlton, Indian Village and Highland in Tama County ("Marshall County banking market"). The Board also has concluded that the relevant banking market does not include Howard, Toledo, Tama and Columbia Townships in Tama County and Felix and Clay Townships in southern Grundy County as proposed by BancSecurity. Banking data reveal that a very high proportion of deposits and loans of BancSecurity's subsidiary bank, Security Bank, Marshalltown, Iowa ("Security Bank"), and Savings are received and originate from the Marshall County banking market. Data provided by BancSecurity show that approximately 96 percent of Security Bank's deposit accounts and 94 percent of its loans, and approximately 78 percent of Savings's deposits and 95 percent of the loans made by Savings, originated in the Marshall County banking market. In contrast, approximately 2 percent of Security Bank's deposit accounts and approximately 3 percent of its loans are from the portions of Tama County not included in the banking market. In addition, Security Bank received approximately 1 percent of its deposit accounts from and made approximately 2 percent of its loans in Felix and Clay Townships in southern Grundy County. Discussions with senior management of depository institutions in Marshall, Tama and Grundy Counties, moreover, confirmed that competition among banking organizations in different counties is limited. Banks in Marshall County generally reported only a modest amount of business from Tama County, mostly from the western townships that are included in the Marshall County banking market. In addition, Marshall County banks that were located near the border with Tama County reported that only 5 to 8 percent of their business originated in Tama County. On the other hand, banks located in the eastern three quarters of Tama County generally reported few or no accounts with Marshall County residents. Banks in Clay Township indicated that they derived small to modest amounts of business in Marshall and Tama Counties. The Federal Reserve Survey also suggests that there is relatively little advertising by area financial institutions outside their local communities. The Federal Reserve Survey of households and businesses in Marshall County indicated that Marshall County consumers almost exclusively obtained banking services from Marshall County depository institutions. Almost all the transaction and savings accounts, and all the certificates of deposit reported in a telephone survey of Marshall County residents were in Marshall County depository institutions. In addition, 40 of the 47 consumer loans and 16 of 17 commercial and industrial loans to the Marshall County participants in the telephone survey within the last five years were from Marshall County depository institutions, and none of the eight remaining consumer loans were from depository institutions in either Tama or Grundy Counties. An overwhelming majority of households and business owners interviewed in Marshall County stated that they would seek another Marshall County depository institution if they became dissatisfied with their current institution. Almost none of the respondents stated that they would consider an institution in Tama or Grundy County. Marshalltown, with a population of approximately 25,000 residents, is the largest town in the Marshall County banking market. The communities surrounding Marshalltown, particularly those identified by BancSecurity as included in the relevant banking market, are small, offer few incentives for regular travel to these areas by Marshall County residents, and are not conveniently located to Marshalltown. Tama and Toledo, for example, have populations of approximately 2,700 and 2,400 residents, respectively, and are located approximately 20 miles from Marshalltown. Travel time between the communities and Marshalltown is approximately 30 minutes. Clay and Felix Townships in southern Grundy County have populations of approximately 1,500 and 300 residents, respectively, and are located approximately 15 miles from Marshalltown. Travel time between the communities and Marshalltown is approximately 20 to 25 minutes. Commuting data indicate that Marshall County residents generally do not regularly travel outside of their county. In addition, except for the Tama County townships included in the Marshall County banking market, residents of Tama County generally do not commute in large numbers to Marshall County. Approximately 13 percent of the work force residing in Tama County commute to Marshall County, with more than half of these commuters traveling from the four Tama County townships that are included in the Marshall County banking market. Only 4.5 percent of the Tama County work force commuting to Marshall County resides in Howard, Toledo, Tama, and Columbia Townships, that BancSecurity argues should be included within the Marshall County banking market. A significant percentage of the labor force from Felix and Clay Townships in southern Grundy County commute to Marshall County. Other data, including interviews with Grundy County banking officials, indicate, however, that banks in these southern Grundy County townships do not consider Marshall County banks to be significant competitors. Moreover, even if these Grundy County townships were included in the market, the competitive effects of this proposal still would be significantly adverse. The Federal Reserve Survey found that Marshalltown's large number of retail shopping options provided a disincentive for Marshalltown residents to shop in neighboring communities. In addition, on-site visits to communities surrounding Marshall County did not lend support to broadening the Marshall County banking market beyond the previously identified westernmost townships in Tama County on the basis of travel patterns for goods and services. Basic services such as restaurants, clothing stores, and medical and financial services were available in most of the communities surrounding Marshall County. Based on all the facts of record, and for the reasons discussed above, the Board concludes that the Marshall County banking market, an area that includes all of Marshall County and Spring Creek, Carlton, Indian Village, and Highland Townships, in Tama County, is the appropriate geographic market for analyzing the competitive effects of the proposal. The Board also concludes that Howard, Toledo, Tama, and Columbia Townships in Tama County, and Felix and Clay Townships in southern Grundy County, should not be included in the relevant banking market. Competitive Effects in the Marshall County Banking Market Security Bank and Savings compete in the Marshall County banking market. Security Bank is the largest of 14 depository institutions in the market, controlling approximately $214 million of deposits and representing almost 38 percent of the total deposits in the market ("market deposits"). Savings is the third largest of the 14 depository institutions in the market, controlling deposits of approximately $87 million, representing 7.7 percent of market deposits. On consummation, BancSecurity would control total deposits of approximately $301 million, representing approximately 49.2 percent of market deposits. The market, as measured by the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index ("HHI"), is already highly concentrated. Consummation of this proposal would cause the HHI to increase by 849 points to 3032. This increase in concentration would significantly exceed the threshold levels in the Justice Department merger guidelines. The Board notes that HHI thresholds are used as guidelines to help the Board, the Justice Department, and other banking agencies identify cases in which a more detailed competitive analysis is appropriate to ensure that the proposal would not have a significantly adverse effect on competition in any relevant banking market. A proposal that fails to pass the HHI market screen nevertheless may be approved if other information indicates that the proposal would not have a significantly adverse effect on competition. The Board has carefully considered BancSecurity's contentions that consummation of the proposal would not result in significantly adverse competitive effects because BancSecurity and Savings do not provide the same types of banking products and services other than residential mortgage loans and retail deposits and that a number of considerations would mitigate any potential adverse competitive effect in any relevant banking market, including the number of depository institution competitors remaining in the banking market, the attractiveness of the banking market to potential entrants and low regulatory barriers for entry, and competition provided by credit unions and other providers of financial services located within and outside the banking market. Security Bank and Savings compete directly in a number of products, including residential mortgage loans, an individual product that is important to Marshall County banking market residents. Security Bank is the largest provider of residential mortgage loans in the market, with a market share of approximately 36 percent. Savings is the second largest provider, with approximately 25 percent of the market. After consummation of the proposal, the concentration in the market for residential mortgage loans, as measured by the HHI, would increase 1758 points to 3953 and BancSecurity would have a pro forma share of more than 60 percent of the residential mortgage loan market. This pro forma market share would be approximately five times larger than the market share of the next largest competitor, and 10 of the remaining competitors would each control a market share of less than 5 percent. Security Bank and Savings also compete directly with respect to federally insured deposit accounts. Security Bank is the largest provider of these accounts in the Marshall County banking market with a market share of approximately 34 percent. Savings is the third largest provider of these accounts with approximately a 14 percent market share. After consummation of this proposal, concentration in the market for federally insured deposit accounts, as measured by the HHI, would increase 961 points to 2933, and BancSecurity would have a pro forma share of greater than 48 percent of the market. BancSecurity's market share after consummation of the proposal would be more than twice as large as the share of the next largest competitor, more than five times as large as the third largest competitor, and ten competitors would have market shares of less than 5 percent. The Board has carefully considered the mitigating effect of the fact that 13 depository institutions would remain in the market after consummation, including several banks controlled by large bank holding companies, in light of BancSecurity's pro forma share of market deposits. BancSecurity would control market deposits at least ten times larger than market deposits controlled by all but two of the remaining competitors. In addition, 10 of the 12 remaining competitors would have less than 5 percent of deposits, and nine of these competitors would have less than 3 percent of deposits. BancSecurity's share of market deposits would approximately equal the market shares of all other depository institutions combined, and would be more than twice as large as the market share of its closest competitor. The degree of disparity between the market shares of BancSecurity and its competitors significantly reduces the mitigating effect of the number of remaining competitors and would permit BancSecurity to maintain a dominant market position despite the presence of firms that may have overall greater organizational resources. The Board also notes that, although several large depository institutions have competed in the banking market for a number of years, deposit market shares have been fairly stable in the past five years, without significant encroachment on BancSecurity's market share by competitors. Between 1991 and 1994, for example, Security Bank continued to control more than twice the share of market deposits as its next largest competitor. Data also indicate that Security Bank currently has a dominant market share in every lending category examined in the Federal Reserve Survey. For certain types of credit, Security Bank's share in the Marshall County banking market is two or three times more than the share of the next largest provider. These conditions have prevailed despite the entry into the market of five banking organizations since 1994. Moreover, the Federal Reserve Survey found that residents tended to form long-standing banking relationships with local depository institutions that were not easily displaced by depository institutions that did not have an established record of serving the Marshall County community. Although the Marshall County banking market has characteristics that make it attractive for entry, the barriers to entry imposed by Iowa law on new entrants into a banking market substantially offset the mitigating effect of this consideration. Specifically, office protection laws restricting intrastate branching significantly limit the number of potential competitors eligible to enter the Marshall County banking market. Entry by acquisition of an existing financial institution is permissible; however, this proposal would effectively eliminate MFC as an entry vehicle, and entry through the acquisition of a competitor to BancSecurity would not increase the number of competitors in this market. Although interstate banking will be permitted in Iowa after June 1, 1997, out-of-state banking organizations will only be permitted to acquire an Iowa bank that has operated for at least five years and will not be able to establish de novo branches. BancSecurity contends that credit unions and other financial institutions in and outside the Marshall County banking market exert a mitigating competitive influence. In the aggregate, however, the four credit unions in the Marshall County banking market control less than 7 percent of the market deposits. Three of the four credit unions control small amounts of deposits and have restrictive membership requirements. The largest credit union is open for membership to all residents of Marshall, Tama, Grundy, and Hardin Counties, but offers a narrow product line that excludes residential mortgages and commercial deposit and lending services. In addition, as previously discussed, the Justice Department guidelines used to screen the competitive effects of depository institution acquisitions implicitly take into account competition provided by credit unions and non-depository lenders in the banking market. Specifically, the adoption of higher thresholds for screening bank mergers recognizes that competition by nonbank sources not included in the calculation of the HHI may serve to mitigate the adverse competitive impact of a merger. The Board concludes in light of all the facts of record, including the Federal Reserve Survey, which indicates that the overwhelming majority of retail and commercial customers in the Marshall County banking market obtain their banking services from a local depository institution, that out-of-market financial institutions, including institutions providing electronic banking services, do not mitigate the substantially adverse competitive effects of this proposal. Public Benefits The Board has considered whether the potential benefits to the public, such as greater convenience, increased competition, or gains in efficiency outweigh possible adverse effects of the proposal. BancSecurity has indicated that it could expand the programs of Savings to include those offered by BancSecurity to benefit the existing customers of both institutions. BancSecurity also states that, through the acquisition of Savings, it would be able to improve the quality of services provided to the customers of both institutions, and to increase the lending limits of the combined entity. The requirement under section 4 of the BHC Act that the Board must determine that public benefits from a proposal can reasonably be expected to outweigh potential adverse effects necessarily involves a balancing process that takes into account the extent of the potential for adverse effects. The Board notes that MFC and Savings are well-managed organizations in satisfactory financial condition and that Savings received a "satisfactory" rating from its primary federal supervisor in its most recent evaluation for performance under the Community Reinvestment Act. For the reasons discussed in this order, however, the effects on competition in the Marshall County banking market are substantially adverse. In light of these and all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that the public benefits resulting from potential costs savings, gains in efficiency or greater convenience identified in the proposal are not sufficient, on balance, to outweigh the significantly adverse effects on competition in the Marshall County banking market. For reasons noted above, and based on all of the facts of record, the Board concludes that the proposed transaction would have significantly adverse effects on the Marshall County banking market. The Board also concludes that considerations relating to public benefits, including financial and managerial resources of the institutions involved, do not lend sufficient weight to outweigh these adverse competitive effects. Accordingly, the Board hereby denies BancSecurity's notice under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. By order of the Board of Governors, effective December 9, 1996. Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes State deposit data are as of June 30, 1995. In this context, depository institutions include commercial banks, savings banks, and savings associations. 12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8). See St. Joseph Valley Bank , 68 Federal Reserve Bulletin 673 (1982). The key question to be considered in making this selection "is not where the parties to the merger do business or even where they compete, but where, within the area of competitive overlap, the effect of the merger on competition will be direct and immediate." United States v. Philadelphia Nat'l Bank , 374 U.S. at 357 (1963); United States v. Phillipsburg Nat'l Bank , 399 U.S. 350 (1969). BancSecurity objects to consideration by the Board of any information or staff submissions that have not been provided to it under the Freedom of Information Act ("FOIA"). Certain information in the record has been withheld from BancSecurity as privileged from disclosure under the FOIA. The Board notes that the rules regarding access to information under the FOIA provide the appropriate framework for considering a challenge to confidential treatment accorded staff's submissions and other information, and that BancSecurity's challenge was reviewed under the FOIA and denied. The Board's rules do not provide an applicant access to information that is otherwise exempt from disclosure under the FOIA. BancSecurity, moreover, has been provided all nonconfidential information in the record of this notice. During the processing of the notice, BancSecurity proposed additional larger geographic areas as the relevant banking market. For the reasons discussed in detail in this order, the Board concludes that these alternative proposals would not constitute the relevant banking market for considering the competitive effects of the proposed acquisition. The data have been adjusted to exclude banking data from offices of Security Bank in Jasper and Hardin Counties. There are no banks in Felix Township. All Marshall County banks advertise in the Marshalltown daily newspaper that circulates primarily in Marshall County. The newspaper has few subscribers in Tama and Toledo in Tama County or Felix and Clay Townships in southern Grundy County. Security Bank and Savings are two of only three depository institutions with offices in both Marshall and Tama counties. Security Bank's Tama County branch advertises primarily in a local weekly newspaper in the town where the branch is located. The Toledo branch of Savings advertises primarily in a Tama weekly newspaper. Although Security Bank and Savings also advertise on Marshalltown radio stations, these stations broadcast over an area even larger than the extended area identified by BancSecurity as the relevant banking market. For example, one Marshalltown station broadcasts over an area encompassing 25 Iowa counties. Banking data also show little indication that the radio advertising has been effective in generating customers from outside the Marshall County banking market. The Board notes that general survey data suggest that individuals in households and small business owners have a strong preference for purchasing basic banking services very close to where they live or work, and that the data are similar in urban and rural markets. BancSecurity maintains that designation of Tama and Marshall Counties as a Rand-McNally basic trade area and the overlap of school district boundaries between the Counties, among other things, support its contention that the relevant banking market should be larger. The Board notes that these delineations are made for purposes not related to the competitive overlap between depository institutions and that the facts of this case, including those noted above, indicate that these delineations do not adequately reflect the area in which competition for banking services is real and immediate. See Wyoming Bancorporation v. Board of Governors , 729 F.2d 687 (1984). Residents of Marshall County have one of the lowest rates of commuting outside their county in Iowa. Only 9.5 percent of the county's workers commute outside Marshall County for employment, and only approximately 1.8 percent commute to Tama or Grundy County. BancSecurity states that 1990 census data understate the number of commuters because the data do not fully reflect the 1,500 new jobs created in the Marshalltown area in the last five years nor the large number of retirement-age residents of Tama County who may travel to the Marshalltown area for reasons other than employment. BancSecurity also argues that data from the Iowa Department of Transportation show a high traffic flow on the main highways between Marshall and Tama Counties and that, in a 1992 labor survey, many Tama County residents reported that they would accept a daily commuting distance of up to 60 miles. The Board has considered these data in light of all the facts of record, including data that suggest that events since 1990 may have decreased the amount of commuting into Marshalltown. For example, the data indicate that firms have exited or downsized in Marshalltown, a number of workers from out of state have transferred to Marshalltown in the case of the relocation of workers after a corporate consolidation, and there have been increases in employment opportunities in Tama County, such as the recent opening of a gambling casino in the Meskwaki Indian Settlement in southwest Tama County and the expansion of several other companies in Tama County. The Herfindahl-Hirschman Index would increase by 733 points to 2623, and BancSecurity would control 45.3 percent of total deposits in the market. Market data are as of June 30, 1995, and are based on calculations that include the deposits of thrift institutions at 50 percent. The Board previously has indicated that thrift institutions have become, or have the potential to become, significant competitors of commercial banks. See WM Bancorp , 76 Federal Reserve Bulletin 743 (1984). Because the deposits of Savings would be controlled by a commercial banking organization after consummation of the proposal, those deposits are included at 100 percent in the calculation of BancSecurity's pro forma market share. See Norwest Corporation , 78 Federal Reserve Bulletin 452 (1992); First Banks, Inc. , 76 Federal Reserve Bulletin 669 (1990). BancSecurity contends that the methodology used to assess the competitive effects in the market does not give sufficient weight to the deposits of a thrift competitor in the market and gives too much weight to the deposits acquired from Savings, which will continue to be operated as a traditional thrift after consummation of the proposal. The deposits controlled by the thrift competitor have not been given full weight because it does not provide the full range of products and services offered by commercial banks in the relevant market, particularly residential mortgages or commercial loans. The deposits of Savings, however, have been included pro forma at 100 percent because the deposits would directly enhance the capacity of BancSecurity to offer a full range of commercial banking products. Indeed, in this case, BancSecurity characterizes as a public benefit of the transaction the fact that Savings will be able to attract larger lending transactions as a result of combined lending limits available through loan participations with BancSecurity's banking subsidiaries. BancSecurity also has referred to public benefits from the availability of other new banking services from Savings. In this light, the Board concludes that its traditional methodology appropriately considers thrift deposits in analyzing the competitive effect of the proposal. Under the revised Department of Justice Merger Guidelines, 49 Federal Register 26,823 (1984), a market in which the post-merger HHI is above 1800 is considered highly concentrated. The Justice Department has informed the Board that a bank merger or acquisition generally will not be challenged (in the absence of other factors indicating anticompetitive effects) unless the post-merger HHI is at least 1800 and the merger increases the HHI by more than 200 points. The Justice Department has stated that the higher than normal HHI thresholds for screening bank mergers for anticompetitive effects implicitly recognize the competitive effect of limited-purpose lenders and other non-depository institutions. The proposal also would significantly exceed the Justice Department Merger Guidelines under BancSecurity's delineation of the relevant banking market by causing the HHI to increase 697 points to 2224. In addition, market share calculations based on BancSecurity's contentions regarding the weight accorded deposits held by thrift competitors in the Marshall County banking market also would significantly exceed the screening guidelines. If deposits of the thrift competitor in the market were given full weight, the HHI would increase 823 points to 2933, and BancSecurity would control 48.3 percent of market deposits. If the deposits controlled by Savings were weighted at 50 percent pre- and post-merger, the HHI would increase 578 points to 2761 and BancSecurity would control 45 percent of market deposits. HHI calculations are based on deposit data that were assembled before Tama State Bank moved its main office to Marshalltown in September 1996. The Marshalltown office is a recently established de novo office, and the bank has retained its office in Tama County. The deposits of this institution, therefore, have not been included in the HHI calculations. Savings, a thrift institution, engages primarily in accepting federally insured deposits and making residential mortgages. Security Bank engages in a wide variety of banking products and services including mortgage, commercial, agricultural, and consumer lending, and deposit taking. The analysis of the proposal's structural impact on residential mortgage loans is based on call report mortgage data, discussions with area bankers, and a telephone consumer survey of borrowing practices by local residents. This calculation is based on weighting thrift institutions in the market at 100 percent. In addition to the small market shares held by nearly all remaining competitors, the Board notes that more than half of the remaining firms are in small communities throughout Marshall County. BancSecurity indicates that Norwest Bancorp, Minneapolis, Minnesota ("Norwest"), has increased its share of market deposits by 63 percent since entering the market through the acquisition of a branch of a failed thrift institution in June 1994, has established a second location in Marshalltown for the purpose of offering mortgage and other loans as well as securities brokerage services, and has announced plans to build a new bank facility in Marshalltown. The Board notes, however, that Norwest controls less than 3 percent of the deposits in the Marshall County banking market. In addition to Security Bank's share of the market for federally insured deposits, residential mortgage loans, and consumer loans, Security Bank also controls approximately 44 percent of the market for small commercial and industrial loans (loans in amounts of less than $1 million) and approximately 57 percent of the market for all commercial and industrial loans. Recent entry by banking organizations appears to have contributed little to increasing competition in the banking market because four of the five entrants have acquired existing banking offices. The fifth entrant, Tama State Bank, relocated its headquarters from Tama County to Marshalltown in September 1996. Data indicate that population and deposits per banking office, per capita income and growth in market deposits, and profitability of banks in the banking market (as measured by the return on assets (annualized)) are all above the average for Iowa's rural counties. See Iowa Code Ann. §§ 524.1202 & 524.1419. Iowa law would permit a bank headquartered in a contiguous county to establish a new branch in Marshall County only in towns that do not already have a bank office in operation. De novo branching into the relevant banking market would therefore be limited to eight very small towns, none of which has a population in excess of 350. A bank headquartered in a contiguous county could also relocate its home office into the market, or a new bank could be established. ( See Iowa Code Ann. §§ 524.312 & 524.301) However, the fixed costs of building a suitable facility, hiring additional staff, advertising costs and other activities associated with establishing a new headquarters make this option unrealistic for many small banking firms. The establishment of a new bank would involve costs similar to those of relocating an existing bank, but also would include costs to meet the initial capital requirements and to gain regulatory approval. Federal savings banks may branch without restriction under Iowa law and may act as an agent for their banking affiliates under federal interstate banking law. However, this affects only a small number of institutions and does not make the office protection barriers any less significant for most potential competitors. Iowa Code Ann. §§ 524.1205 & 524.1805. If deposits controlled by this credit union were given the same weight as thrift institutions in the banking market, the HHI would increase 818 points to 2903 on consummation of the proposal. The HHI for federally insured retail deposits would increase by 880 points to 2705 under the proposal if deposits in this credit union were given full weight. BancSecurity has noted the absence of any comments by the Justice Department, any other federal regulator of financial institutions, or any competitor in the market about possible adverse competitive effects of this proposal. The BHC Act, however, charges the Board with determining independently whether a particular proposal can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources or decreased or unfair competition. (12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8)). In making its determinations, however, the Board carefully considers the views provided to it by other agencies. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan and Governors Kelley, Lindsey, Phillips, Yellen, and Meyer. Absent and not voting: Vice Chair Rivlin.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notices by six Southeast banking organizations to acquire more than 5 percent of the voting shares of a new company that will result from the merger of the HONOR, MOST, and ALERT electronic funds transfer networks. Banking organizations making the request to acquire shares in the new company are Barnett Banks, Inc., Jacksonville, Florida; Crestar Financial Corporation, Richmond, Virginia; First Union Corporation, Charlotte, North Carolina; NationsBank Corporation, Charlotte, North Carolina; Southern National Corporation, Winston-Salem, North Carolina; and Wachovia Corporation, Winston-Salem, North Carolina. A copy of the Board's Order is attached. Barnett Banks, Inc. Jacksonville, Florida Crestar Financial Corporation Richmond, Virginia First Union Corporation Charlotte, North Carolina NationsBank Corporation Charlotte, North Carolina Southern National Corporation Winston-Salem, North Carolina Wachovia Corporation Winston-Salem, North Carolina Order Approving Notices to Conduct Certain Data Processing and Other Nonbanking Activities Barnett Banks, Inc., Jacksonville, Florida; Crestar Financial Corporation, Richmond, Virginia; First Union Corporation, Charlotte, North Carolina; NationsBank Corporation, Charlotte, North Carolina; Southern National Corporation, Winston-Salem, North Carolina; and Wachovia Corporation, Winston-Salem, North Carolina (collectively, "Applicants"), bank holding companies within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), have given notice under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8)) and section 225.23 of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.23) to acquire or retain control of 5 percent or more of the voting shares of Southeast Switch, Inc., Maitland, Florida ("SES"), after its mergers with Internet, Inc., Reston, Virginia ("Internet"), and Alabama Network, Inc., Birmingham, Alabama ("Alabama Network"). Currently, SES operates an electronic funds transfer ("EFT") network under the tradename HONOR, Internet operates an EFT network under the tradename MOST, and Alabama Network operates an EFT network under the tradename ALERT. These EFT networks provide data processing and data transmission services to banks and retail merchants who are members of their branded automated teller machine ("ATM") and point of sale ("POS") networks. The combined entity ("Company") would engage in certain nonbanking activities related to the operation of ATM and POS networks, including various data processing services, pursuant to section 225.25(b)(7) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.25(b)(7)). Applicants propose to conduct these activities throughout the United States, Bermuda, Canada, Mexico, Central America, and the Caribbean. Notice of the proposals, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (61 Federal Register 56,547, 58,882 (1996)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the notices and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. As in other cases, the Board also sought comments from the Department of Justice on the competitive effects of these proposals. The Department of Justice conducted an investigation of the proposals and indicated that it had no objection to consummation of the proposed transactions. Applicants are large commercial banking organizations with headquarters in Florida, Virginia, and North Carolina, and they engage directly and through subsidiaries in a broad range of banking and permissible nonbanking activities in the United States. Section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act provides that a bank holding company may, with Board approval, engage in any activity that the Board determines to be "so closely related to banking or managing or controlling banks as to be a proper incident thereto." The Board previously has determined that all the activities proposed in these notices are closely related to banking within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Applicants would conduct these activities in accordance with Regulation Y and previous Board decisions. The Board also must consider whether the performance of the proposed activities by Applicants through Company "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public . . . that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices." As part of this consideration under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act, the Board reviews the financial and managerial resources of the Applicants and their subsidiaries, and any company to be acquired, and the effect of the proposal on those resources. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that financial and managerial considerations are consistent with approval of the proposals. In addition, there is no evidence in the record that the proposals would result in conflicts of interests or unsound banking practices. Competitive Considerations The proposals would result in a joint venture between large banking organizations that would operate the predominant EFT network in a multi-state area in the southeastern United States. The Board has considered whether the proposed joint venture would result in undue concentration of resources or unfair competition under applicable principles of antitrust law. The Board previously has concluded that the economic and market structure characteristics of the EFT industry tend to favor establishing a dominant network to serve a multi-state region. For example, network externalities, such as the economies of ubiquity, appear to promote consolidation of regional ATM networks. As a result, dominant ATM networks have emerged in various geographic areas throughout the EFT industry. One recent study indicates that the ten largest regional networks now account for 80 percent of all regional ATM network transactions in the United States. The proposed joint venture would provide services to depository affiliates of the joint venture participants, including the Applicants, and to unaffiliated financial institutions under operating rules that promote open access to the network, which are discussed in detail below. Accordingly, smaller financial institutions would have the opportunity to provide their customers with greater access to their deposit accounts and thereby could compete with larger, multi-state organizations for retail deposit funds without the necessity of substantial investments in branch systems or their own proprietary ATM networks. The operating rules also promote competition between Company's network and alternative providers of EFT-related services, including national ATM and POS networks, other regional networks, and third-party providers of EFT switching and processing services, thereby encouraging price and other competition for the services provided by the proposed network. In addition, each of the Applicants would be free to continue to operate its own proprietary network and to participate in other national and regional networks while participating in Company's network. Moreover, there is no evidence in the record that this proposal would reduce competition among Applicants, the other owners of Company, and other banking organizations as providers of banking products and services. In particular, Company's operating rules do not set prices that a member institution must charge its retail customers for ATM or POS transactions. In this light, and based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that the proposal would not result in adverse effects such as undue concentration of resources or unfair competition. The Board also has considered whether these proposals would result in decreased competition. The Board and the courts traditionally have considered the area of effective competition between the merging parties in order to determine whether a particular merger transaction is likely to decrease competition. This area of effective competition has been defined by reference both to a line of commerce, or product market, and to a geographic market. The Board previously has identified three distinct products that may be offered by ATM networks: (1) network access (access to an ATM network identified by a common trademark or logo displayed on ATMs and ATM cards); (2) network services (the switching and gateway functions for the network); and (3) ATM processing (the data processing and telecommunications facilities used to operate, monitor, and support a bank's ATMs). HONOR provides all three services to its network members. In contrast, MOST and ALERT provide only network access directly; network services and ATM processing are provided to members of these networks through third parties. The relevant product market in which to examine the competitive effects of this proposal, therefore, is the network access market. The Board previously has determined that the geographic market for network access is an area significantly larger than local banking markets and has considered the market area of an ATM network to consist of regions comprising several states. In this case, the HONOR network operates primarily in the Southeast, in North Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia, and Florida ("HONOR core states"), and is the predominant regional EFT network in that area. MOST operates primarily in the Middle Atlantic, in Maryland, Virginia, the District of Columbia, and Tennessee ("MOST core states"), and is the predominant regional EFT network in that area. ALERT operates primarily in Alabama and is the predominant regional EFT network in that state. On consummation of these proposals, Company would provide network access in a region consisting of those states and adjacent states ("Southeast Region"). Although the three networks involved in this proposal operate primarily in areas adjacent to one another, the record also indicates that the MOST network has a notable presence in the HONOR core states and that the HONOR network maintains a notable presence both in the MOST core states and in Alabama. There are a number of considerations, however, that mitigate any decrease in existing or potential competition resulting from these proposals. For example, the extent of geographic overlap among HONOR, MOST, and ALERT results primarily from the geographic expansion of a few member institutions, and the record indicates that the EFT networks generally have not actively competed for new members in each other's core states. In addition, several other large regional networks, such as MAC and NYCE, currently operate in areas adjacent to Company's proposed network. The Board believes that these regional networks would provide competitive constraints to the proposed network, and that their existence may become increasingly significant as multi-state banking organizations continue to expand geographically. Moreover, smaller networks and third-party processors will continue to operate EFT networks within the Southeast Region, and to provide both direct and potential competition for Company. Finally, national networks offer an attractive alternative to regional networks for some financial institutions in the Southeast Region, and national networks appear to be increasing their competitive pressure on regional networks. The Board also believes that proposed operating rules for Company, when taken together, facilitate competition with national and other regional networks and with third-party service providers, and ensure access to the network for all depository institutions. Applicants anticipate that Company would continue the use of certain procompetitive rules currently implemented by one or more of the constituent networks. For example, all depository institutions would be permitted to participate in the network on a nondiscriminatory basis and would be permitted to join other regional networks and to co-brand their cards and ATM terminals. The Board also notes that national network transactions initiated at a terminal in Company's network would not be required to be routed through Company's switch. The combined entity, moreover, would allow the use of third-party processors and would permit unbranded subswitching of transactions subject only to a royalty fee established to compensate Company for the use of its brand. For those reasons, and based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposals would not have a significantly adverse effect on competition in any relevant market. Public Benefits Section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act requires that, in order to approve a proposal, the Board must determine that the public benefits reasonably to be expected from the proposal would outweigh potential adverse effects. This is a balancing process that takes into account the extent of the potential for adverse effects, which, for the reasons indicated above, the Board does not believe to be significant in this case. Consumers would benefit from the added account availability and convenience resulting from the consummation of these proposals. In particular, an ATM network with a larger number of financial institution members and available ATMs has greater value to network cardholders, because they would have broader and more convenient access to their deposit accounts. In this case, the geographic territory covered by a network in the Southeast Region would expand significantly, and, accordingly, the benefits to consumers in this area of the country would be enhanced, particularly as consumers travel increasingly and business activity continues to grow. Furthermore, as noted above, the proposed joint venture would offer services to all financial institutions, and smaller financial institutions would have the opportunity to provide their customers with greater access to their deposit accounts. Membership in Company's network would thereby enable smaller financial institutions to compete with larger, multi-state organizations for retail deposit funds without the necessity of making substantial investments in branch systems or their own proprietary ATM networks. Consummation of these proposals would result in other public benefits. For example, the proposal is expected to produce economies of scale and reduce average costs for the combined network. The Board expects that a portion of these cost savings would be passed on to member financial institutions, and to consumers, in the form of lower fees. The record also indicates that Company plans to increase research and development expenditures over the levels budgeted by the constituent networks in the past. The broader ownership base of Company should improve the probability of success for new products by increasing the number of financial institutions that would be willing to introduce these products to consumers in earlier stages of development. For the foregoing reasons, and after careful consideration of all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that the balance of the public interest factors it must consider under the proper incident to banking standard of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act is favorable and consistent with approval of these proposals. Conclusion Based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the notices should be, and hereby are, approved. The Board's approval is specifically conditioned on Applicants' compliance with the commitments made in connection with these notices and the conditions referred to in this order. The Board's determination also is subject to all the conditions set forth in Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.23(g) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.7 and 225.23(g)), and to the Board's authority to require such modification or termination of the activities of a bank holding company or any of its subsidiaries as the Board finds necessary to ensure compliance with, and to prevent evasion of, the provisions of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders issued thereunder. For purposes of this action, the commitments and conditions are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision, and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. This transaction shall not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta or the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective December 9, 1996. Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Appendix B Asset and Deposit Data as of June 30, 1996 Barnett Banks, Inc., with approximately $41.8 billion in total consolidated assets, is the 13th largest commercial banking organization in the United States, controlling $34.6 billion in deposits. Barnett operates subsidiary banks in Florida and Georgia. Crestar Financial Corporation, with approximately $18.5 billion in total consolidated assets, is the 40th largest commercial banking organization in the United States, controlling $11.7 billion in deposits. Crestar operates subsidiary banks in Virginia, Maryland, and the District of Columbia. First Union Corporation, with approximately $139.9 billion in total consolidated assets, is the sixth largest commercial banking organization in the United States, controlling $90 billion in deposits. First Union operates subsidiary banks in Connecticut, Delaware, the District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Maryland, North Carolina, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, Tennessee, and Virginia. NationsBank Corporation, with approximately $192.3 billion in total consolidated assets, is the fifth largest commercial banking organization in the United States, controlling $98.4 billion in deposits. NationsBank operates subsidiary banks in North Carolina, Delaware, the District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Maryland, New Mexico, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, and Virginia. Southern National Corporation, with approximately $20.6 billion in total consolidated assets, is the 32nd largest commercial banking organization in the United States, controlling $14.7 billion in deposits. Southern National operates subsidiary banks in North Carolina, South Carolina, and Virginia. Wachovia Corporation, with approximately $46 billion in total consolidated assets, is the 31st largest commercial banking organization in the United States, controlling $25.1 billion in deposits. Wachovia operates subsidiary banks in North Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia, and Delaware. Footnotes Applicants are the bank holding companies that would control more than 5 percent of any class of Company's voting shares. Other current shareholders of SES, Internet, and Alabama Network also would own shares of Company after consummation of this proposal. In general, an ATM network is an arrangement whereby more than one ATM and more than one depository institution (or the depository records of such institutions) are connected by electronic or telecommunications means to one or more computers, processors, or switches for the purpose of providing ATM services to retail customers of the institutions. POS terminals are generally located in the establishments of merchants. They accept ATM or similar cards and, using the ATM network or a parallel POS-only network, provide access to the cardholder's account to transfer funds to the merchant's account. A list of Company's proposed data processing and transmission activities is set forth in Appendix A. In connection with its EFT-related data processing and transmission activities, Company also would provide management consulting services to depository institutions for EFT-related activities pursuant to section 225.25(b)(11) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.25(b)(11)) and check verification services to retailers pursuant to section 225.25(b)(22) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.25(b)(22)), which permits a bank holding company to engage in authorizing a subscribing merchant to accept personal checks and purchasing from the merchant validly authorized checks that are subsequently dishonored. Asset and deposit information for each of the Applicants is set forth in Appendix B. See 12 C.F.R. 225.25(b)(7), (11), and (22); The Bank of New York Company, Inc., et al. , 80 Federal Reserve Bulletin 1107 (1994) (" Bank of NY Order "). See 12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8). See 12 C.F.R. 225.24. See also The Fuji Bank, Limited , 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 94 (1989); Bayerische Vereinsbank AG , 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 155 (1987). Early ATM networks typically were composed of banks that used their ATMs for dispensing cash, and were confined to branches in local banking markets. The smaller ATM networks have tended to consolidate in response to several factors, including increased consumer desire to obtain widespread access to their accounts, the rise of interstate banking, the competitive advantage produced by economies of scale, and the desire to undertake relevant and timely technology research and development and thereby enhance the products available from and through the network. As an ATM network expands the number of its financial institution members and available ATMs, its value to network cardholders increases due to the greater accessibility of their deposit accounts. Similarly, as the number of cardholders increases, so does the number of transactions and hence the economic return on ATM terminals in the network. This increased economic return provides incentives for banks to establish additional ATMs, thereby further enhancing the network's value to cardholders. Accordingly, banks tend to place a greater value on membership in a network as its membership expands. Although the network in the proposals would become the nation's largest regional EFT network in transaction volume, a number of other large networks would continue to operate both in Company's service area and elsewhere throughout the United States. See McAndrews and Rob, "Shared Ownership and Pricing in a Network Switch," 14 International Journal of Industrial Organization 727 (October 1996). See Banc One Corporation, et al ., 81 Federal Reserve Bulletin 492 (1995) (" EPS Order "). Several regional or national firms, such as Deluxe Data Systems and Electronic Data Systems, offer network services and ATM processing services to unaffiliated networks and their members. In considering network access for POS transactions, the Board notes that there are a number of competitors in the market, including two large national networks that have grown substantially in recent years throughout the nation (VisaCheck and MasterMoney). Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that the proposals would not significantly affect competition in any market for POS-related services. See EPS Order at p. 494-95. For example, HONOR operates 484 ATMs in Virginia, and MOST operates 419 ATMs in North Carolina. The record indicates that the overlap among these networks is attributable primarily to (1) the membership of two large interstate bank holding companies in both the HONOR and MOST networks, and (2) the membership of a few large Alabama-based organizations in both the ALERT and HONOR networks. The record indicates that banking organizations tend to transport regional ATM marks as they expand into new geographic areas. For example, Publix Supermarkets Inc., operates an ATM network under the tradename PRESTO in Florida and Georgia, and First Tennessee Bank operates an ATM network under the tradename Money Belt in Tennessee, Virginia, Georgia, and Florida. Electronic Data Systems, a large third-party processor, operates an ATM network under the tradename MPACT in 14 states, including Mississippi and Arkansas. A number of smaller banks in the Southeast Region that are members of a national network are not members of HONOR, MOST, or ALERT. In addition, VISA operates a national EFT network under the tradename PLUS, and recently has announced that it plans to change the PLUS mark to VISA in order to generate greater brand recognition in all regions of the country. The Board previously has determined that ATM network operating rules are an important consideration in assessing the competitive impact of a proposal under the section 4(c)(8) factors. See Bank of NY Order; EPS Order . In addition, Company's corporate structure ensures that its board of directors will represent a wide range of interests and that Company policy will not be dominated by the organizations with the largest shareholdings. Twenty-two members of the Company's 26-member board of directors will be appointed by the Company's Class A shareholders, which are all financial institutions. The Class A shareholders consist of both net issuers and net acquirers of network transactions, vary in asset size of the organization, and are geographically diverse. "Subswitching" refers to the switching of transactions between members of the same regional network without accessing that network, and therefore without paying the network's switch fee. Generally, this is accomplished by routing the transaction through a third-party processor that provides ATM processing services for both network members. Applicants have stated that Company's proposed operating rules would not be made final until the proposals are consummated. The Board believes that the benefits of the five operating rules summarized above are important considerations in its determination to approve these proposals. Accordingly, Company must notify the Board if Company does not adopt those operating rules substantially as proposed so the Board can determine whether the rules as adopted affect the Board's consideration of the factors in this case. See generally Schiller, "The Travel Market in the United States and the Third District," Business Review of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia , pages 11-21 (September-October 1996) (demonstrating increases in aggregate travel during the period from 1984 to 1994). Moreover, available evidence indicates that the benefits of ubiquity have continued to grow over time as ATM networks have consolidated. In particular, the number and percentage of interchange transactions -- in which consumers access their accounts through terminals not deployed by their own financial institutions -- have increased markedly in recent years. See generally Bank Network News (1988-1995). The MOST and ALERT networks do not provide switching and processing services directly to their members. HONOR provides switching and processing services directly to its members and currently maintains some excess capacity in its system. The record indicates that HONOR's marginal costs to provide switching services are substantially lower than the prices charged to MOST and ALERT by a third-party provider of these services. Hence, increased transaction volume for the HONOR switch and the elimination of costs attributable to the current outsourcing of services for MOST and ALERT network transactions would be likely to allow Company to realize economies of scale and to reduce average costs for the combined network. The transactional cost savings for Company could be substantial, even after taking into account the added capital, conversion, and operating costs that would be incurred in expanding Company's network processing capacity and utilization. The Board also notes that, due to the large market share of the third party performing switching services for MOST and ALERT network transactions, the conversion of transaction volume from the third-party switch to the HONOR switch could increase competition in this product market. See McAndrews, "Retail Pricing of ATM Network Services," Working Paper No. 96-4, April 1996, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia (indicating that network fees and consumer prices are lower in larger EFT networks). Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan and Governors Kelley, Lindsey, Phillips, Yellen, and Meyer. Absent and not voting: Vice Chair Rivlin.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application of Country Bank Shares Corporation, Mount Horeb, Wisconsin, to acquire all the voting shares of Belleville Bancshares Corporation and thereby indirectly acquire Belleville State Bank, both of Belleville, Wisconsin. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Country Bank Shares Corporation Mount Horeb, Wisconsin Order Approving the Acquisition of a Bank Holding Company Country Bank Shares Corporation, Mount Horeb, Wisconsin ("Country"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 3 of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1842) to acquire all the voting shares of Belleville Bancshares Corporation ("Belleville") and thereby indirectly acquire Belleville State Bank ("Belleville Bank"), both of Belleville, Wisconsin. Notice of the application, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (61 Federal Register 36,884 (1996)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the proposal and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 3(c) of the BHC Act. Country is the 34th largest commercial banking organization in Wisconsin, controlling total deposits of approximately $206.3 million, representing less than 1 percent of total deposits in commercial banking organizations in the state. Belleville is the 213th largest commercial banking organization in Wisconsin, controlling deposits of approximately $34.7 million, representing less than 1 percent of total deposits in commercial banking organizations in the state. On consummation of the proposal, Country would become the 30th largest commercial banking organization in Wisconsin, with approximately $241 million in deposits. Competitive Considerations The BHC Act prohibits the Board from approving an application under section 3 of the BHC Act if the proposal would result in a monopoly, or would substantially lessen competition in any relevant banking market, unless the Board finds that the anticompetitive effects of the proposal are clearly outweighed in the public interest by the probable effects of the proposal in meeting the convenience and needs of the community to be served. Country and Belleville compete directly in the Madison, Wisconsin, banking market. Country operates the 11th largest banking or thrift organization ("depository institution") in the Madison banking market, controlling deposits of approximately $77.1 million, representing approximately 2 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in the market ("market deposits"). Belleville operates the 24th largest depository institution in the market, controlling deposits of approximately $34.7 million, representing less than 1 percent of market deposits. On consummation of this proposal, Country would become the ninth largest depository institution in the Madison banking market, controlling deposits of $111.8 million, representing approximately 3 percent of market deposits. The market would remain moderately concentrated, as measured by the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index ("HHI"), and numerous competitors would remain in this market. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that consummation of this proposal would not result in any significantly adverse effects on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in the Madison banking market or any other relevant banking market. The Board also must consider the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the companies and banks involved, the convenience and needs of the community to be served, and certain other supervisory factors. Supervisory Factors The Board has carefully considered the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of Country, Belleville, and their respective subsidiaries, and other supervisory factors in light of all the facts of record. These facts include supervisory reports of examination assessing the financial and managerial resources of the organizations and confidential information provided by Country. Based on these and all the facts of record, the Board concludes that all supervisory factors that the Board is required to consider under the BHC Act, including the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of Country and Belleville weigh in favor of approval of this proposal. Convenience and Needs Factor The Board has long held that consideration of the convenience and needs factor includes a review of the relevant depository institution's record of performance under the Community Reinvestment Act (12 U.S.C. § 2901 et seq .) ("CRA"). As provided in the CRA, the Board has evaluated this factor in light of examinations by the primary federal supervisor of the CRA performance records of the relevant institutions. The Board also has considered comments from the Wisconsin Rural Development Center, Inc. ("Protestant"), which maintain that Country's lead bank, Mt. Horeb Bank, has not adequately assisted in meeting the credit needs of small- to medium-sized family farmers, small businesses, and low-income borrowers in its community. Protestant also contends that the bank's participation in government-guaranteed programs has been minimal, and that the bank is improperly reducing its agricultural lending through more stringent underwriting criteria for farm loans. An institution's most recent CRA performance evaluation is a particularly important consideration in the applications process because it represents a detailed on-site evaluation of the institution's overall record of performance under the CRA by its primary federal supervisor. The Board also takes into account information on an institution's lending activities that assist in meeting the credit needs of low- and moderate-income neighborhoods, including programs and activities initiated since its most recent CRA performance examination. Country's four subsidiary banks received CRA performance ratings of "satisfactory" or "outstanding" in their most recent evaluations for CRA performance by their primary federal regulator, the FDIC. Country's lead bank, Mt. Horeb Bank, received an "outstanding" rating for CRA performance from the FDIC as of January 1996 ("January 1996 Examination"). Belleville Bank, received a "satisfactory" rating for CRA performance from the FDIC as of January 1995. Mt. Horeb Bank is a small bank, with total assets of approximately $88 million, and operates a main office and one drive-in branch. It primarily makes residential real estate loans, farm loans, commercial real estate loans, and small business loans. As of the January 1996 Examination, approximately 23 percent of Mt. Horeb Bank's outstanding loans were for residential real estate purchase and improvement, 20 percent for agricultural-related purposes, 20 percent for financing real estate construction and development, 18 percent for business purposes, and 10 percent for consumer loans. The January 1996 examination characterized the bank's loan-to-deposit ratio as strong and calculated the average loan-to-deposit ratio as 79 percent from December 31, 1993, to September 30, 1995. A substantial majority of Mt. Horeb Bank's loans, when measured either as a percentage of total number of loans or as a percentage of total dollar amounts of loans, were within its assessment area. Examiners also found that the bank had an excellent record of originating loans among borrowers of different income levels, especially low- and moderate-income ("LMI") borrowers, and to small businesses and small farms. The January 1996 Examination considered the bank's loans to be reasonably distributed throughout its assessment area. By order of the Board of Governors, effective December 9, 1996. Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes State deposit data are as of June 30, 1995. The Madison, Wisconsin, banking market is approximated by Dane County except for the eastern tier of townships; and Dekorra, Lowville, Otsego, Fountain, Prairie, Columbus, Hampden, Leeds, Arlington, Lodi, and West Point townships in Columbia County, all in Wisconsin. Market data are as of June 30, 1995. Market share data are based on calculations in which the deposits of thrift institutions are included at 50 percent. The Board previously has indicated that thrift institutions have become, or have the potential to become, significant competitors of commercial banks. See Midwest Financial Group , 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 386 (1989); National City Corporation , 70 Federal Reserve Bulletin 743 (1984). Thus, the Board has regularly included thrift deposits in the calculation of market share on a 50-percent weighted basis. See, e.g., First Hawaiian, Inc. , 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 52 (1991). On consummation of this proposal, the HHI would increase 3 points to 1245. Under the revised Department of Justice Merger Guidelines, 49 Federal Register 26,823 (June 29, 1984), a market in which the post-merger HHI is between 1000 and 1800 is considered moderately concentrated. The Justice Department has informed the Board that a bank merger or acquisition generally will not be challenged (in the absence of other factors indicating anticompetitive effects) unless the post-merger HHI is at least 1800 and the merger increases the HHI by more than 200 points. The Justice Department has stated that the higher than normal threshold for an increase in the HHI when screening bank mergers and acquisitions for anticompetitive effects implicitly recognizes the competitive effects of limited-purpose lenders and other non-depository financial entities. The Board received comments alleging that two directors of Country's lead subsidiary bank, State Bank of Mt. Horeb, Mount Horeb, Wisconsin ("Mt. Horeb Bank"), have potential conflicts of interest because they extend credit in their farm-related private businesses in Mount Horeb at a higher rate to borrowers who are unable to obtain loans from Mt. Horeb Bank. The comments also contend that Mt. Horeb Bank has been unwilling to restructure or consolidate existing farm loans, has not honored its loan commitments, has treated its customers poorly and unprofessionally, and has taken too long to act on loan applications. Country denies the allegations made in the comments, and, in particular, notes that all the extensions of credit made by the two directors in their private businesses were to long-standing account holders on the same terms offered to other customers. In its evaluation of the managerial factors in this case, the Board has considered the comments and recent reports of examination by the bank's primary federal supervisor, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ("FDIC"), assessing the managerial resources and operations of Mt. Horeb Bank. Based on all the facts of record, including confidential supervisory information provided by the FDIC, the Board concludes that the comments do not warrant denial of the proposal. One commenter contends that adverse managerial considerations are raised by a preliminary ruling in 1994 in a lawsuit against a director of Country based on his actions as a director of a manufacturing company. The lawsuit involved an attempt by the directors of the manufacturing company to acquire control of the company through a stock repurchase program. The case was settled without a final judgment by the court. In addition, the commenter maintains that this director and two other principals of Belleville used unethical tactics to encourage minority shareholders of the bank to sell their shares at below-market prices in connection with the formation of Belleville as a bank holding company in 1992. These allegations involve personal offers made by a group of Belleville Bank shareholders to purchase shares of other shareholders of the bank. The offers did not involve bank funds or any corporate action by the bank. The shareholder group members deny that they used unethical tactics to encourage minority shareholders to sell their shares, and note that they informally consulted with four other members of the bank's board of directors and representatives of two brokerage firms to determine the fairness of the prices offered. The commenter also alleges that this director continued to exercise influence over Belleville Bank's board of directors after his resignation from the board in 1990 while he also served as a director of Country. The Board has considered these comments in light of relevant reports of examination and other supervisory information assessing the competence, experience, and integrity of Country's director and in light of the court's preliminary findings and the final disposition of the cases noted. In addition, the Board has carefully reviewed supervisory information regarding steps taken by the Country director to ensure compliance with the interlock prohibitions of the Depository Institution Management Interlocks Act (12 U.S.C. § 3201) ("DIMIA") and the Board's Regulation L (12 C.F.R. 212). This commenter also notes that an attorney who provides legal services to Country and Belleville, and who also is a minority shareholder of Country, was suspended from the practice of law for six months by the Wisconsin Supreme Court for failing to account properly with his law firm for fees received from Country. Country states that the attorney is one of a number of attorneys employed by these organizations, owns less than 10 percent of the voting shares of Country, and does not serve as an officer or director of either organization or their subsidiaries. Two commenters state generally that Belleville's management does not consider the interest of the minority shareholders of Belleville Bank, and a number of commenters contend that these shareholders have not received a fair return on their investment and would not benefit from the proposal. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that these matters do not relate to factors specified in the BHC Act and are therefore beyond the jurisdiction of the Board to consider in reviewing applications under section 3 of the BHC Act. See Western Bancshares, Inc. v. Board of Governors , 480 F.2d 749 (10th Cir. 1973). The Board notes that the Statement of the Federal Financial Supervisory Agencies Regarding the Community Reinvestment Act provides that a CRA examination is an important and often controlling factor in the consideration of an institution's CRA record and that reports of these examinations will be given great weight in the applications process. 54 Federal Register 13,742, 13,745 (1989). Protestant asserts that the bank's rating is incorrect because examiners did not have the information provided by Protestant's comments to this proposal. A subsidiary bank of a bank holding company is a small bank for purposes of the new regulations jointly promulgated by the federal financial supervisory agencies to implement the CRA if it had less than $250 million in assets as of December 31 of either of the prior two calendar years, and was an affiliate of a holding company that, as of December 31 of either of the prior two calendar years, had total banking and thrift assets of less than $1 billion. See 60 Federal Register 22,156 (May 4, 1995). See also 12 C.F.R. 345.12(t). For purposes of the new CRA regulation, a small business loan is a commercial and industrial loan with an original amount of $1 million or less, or a loan secured by nonfarm, nonresidential property with an original amount of $1 million or less. See 12 C.F.R. 228.12(u). Mt. Horeb Bank also sells loans on the secondary market. In 1995, the bank originated and sold 66 loans totalling $6.3 million. Accounting for these loans would increase the residential real estate lending to more than 50 percent. Mt. Horeb Bank's average loan-to-deposit ratio was 79.1 percent in 1994 and 72.8 percent in 1995. The bank's average loan-to-deposit ratio would increase to approximately 85 percent by accounting for its loans sold on the secondary market. The Board has carefully considered the results of the bank's compliance examination in light of comments by a community organization contending that closing costs and charges on loan transactions are not adequately disclosed. Protestant criticizes Mt. Horeb Bank's participation in the WHEDA/CROP Fund, contending that the bank refuses to restructure program loans and makes poor credit decisions that result in a large number of forbearances for program loans. Protestant also maintains that Mt. Horeb Bank violated WHEDA/CROP interest payment rules by underwriting loans on the basis of 360 days rather than 365 days, and alleges that bank officials have threatened retaliation against any borrower who publicizes these practices. Country has denied any improper actions by bank officials in connection with the WHEDA/CROP Fund. Under WHEDA/CROP guidelines, a participating bank may submit a request for forbearance to prevent a default, and a proposed repayment schedule for WHEDA's approval. In 1995, Mt. Horeb Bank submitted forbearance requests for ten loans to WHEDA. Two loans were paid in full before WHEDA considered the forbearance requests and forbearances were granted for the remaining eight loans. The Board has provided copies of Protestant's contentions to WHEDA, and WHEDA staff informally has indicated that it does not consider the number of loans submitted by the bank to be excessive, and characterized the interest payment rule violation as technical in nature. The Board also has considered these comments in light of confidential supervisory information provided by the FDIC, and has concluded that these comments do not warrant denial of the proposal. Protestant also argues that Mt. Horeb Bank's participation in the FmHA program is inadequate. FmHA loans represent more than 15 percent of Mt. Horeb Bank's outstanding agricultural loans. The Board also has considered comments from a number of area residents objecting to the loss of a locally owned bank. The Board has considered these comments in light of all the facts of record, including the records of Country's subsidiary banks in assisting to meet the credit needs of their communities. Protestant also has requested a private meeting with the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago ("Reserve Bank") to discuss the issues raised in Protestant's comments, but declined to meet with the Reserve Bank in the presence of Country. Although the Board's Rules of Procedure permit System staff to arrange for a private meeting between a protestant and the applicant for the purposes of clarifying and narrowing the issues and providing a forum for resolving differences, this procedure does not authorize a private meeting with any one party during the processing of an application. See 12 C.F.R. 262.25(c). Protestant also has requested that the Board hold public hearings or meetings to consider public testimony regarding the managerial and the convenience and needs considerations in the proposal. Section 3(b) of the BHC Act does not require the Board to hold a public hearing or meeting unless the appropriate supervisory authority for the bank to be acquired makes a timely written recommendation of denial of the application. In this case, neither the FDIC nor the Wisconsin Commissioner of Banking has recommended denial. Under its rules, the Board may, in its discretion, hold a public hearing or meeting on an application to clarify factual issues related to the application and to provide an opportunity for testimony, if appropriate. 12 C.F.R. 262.3(e) and 262.25(d). The Board has carefully considered Protestant's request in light of all the facts of record. In the Board's view, Protestant has had ample opportunity to submit its views and has, in fact, submitted materials that have been considered by the Board in acting on the application. Protestant has not demonstrated why its written submissions do not adequately present its allegations and what, if any, additional matters would be addressed in a public hearing or meeting. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that a public hearing or meeting is not necessary to clarify the factual record and is not otherwise warranted in this case. Accordingly, Protestant's request for public hearings or meetings on the application is denied. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan and Governors Kelley, Lindsey, Phillips, Yellen, and Meyer. Absent and not voting: Vice Chair Rivlin.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice filed by Stichting Prioriteit ABN AMRO Holding, Stichting Administratiekantoor ABN AMRO Holding, ABN AMRO Holding N.V., and ABN AMRO Bank N.V., all of Amsterdam, The Netherlands, to acquire all of the voting shares of ChiCorp, Inc., Chicago, Illinois, and thereby engage in a variety of nonbanking activities, including underwriting and dealing in all types of debt and equity on a limited basis, and certain other securities- and derivatives-related activities. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Stichting Prioriteit ABN AMRO Holding Stichting Administratiekantoor ABN AMRO Holding ABN AMRO Holding N.V. ABN AMRO Bank N.V. all of Amsterdam, The Netherlands Order Approving Notice to Engage in Certain Nonbanking Activities, Including Underwriting and Dealing in All Types of Debt and Equity on a Limited Basis, and Certain Other Securities- and Derivatives-Related Activities Stichting Prioriteit ABN AMRO Holding, Stichting Administratiekantoor ABN AMRO Holding, ABN AMRO Holding N.V., and ABN AMRO Bank N.V., all of Amsterdam, The Netherlands (collectively, "Notificants"), bank holding companies within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company ("BHC") Act, have requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8)) and section 225.23 of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.23) to acquire all the voting securities of ChiCorp Inc., Chicago, Illinois ("ChiCorp"), and thereby engage in a wide range of nonbanking activities, including securities- and derivatives-related activities. Notificants have applied to engage in the following nonbanking activities throughout the United States, and propose to provide the following services worldwide: (1) Making, acquiring, and servicing loans and other extensions of credit for their own account and for the account of others, pursuant to section 225.25(b)(1) of the Board's Regulation Y; (2) Providing various types of investment and financial advisory services, pursuant to section 225.25(b)(4) of Regulation Y; (3) Leasing personal or real property or acting as agent, broker, or adviser in leasing such property, pursuant to section 225.25(b)(5) of Regulation Y; (4) Operating an automated front-end securities order entry system, and thereby providing to others data processing and data transmission services, facilities and data bases, and access to such services, facilities and data bases, for the processing, transmission or storage of financial, banking, or economic data, pursuant to section 225.25(b)(7) of Regulation Y; (5) Conducting discount and full-service brokerage activities, pursuant to section 225.25(b)(15) of Regulation Y; (6) Underwriting and dealing in obligations of the United States and other obligations that state member banks may underwrite and deal in under 12 U.S.C. ï¿½ï¿½ 335 and 24(7) ("bank-eligible securities"), pursuant to section 225.25(b)(16) of Regulation Y; (7) Acting as a futures commission merchant ("FCM") for nonaffiliated persons in the execution and clearance on major commodity exchanges of futures contracts and options on futures contracts based on bullion, foreign exchange, government securities, or certificates of deposit or other money market instruments that a bank may buy or sell in the cash market for its own account, and providing investment advice with respect to such contracts as an FCM or a commodity trading advisor ("CTA"), pursuant to sections 225.25(b)(18) and (19) of Regulation Y; (8) Underwriting and dealing in, to a limited extent, all types of debt and equity securities other than interests in open-end investment companies ("bank-ineligible securities"); (9) Buying and selling all types of debt and equity securities on the order of customers as a "riskless principal" and acting as agent in the private placement of all types of debt and equity securities; (10) Trading for their own account, for purposes other than hedging, and for the account of customers in gold and silver bullion, bars, rounds and coins, and platinum and palladium coin and bullion; (11) Trading for their own account in foreign exchange spot, forward, futures, options, and options on futures contracts, and providing transaction and advisory services to nonaffiliated customers with respect to such foreign exchange-related instruments; (12) Acting as an FCM for nonaffiliated persons in the execution and clearance on major commodity exchanges of futures and options on futures contracts based on bonds or other debt instruments, certain commodities, and stock, bond, or commodity indices, and providing investment advice, including discretionary management services, with respect to such contracts; (13) Providing execution-only and clearing-only services for options on securities to institutional customers; (14) Providing clearing-only services for futures and options on futures contracts to, and serving as the primary clearing firm for, certain professional floor traders on the Kansas City Board of Trade ("KCBOT") and the Minneapolis Grain Exchange ("MGE"); and (15) Providing brokerage services with respect to forward contracts for the delivery of certain financial and nonfinancial commodities. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (61 Federal Register 41,413 (1996)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the notice and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Stichting Prioriteit ABN AMRO Holding, with total consolidated assets of $339.4 billion, is the largest commercial banking organization in the Netherlands. Notificants control seven depository institutions in Illinois and one commercial bank in New York. ABN AMRO Bank N.V. also operates branches in Boston, Massachusetts; Chicago, Illinois; New York, New York; Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; and Seattle, Washington; and agencies in Atlanta, Georgia; Miami, Florida; Houston, Texas; and Los Angeles and San Francisco, California. ChiCorp and its principal subsidiary, The Chicago Corporation, Chicago, Illinois ("TCC"), engage worldwide in a wide range of investment advisory, securities underwriting, and futures-related activities. Notificants propose to merge TCC with and into Notificants' existing section 20 subsidiary, ABN AMRO Securities (USA) Inc., Chicago, Illinois ("Company"). TCC and Company are, and Company will continue to be, broker-dealers registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. ï¿½ 78a et seq .) and a member of the National Association of Securities Dealers ("NASD"). In addition, TCC is, and Company would become, registered as an FCM and CTA with the Commodity Futures Trading Commission ("CFTC") under the Commodity Exchange Act (7 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1 et seq.) and a member of the National Futures Association ("NFA"). Accordingly, Company will be subject to the recordkeeping and reporting obligations, fiduciary standards, and other requirements of the Securities Exchange Act, the Commodity Exchange Act, the SEC, CFTC, NASD and NFA. Activities Previously Approved by the Board Activities Approved by Regulation The Board previously has determined by regulation that certain of the proposed lending, investment and financial advisory, leasing, data processing, securities brokerage, bank-eligible underwriting and dealing, and FCM and futures advisory services are so closely related to banking as to be proper incidents thereto within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Except as discussed below, Notificants have committed that these activities will be conducted within the limitations established by Regulation Y and the Board's orders related to these activities. Bank-Ineligible Underwriting and Dealing Activities The Board has determined that, subject to the prudential framework of limitations established in previous decisions to address the potential for conflicts of interests, unsound banking practices, or other adverse effects, the proposed activities of underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities are so closely related to banking as to be a proper incident thereto within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Notificants have committed that Company will conduct the proposed underwriting and dealing activities using the same methods and procedures and subject to the same prudential limitations established by the Board in the Section 20 Orders. The Board also has determined that the conduct of these securities underwriting and dealing activities is consistent with section 20 of the Glass-Steagall Act (12 U.S.C. § 377), provided that the company engaged in the underwriting and dealing activities derives no more than 10 percent of its total gross revenue from underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities over any two-year period. Notificants have committed that Company will conduct its underwriting and dealing activities in bank-ineligible securities subject to the 10-percent revenue test. Private Placement and "Riskless Principal" Activities Private placement involves the placement of new issues of securities with a limited number of sophisticated purchasers in a nonpublic offering. A financial intermediary in a private placement transaction acts solely as an agent of the issuer in soliciting purchasers and does not purchase the securities and attempt to resell them. Securities that are privately placed are not subject to the registration requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, and are offered only to financially sophisticated institutions and individuals and not to the public. Company will not privately place registered securities and will only place securities with customers that qualify as accredited investors. "Riskless principal" is the term used in the securities business to refer to a transaction in which a broker-dealer, after receiving an order to buy (or sell) a security for a customer, purchases (or sells) the security for its own account to offset a contemporaneous sale to (or purchase from) the customer. Riskless principal transactions are understood in the industry to include only transactions in the secondary market. Thus, Company would not act as a riskless principal in selling bank-ineligible securities at the order of a customer that is the issuer of the securities to be sold, or in any transaction where Company has a contractual agreement to place the securities as agent of the issuer. Company also would not act as a riskless principal in any transaction involving a bank-ineligible security for which it or an affiliate makes a market. The Board has determined that, subject to the limitations established by the Board in prior orders, the proposed private placement and riskless principal activities are so closely related to banking as to be a proper incident thereto within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. The Board also has determined that acting as agent in the private placement of securities, and purchasing and selling securities on the order of investors as a riskless principal, do not constitute underwriting and dealing in securities for purposes of section 20 of the Glass-Steagall Act, and that revenue derived from these activities is not subject to the 10-percent revenue limitation on bank-ineligible securities underwriting and dealing. Notificants have committed that Company will conduct its private placement activities using the same methods and procedures and subject to the same prudential limitations as those established by the Board in Bankers Trust and J.P. Morgan , including the comprehensive framework of restrictions imposed by the Board in connection with underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities, which were designed to avoid potential conflicts of interests, unsound banking practices, and other adverse effects. Notificants also have committed that Company will conduct its riskless principal activities subject to the limitations previously established by the Board. General Partnership Activities Company proposes to assume TCC's role as general partner and investment adviser to several limited partnerships ("Partnerships") that invest in assets that a bank holding company is permitted to own. The Board previously has permitted bank holding companies to serve as general partner and investment adviser for unregistered limited partnerships that invest in securities. Notificants have committed that the proposed activities would be conducted in accordance with limitations contained in the BHC Act and in previous Board decisions. Notificants have committed, for example, that the Partnerships, together with Notificants and their affiliates, will not control more than 5 percent of any class of voting securities of any issuer without prior Board approval. Notificants also have committed that no directors, officers, or employees of Notificants or their affiliates will serve as directors, officers, or employees of any issuer of which the Partnerships, Notificants and their affiliates hold more than 10 percent of the total equity. Precious Metal and Foreign Exchange Activities Notificants propose that Company trade in gold and silver bullion, bars, rounds, and coins, and platinum and palladium bullion and coins for its own account and for the account of customers. Notificants also propose that Company trade for its own account in foreign exchange spot, forward, futures, options and options on futures transactions, and provide execution and limited advisory services with respect to such instruments to unaffiliated customers. The Board previously has determined that the proposed precious metals activities are closely related to banking and permissible for bank holding companies under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. The Board also previously has approved the proposed foreign exchange-related activities subject to certain limitations, and Notificants have committed that Company will conduct its foreign exchange-related activities in accordance with the limitations established by the Board. Additional FCM and CTA Activities Notificants also propose that Company act as an FCM for, and provide advisory services to, unaffiliated persons in connection with the purchase and sale of futures and options on futures based on bonds or other debt instruments, certain commodities, or stock, bond or commodity indices. Company's FCM activities would include engaging in execution-only, clearing-only and omnibus account activities with respect to futures and options on futures based on financial and nonfinancial commodities, and providing discretionary portfolio management services with respect to futures and options on futures on financial and nonfinancial commodities. Company would provide these additional futures-related execution-only, clearing-only and discretionary portfolio management services only to institutional customers and certain sophisticated non-institutional commercial hedger customers. The Board previously has determined that Company's proposed futures-related execution, clearing and advisory activities, including its proposed clearing-only activities, are so closely related to banking as to be proper incidents thereto, provided that the activities are conducted in conformity with certain limitations and conditions designed to, inter alia , ensure that the activities are consistent with safe and sound banking practices and mitigate potential conflicts of interests. Notificants have committed that Company will conduct these additional FCM and advisory activities in accordance with the limitations established by the Board in previous cases. Notificants also propose that Company provide clearing-only services to, and serve as the primary clearing firm for, certain professional floor traders on the KCBOT and MGE with respect to the futures contracts and options on futures contracts traded on such exchanges. The Board previously has determined that providing clearing services with respect to exchange-traded securities, options, futures, and options on futures contracts is closely related to banking within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. In 1991, however, the Board denied an application by Notificants to engage de novo in providing the proposed services to market makers and other professional floor traders dealing for their own accounts. The Board's decision in the 1991 ABN AMRO Order was based on the Board's conclusion that, at the time of the application, the applicants had not sufficiently demonstrated that the potential public benefit of the proposed activity outweighed the financial risks associated with serving as the primary clearing firm for professional floor traders. In the 1991 ABN AMRO Order , the Board recognized that a company serving as the primary clearing firm for professional floor traders may be exposed to significant financial risks because the company generally would not have the ability to reject an executed trade presented to it for clearance, even where the company believes the trade presents unacceptable risks in light of market conditions or the traders' financial position. The Board also noted that, at the time of the application, the applicants lacked appropriate operational systems to track and manage the intra-day risks arising from the trading activities of the floor traders. This lack of a mechanism to monitor intra-day trading activities presented the possibility that a professional floor trader could incur substantial losses through the trading of options or futures contracts, which the applicants would be obligated to clear and guarantee, before the applicants could act to mitigate their credit risk exposure. Since 1991, the Board and bank holding companies have gained substantial experience with the conduct, methods, procedures, and regulation of clearing-only activities. Also, the Board has authorized bank holding companies to provide clearing-only services with respect to futures contracts and options on futures contracts for customers other than professional floor traders, subject to certain conditions designed to assure that the bank holding companies have the ability to manage the attendant financial risks. In particular, the bank holding companies agreed to provide the clearing-only services pursuant to "give-up" agreements that provide the bank holding companies the right to refuse to accept for clearance any customer trade that the bank holding company deems unsuitable in light of market conditions or a customer's financial situation or objective. In addition, the bank holding companies agreed to establish procedures to monitor the intra-day trading activities and risk exposure of their clearing-only customers. The facts of record in this case indicate that TCC has, and Company will have, sufficient risk management policies, procedures, and systems to permit Notificants and Company to adequately monitor and control the risks, including the intra-day risks, associated with Company's proposal to serve as the primary clearing firm for a limited number of professional floor traders on the KCBOT and MGE. Specifically, TCC establishes trading, credit, margin, and exposure limits for each professional floor trader for which it serves as the primary clearing firm. Adherence to these limits is monitored on an intra-day basis by experienced TCC personnel who are physically present on the floor of the KCBOT and MGE. These TCC personnel visually monitor the trading activities of floor traders on the exchanges and review trades submitted by the floor traders for clearance. If a TCC employee determines that a floor trader is exceeding the limits established by TCC, or is otherwise engaged in questionable trading activities, the employee has the ability to limit or halt the floor trader's activities, require the floor trader to post additional margin, partially or entirely liquidate the floor trader's positions, or immediately revoke the floor traders membership on the exchange. The managers of TCC's operations on the KCBOT and MGE also personally guarantee TCC against any losses that TCC may incur from serving as the primary clearing firm for floor traders on the exchanges, which provides such personnel with an incentive to closely monitor the trading activities of the floor traders. Notificants have stated that Company will install an on-line risk management system that will provide personnel in Chicago, Kansas City, and Minneapolis with intra-day data on the trading activities of professional floor traders on the KCBOT and MGE, and that will permit such personnel to analyze Company's exposure to such trading activities on an intra-day basis. The Board notes that the type of risk management systems necessary to appropriately manage the risks arising from a particular activity necessarily depends on the scope and nature of the proposed activity. Company proposes to serve as the primary clearing firm for a limited number of professional floor traders on two exchanges. These exchanges have relatively small trading areas and volumes, which permits personnel on the floors of the exchanges to monitor trading activity on the exchanges. The Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago ("Reserve Bank") conducted an on-site review of the operational and managerial infrastructure maintained by TCC in Chicago, Kansas City, and Minneapolis to monitor and control the financial risks associated with TCC's primary clearing activities on the KCBOT and MGE. Based on this review and other facts of record, the Board concludes that TCC has the managerial and operational resources and systems adequately to monitor and control the financial risks arising from its role as primary clearing firm on the KCBOT and MGE. The record in this case also indicates that Notificants' proposal to assume the clearing-only activities of ChiCorp on the KCBOT and MGE, within the framework discussed in this order, can reasonably be expected to produce public benefits that outweigh possible adverse effects. The Board notes that the KCBOT and MGE are small exchanges with relatively low transaction volumes, and that ChiCorp serves as the primary clearing firm for a significant percentage of the professional floor traders on such exchanges. Notificants' proposal would permit Company to continue providing primary clearing services to the professional floor traders on the KCBOT and MGE that are currently customers of TCC. In light of all the facts of record, including the limited nature of Company's proposed clearing-only activities for professional floor traders, the commitments provided by Notificants, and the operational and managerial systems that Company will have in place to monitor and control the risks arising from the proposed activities, the Board has concluded that the credit and other risk considerations associated with the proposed clearing-only activities for professional floor traders on the KCBOT and the MGE are consistent with approval of this notice and that, therefore, the proposed activity is a proper incident to banking within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Brokerage Services With Respect to Forward Contracts Based on Certain Financial and Nonfinancial Commodities Notificants propose that Company act as broker with respect to forward contracts based on certain financial and nonfinancial commodities. In this capacity, Company would assist customers in arranging forward contracts with third parties pursuant to which the customers would make (or receive) delivery of financial and nonfinancial commodities on a future date. Company would act as a broker only with respect to forward contracts that are based on those financial and nonfinancial commodities that also serve as the basis for an exchange-traded futures contract. Bank holding companies are permitted to act as a broker in the execution and clearance of futures contracts and options on futures contracts based on financial and nonfinancial commodities. As noted above, the forward contracts that Company proposes to broker would be based on the same financial and nonfinancial commodities that underlie futures contracts that bank holding companies are permitted to broker as an FCM. Bank holding companies also are permitted to broker forward contracts on foreign exchange and arrange swap transactions that are based on nonfinancial commodities or indices of nonfinancial commodities. Accordingly, the Board has concluded that acting as a broker for forward contracts based on those financial and nonfinancial commodities that underlie an exchange-traded futures contract is a permissible activity for bank holding companies under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Other Considerations In order to approve this notice, the Board must determine that the activities are a proper incident to banking, that is, that the performance of the proposed activities "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public . . . that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interest, or unsound banking practices." As part of its review of these factors, the Board considers the financial and managerial resources of the notificant and its subsidiaries and the effect the transaction would have on such resources. The Board notes that Notificants' capital ratios satisfy applicable risk-based standards under the Basle Accord, and are considered equivalent to the capital levels that would be required of a United States banking organization. The Board also has reviewed the capitalization of Notificants and Company in accordance with the standards set forth in the Section 20 Orders and finds the capitalization of each to be consistent with approval. The determination of the capitalization of Company is based on all the facts of record, including Notificants' projections of the volume of Company's underwriting and dealing activities in bank-ineligible securities. In connection with this proposal, the Reserve Bank has reviewed the operational and managerial infrastructure of Company, including its computer, audit, and accounting systems and internal risk management procedures and controls, with respect to the proposed underwriting and dealing in debt and equity securities, and has determined that Company has established an adequate operational and managerial infrastructure to ensure compliance with the requirements of the Section 20 Orders. The Reserve Bank also has reviewed the operational and managerial infrastructure of ChiCorp with respect to its provision of clearing-only services to locals on the KCBOT and MGE, including the policies, procedures, and systems that ChiCorp has, and that Company will have, in place to monitor and control the financial risks associated with such activities. On the basis of the Reserve Bank's review, and all the facts of record, the Board concludes that financial and managerial considerations are consistent with approval of this proposal. Consummation of the proposal can reasonably be expected to provide added convenience and services to Notificants' customers by offering them an expanded range of products and services. Notificants also have stated that consummation of the proposal would give ChiCorp access to Notificants' worldwide customer base and contacts and would permit ChiCorp and Company to compete more effectively in the market for securities- and futures-related services. There are numerous providers of the proposed nonbanking services and, therefore, consummation of the proposal would not significantly decrease competition in any relevant market. The Board also believes that the conduct of the proposed activities within the framework established in this order, prior orders, and Regulation Y is not likely to result in significantly adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, or unsound banking practices. Accordingly, and for the reasons set forth in this order and in the Section 20 Orders, the Board has concluded that Notificants' proposal to engage in the proposed activities is consistent with the Glass-Steagall Act, and that the proposed activities are so closely related to banking as to be proper incidents thereto within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act, provided that Notificants limit Company's activities as specified in this order and the Section 20 Orders, as modified by the Modification Orders. On the basis of all the facts of record, the Board has determined to, and hereby does, approve this notice subject to all the terms and conditions discussed in this order and in the Section 20 Orders, as modified by the Modification Orders. The Board's approval of this proposal extends only to activities conducted within the limitations of those orders and this order, including the Board's reservation of authority to establish additional limitations to ensure that Company's activities are consistent with safety and soundness, avoiding conflicts of interests, and other relevant considerations under the BHC Act. Underwriting and dealing in any manner other than as approved in this order and the Section 20 Orders, as modified by the Modification Orders, is not authorized for Company. The Board's determination also is subject to all the terms and conditions set forth in Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.23(g) (12 C.F.R. 225.7 and 225.23(g)), and to the Board's authority to require modification or termination of the activities of a bank holding company or any of its subsidiaries as the Board finds necessary to assure compliance with and to prevent evasion of the provisions of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders issued thereunder. The Board's decision is specifically conditioned on Notificants' compliance with all the commitments made in connection with this notice, including the commitments discussed in this order and the conditions set forth in the Board regulations and orders noted above. The commitments and conditions shall be deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decisions, and may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. This transaction shall not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or the Reserve Bank, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective December 11, 1996. Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes Asset and ranking data are as of December 31, 1995, and use exchange rates then in effect. See Stichting Prioriteit ABN AMRO Holding , 81 Federal Reserve Bulletin 182 (1995). See 12 C.F.R. 225.25(b)(1), (4), (5), (7), (15), (18) and (19). As part of its securities brokerage activities, Company would provide execution-only and clearing-only services with respect to securities to institutional customers. Company will provide clearing-only services with respect to securities only if Company has the ability and the right to reject a trade given to Company for clearance for any reason. As discussed further below, the Board has separately considered Notificants' requests to provide clearing-only services to professional floor traders and with respect to options on securities. See Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, et al. , 76 Federal Reserve Bulletin 158 (1990); J.P. Morgan & Co. Incorporated, et al. , 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 192 (1989), aff'd sub nom . Securities Industry Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System , 900 F.2d 360 (D.C. Cir. 1990); Citicorp, et al. , 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 473 (1987), aff'd sub nom . Securities Industry Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System , 839 F.2d 47 (2d Cir. 1988), cert. denied , 486 U.S. 1059 (1988); as modified by Review of Restrictions on Director, Officer and Employee Interlocks, Cross-Marketing Activities, and the Purchase and Sale of Financial Assets Between a Section 20 Subsidiary and an Affiliated Bank or Thrift , 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin __ (1996) (Order dated October 30, 1996) (collectively, "Section 20 Orders"). To address potential conflicts of interests arising from Company's conduct of full-service brokerage activities along with underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities, Notificants have committed that Company will inform its full-service brokerage customers at the commencement of the relationship that, as a general matter, Company may be a principal or may be engaged in underwriting with respect to, or may purchase from an affiliate, those securities for which brokerage and advisory services are provided. In addition, at the time any brokerage order is taken, the customer will be informed (usually orally) whether Company is acting as agent or principal with respect to a security. Confirmations sent to customers also will state whether Company is acting as agent or principal. See PNC Financial Corp. , 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 396 (1989). See Section 20 Orders. Compliance with the 10-percent revenue limitation shall be calculated in accordance with the method stated in the Section 20 Orders, as modified by the Order Approving Modifications to the Section 20 Orders , 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 751 (1989); the Order Approving Modifications to the Section 20 Orders , 79 Federal Reserve Bulletin 226 (1993); the Supplement to Order Approving Modifications to Section 20 Orders , 79 Federal Reserve Bulletin 360 (1993); and 10 Percent Revenue Limit on Bank-Ineligible Activities of Subsidiaries of Bank Holding Companies Engaged in Underwriting and Dealing Securities , 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin __ (1996) (Order dated September 11, 1996) (collectively, "Modification Orders"). The Board notes that Notificants have not adopted the Board's alternative indexed-revenue test to measure compliance with the 10-percent limitation on bank-ineligible securities activities, and, absent such election, Notificants will continue to employ the Board's original 10-percent revenue test. The Board also notes that Company may engage in activities that are necessary incidents to the proposed underwriting and dealing activities, provided that they are treated as part of the bank-ineligible securities activities, unless Company has received specific approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act to conduct the activities independently. Until such approval is obtained, any revenues from the incidental activities must be counted as ineligible revenues subject to the 10-percent revenue limitation. See SEC Rule 10b-10(a)(8)(i) (17 C.F.R. 240.10b-10(a)(8)(i)). The Board notes that Company, as a registered broker-dealer, must conduct its riskless principal activities in accordance with the customer disclosure and other requirements of the federal securities laws. See J.P. Morgan & Company Incorporated , 76 Federal Reserve Bulletin 26 (1990) (" J.P. Morgan "); Bankers Trust New York Corporation , 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 829 (1989) (" Bankers Trust "). See Bankers Trust . Among the prudential limitations discussed more fully in Bankers Trust and J.P. Morgan are that Company will not privately place open-end investment company securities or securities of investment companies that are advised by Notificants or any of their affiliates. In addition, Company will make no general solicitation or general advertising for securities it places. Notificants have indicated that Company may purchase, for its own account, a portion of the securities that it privately places. Notificants have committed that if Company purchases for its own account any securities that it privately places, Company will treat all revenue derived from the placement transaction as bank-ineligible revenue subject to the 10-percent limitation. Company also proposes to act as principal or agent in the resale of privately placed securities through transactions that would be exempt from registration under the Securities Act of 1933, such as, for example, resales to qualified institutional buyers pursuant to Rule 144A under the Securities Act of 1933. Notificants have committed that, if Company acts as principal with respect to any portion of such an unregistered resale transaction, Company will treat the revenue derived from the entire transaction as part of Company's bank-ineligible revenues subject to the 10-percent revenue limitation. See The Bank of New York Company, Inc. , 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 748 (1996). Neither Company nor its affiliates will hold themselves out as making a market in the bank-ineligible securities that Company buys and sells as riskless principal, or enter quotes for specific bank-ineligible securities in any dealer quotation system in connection with Company's riskless principal transactions, except that Company and its affiliates may enter bid or ask quotations, or publish "offering wanted" or "bid wanted" notices on trading systems other than NASDAQ or an exchange, if Company or the affiliate does not enter price quotations on different sides of the market for a particular security for two business days. In other words, Company or its affiliate must wait at least two business days after entering a "bid" quote on a security before entering an "ask" quote on the same security and vice versa. Company will not act as riskless principal for registered investment company securities or for any securities of investment companies that are advised by Notificants or its affiliates. In addition, because Company proposes to provide riskless principal services in combination with investment advisory services, Company will conduct its riskless principal activities in accordance with the limitations established by the Board for the full-service brokerage activities of bank holding companies. See 12 C.F.R. 225.25(b)(15)(ii). The Partnerships would not register as investment companies under the Investment Company Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. § 80a-1 et seq. ). Each Partnership would be limited to not more than 100 investors. As general partner, Notificants may provide certain administrative and advisory services to the partnership, including monitoring the development of the limited partnerships' investments in the portfolio companies, issuing reports to limited partners, administering cash flow, and distributing dividends. See Meridian Bancorp, Inc. , 80 Federal Reserve Bulletin 736 (1994) (" Meridian "). See Meridian . The Partnerships will not invest in futures contracts or options on futures contracts on any financial or nonfinancial commodity, or knowingly acquire debt securities that are in default at the time of acquisition, without prior approval from the Federal Reserve System. In addition, Notificants have committed that they will consolidate the Partnerships with other subsidiaries of Notificant for purposes of calculating Notificants' capital adequacy whenever such information is required to be presented to the Board of Governors. In consolidating the capital ratios, Notificants will exclude the limited partners' investments and an equal amount of assets from the numerator and denominator, respectively. Notificants also have committed that the Partnerships will not control more than 25 percent of the total equity, including subordinated debt, of any issuer without prior Board approval. In furtherance of the commitments, Notificants have committed that they will monitor, on a system-wide basis, the holdings of the Partnerships and all other entities controlled by Notificants. Company also proposes to serve as investment adviser with discretionary voting authority for several trusts established for pension fund customers that invest in banks and bank holding companies ("Bank Trusts"). Notificants must obtain the Board's approval under the BHC Act before Notificants acquire in the aggregate control of more than 5 percent of the voting shares of any bank or bank holding company. In this regard, Notificants have committed that, in the event that shares held by the Bank Trusts would cause the aggregate holdings of the Bank Trusts, Notificants and any Partnership to exceed 5 percent of any class of voting securities of a bank or bank holding company, Company will irrevocably transfer the voting rights associated with the securities held by the Bank Trusts to an unaffiliated corporate trustee. See The Bessemer Group, Incorporated , 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 569 (1996) (palladium coin and bullion); Swiss Bank Corporation , 81 Federal Reserve Bulletin 185 (1995) (platinum coin and bullion); Midland Bank PLC , 76 Federal Reserve Bulletin 860 (1990) (gold and silver bullion and coin). Company may engage in metal assaying, storage and transport activities as an incident to its precious metal trading activities. See Westpac Banking Corporation , 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 61 (1987). The Long-Term Credit Bank of Japan, Limited , 79 Federal Reserve Bulletin 347 (1993) (" LTCB "). See LTCB . Company's foreign exchange-related advisory services will be limited to discussions regarding current market conditions, and will not be provided on a separate fee basis. In addition, Company will not recommend that a customer purchase or sell particular foreign exchange instruments or contracts. Company proposes to provide FCM and related advisory services with respect to certain futures contracts and options on futures contracts that are based on indices that track estimated losses to the insurance industry from catastrophic events. Notificants have stated that Company's execution and advisory services with respect to such contracts will not require Company to register as an insurance agent or broker in any state. Notificants have committed that Company would provide these services in accordance with the limitations previously established by the Board. See Northern Trust Corporation , 79 Federal Reserve Bulletin 723 (1993) (" Northern Trust "); Bank of Montreal , 79 Federal Reserve Bulletin 1049 (1993) (" Bank of Montreal "); and J.P. Morgan & Co. Incorporated , 80 Federal Reserve Bulletin 151 (1994) (" 1994 J.P. Morgan Order "). For purposes of determining whether an individual meets the $1 million net worth requirement for an institutional customer in Regulation Y, Notificants will consider a parent's net worth to include accounts of the parent's minor children if the parent has discretionary authority over the account or the selection of the account's investment manager. Furthermore, Notificants will consider a grantor trust to be an institutional customer if (i) the grantor is the trustee or fiduciary of the trust with discretionary authority over the trust's assets, and (ii) the net worth of the grantor, including grantor trusts over which it retains discretionary authority, exceeds $1 million. Notificants have stated that all non-institutional commercial hedger customers would be engaged, or affiliated with a commercial enterprise engaged, in producing, manufacturing, processing or merchandising products or providing services related to the commodities underlying the futures and options on futures contracts in which the customer trades. In addition, such customers would not be engaged in executing their own trades on the floors of commodity exchanges. Notificants have committed that Company will: (i) require its non-institutional commercial hedger customers to state in writing that they would engage in "bona fide hedging transactions" as defined by the CFTC ( see 17 C.F.R. 1.3(z)); (ii) establish an initial credit review process to determine whether the proposed hedging activities of a non-institutional commercial hedger customer were appropriate in light of the customer's net worth and business activities; (iii) not permit a non-institutional commercial hedger customer to trade in any commodities other than those that the customer would trade to hedge risks that arise from its commercial activities; and (iv) establish a system to detect any unauthorized trading activity by a non-institutional commercial hedger customer. See Societe Generale , 81 Federal Reserve Bulletin 880 (1995) (" Societe Generale "). See Northern Trust (clearing-only services for financial futures and maintenance of omnibus accounts); Bank of Montreal (execution and clearing and clearing-only services for nonfinancial futures); 1994 J.P. Morgan Order (execution and advisory services on nonfinancial futures); Banque Nationale de Paris , 81 Federal Reserve Bulletin 386 (1995) (" BNP ") (discretionary portfolio management services for financial futures); CS Holding , 81 Federal Reserve Bulletin 803 (1995) (" CS Holding ") (discretionary portfolio management services for non-financial futures); Societe Generale (financial and nonfinancial futures execution, clearing-only, and advisory services for non-institutional commercial hedger customers). Because non-institutional commercial hedger customers have special expertise in commodity-related transactions, the Board previously has noted that such customers are capable of detecting conflicts of interest or advice that is motivated by the bank holding company's self-interest, and are unlikely to rely unduly on commodity-related investment advice provided by a bank holding company. See Societe Generale . Company also proposes to provide clearing-only services to unaffiliated customers with respect to options on securities. Options on securities are treated as securities for purposes of the federal securities laws, and the Board has treated options on securities as securities for purposes of the Glass-Steagall Act. See 15 U.S.C. § 77b(1), § 78c(a)(10); Swiss Bank Corporation , 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 685 (1996). The Board previously has determined that providing clearing services with respect to exchange-traded securities, options, futures, and options on futures contracts is closely related to banking within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. See Stichting Prioriteit ABN AMRO Holding , 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 189 (1991) (" 1991 AMRO Order "); BNP ; Northern Trust . Company will provide clearing-only services with respect to options on securities only to institutional customers and pursuant to agreements that permit Company the right to review and reject any trade presented to it for clearance for any reason. These commitments are similar to those relied on by the Board in previous cases in which the Board determined that providing clearing-only services with respect to exchange-traded futures and options on futures is a proper incident to banking within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. See Northern Trust ; Bank of Montreal . ChiCorp currently serves as the primary clearing firm for 17 professional floor traders on the KCBOT and 34 professional floor traders on the MGE. Because the number of professional floor traders on these exchanges may vary over time depending on trading volume and other factors, Notificants have requested authority for Company to act as the primary clearing firm for up to 20 professional floor traders on the MGE and 40 professional floor traders on the MGE. See 1991 ABN AMRO Order ; BNP ; and Northern Trust . See 1991 ABN AMRO Order . A primary clearing firm is obligated to accept and clear all trades submitted by a professional floor trader, even if the trade was initially presented to, and rejected by, another clearing firm. Once a primary clearing firm clears a trade for a professional floor trader, the firm becomes obligated to settle the trade in the event of a default by the professional floor trader. Particular exchanges may refer to companies serving as a primary clearing firm by different titles. For example, the Chicago Mercantile Exchange refers to firms providing primary clearing services as qualifying clearing firms. See Northern Trust ; Bank of Montreal . The Board also noted that the rules of the applicable exchanges provided the bank holding companies with sufficient time to review an executed trade before determining whether to accept the trade for clearance. The Board received comments supporting Notificants' proposal to provide clearing-only activities for professional floor traders from The Options Clearing Corporation, the Board of Trade Clearing Corporation, and the Chicago Board of Trade ("Commenters"). The Commenters asserted that approval of the proposal would increase competition in the futures markets and would not result in adverse effects in light of the risk management systems that are utilized by major futures exchanges and their clearing members. Notificants have stated that Company will adopt the risk management policies, procedures, and systems used by TCC in connection with its primary clearing activities. TCC has four risk management employees who monitor trading on the KCBOT, and three risk management employees who monitor trading at the MGE. Trades on the KCBOT and MGE are not electronically submitted to the clearing firm or the exchange. Instead, trading cards for each trade are submitted by each professional floor trader to its clearing firm, which enters the trade into the exchange's clearing system. Both the KCBOT and the MGE require that TCC collect the trading cards from each floor trader at least once during each half hour period, thereby providing TCC personnel with an opportunity to review the intra-day trading activities of floor traders. KCBOT rules also require that TCC enter all collected trades into the exchange's on-line clearing system within 45 minutes of the end of the half-hour period during which the trades were collected. The KCBOT's on-line clearing system also permits TCC to monitor the trading activities of floor traders, both individually and in the aggregate, on an intra-day basis, and allows TCC to identify any potentially unmatched trades. Although the MGE does not operate an on-line clearing system, TCC personnel maintain tally sheets that are updated every 30 minutes and that reflect all trades submitted by each professional floor trader throughout the day. TCC risk management personnel in Chicago also electronically receive trade information four times a day from the KCBOT and at the end of the day from the MGE. Reports based on such data are prepared by risk management personnel and reviewed daily by officers in Chicago, Kansas City, and Minneapolis. The Board notes that it has requested comment on whether the list of permissible activities in Regulation Y should be amended to permit bank holding companies to provide clearing-only services to professional floor traders. See 61 Federal Register 47,242, 47,254 (Sept. 6, 1996) ("Regulation Y Proposal"). The Board will consider whether to amend Regulation Y to permit bank holding companies in general to provide clearing-only services to professional floor traders at the time it considers the proposed amendments to Regulation Y. The Board also has proposed in its revision of Regulation Y to modify the conditions that govern certain other activities that TCC currently conducts without restriction. Notificants have committed that, during the one-year period following consummation of the proposal, Company will engage in these activities in accordance with the limitations set forth in the Regulation Y Proposal and, thereafter, will conduct these activities subject to the conditions adopted by the Board in Regulation Y, as then in effect. Because Company will act only as a broker, Company will not itself be required to take physical delivery of the nonfinancial commodities underlying the forward contracts that it arranges under any circumstances. Exchange-traded futures contracts may be based on a wide variety of commodities, including precious metals, oil, cocoa or wool. Banking regulators have not expressly permitted banks to engage in the proposed activity. See OCC Interp. Ltr. No. 494, reprinted in [1989-1990 Transfer Binder] Fed. Banking L. Rep. (CC) at ¶ 83,083 (Dec. 20, 1989). See Bank of Montreal , 79 Federal Reserve Bulletin 1049 (1993). See 12 C.F.R. 225.25(b)(17); Swiss Bank Corporation , 81 Federal Reserve Bulletin 185 (1995). See Bank of Montreal , 79 Federal Reserve Bulletin 1049 (1993); Swiss Bank Corporation , 81 Federal Reserve Bulletin 185 (1995). 12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8). See 12 C.F.R. 225.24; see also The Fuji Bank, Limited , 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 94 (1989); Bayerische Vereinsbank AG , 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 155 (1987). The Board notes that, as a registered broker-dealer, Company must comply with the SEC's net capital rule. See 15 C.F.R. 240.15c3-1. The Board received a comment from an anonymous source contending that ChiCorp has no minorities or women in senior management positions and requesting that the Board deny the proposal on this basis. The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission ("EEOC") has jurisdiction to investigate and determine whether companies are in compliance with federal equal employment laws. The Board has noted that unsubstantiated allegations of improper actions under a statute administered by another federal agency are beyond the scope of the Board's review under the factors specified in the BHC Act. On the other hand, substantiated improper actions may be considered by the Board in light of all the facts of record of an application under the factors in the BHC Act or in the context of the Board's general supervisory authority over bank holding companies. See Norwest Corporation , 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 580, 582 (1996). The Board has referred the comment to the EEOC. ChiCorp's subsidiary, ChiCorp Insurance Agency, engages in the sale as agent of insurance products, including annuities, in Illinois. Notificants propose to transfer these activities to a subsidiary of Notificants' thrift subsidiary, LaSalle Bank, F.S.B. ("LaSalle Bank"), Chicago, Illinois, upon consummation of this proposal. The Board has determined that LaSalle Bank is a Qualified Savings Association within the meaning of section 4(i)(3) of the BHC Act and is, therefore, entitled to engage in these types of insurance agency activities in Illinois. See Stichting Prioriteit ABN AMRO Holding , 78 Federal Reserve Bulletin 296 (1992). Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan and Governors Kelley, Phillips, Yellen, and Meyer. Absent and not voting: Vice Chair Rivlin and Governor Lindsey.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the applications and notices of NationsBank Corporation and NB Holdings Corporation, both of Charlotte, North Carolina, to merge with Boatmen's Bancshares, Inc., St. Louis, Missouri ("Boatmen's"), and thereby acquire Boatmen's banking and nonbanking subsidiaries. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice filed by Unidanmark A/S and Unibank A/S, both of Copenhagen, Denmark, to retain their interest in Aros Securities, Inc., New York, New York, and thereby engage in investment advisory, securities brokerage, private placement, and "riskless principal" activities. A copy of the Board's Order is attached. Unidanmark A/S Unibank A/S Copenhagen, Denmark Order Approving Notice to Engage in Nonbanking Activities Unidanmark A/S and its wholly owned subsidiary Unibank A/S, both of Copenhagen, Denmark (collectively, "Notificants"), foreign banking organizations subject to the provisions of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), have requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1843(c)(8)) and section 225.23 of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.23) to retain their ownership of 100 percent of the voting shares of Aros Securities Inc., New York, New York ("Aros"), and thereby engage in the following activities: (1) providing investment advisory services pursuant to 12 C.F.R. 225.25(b)(4); (2) providing discount and full-service securities brokerage services pursuant to 12 C.F.R. 225.25(b)(15); and (3) acting as agent in the private placement of all types of securities, and buying and selling all types of securities on the order of customers as a "riskless principal" through Company. Aros is registered as a broker-dealer with the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. ï¿½ 78a et seq. ) and is a member of the National Association of Securities Dealers ("NASD"). Accordingly, Aros is subject to the recordkeeping and reporting obligations, fiduciary standards, and other requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the SEC and the NASD. Notice of this proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (61 Federal Register 56,961 (1996)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the notice and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Unidanmark A/S, with total consolidated assets of approximately $45.9 billion, is the second largest banking organization in Denmark. In the United States, Unibank A/S operates a branch in New York, New York. Activities Approved by Regulation The Board previously has determined by regulation that the proposed investment advisory and securities brokerage activities are closely related to banking for purposes of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Notificants propose to conduct the activities in accordance with the Board's regulations and prior Board decisions relating to the activities. Private Placement and "Riskless Principal" Activities Private placement involves the placement of new issues of securities with a limited number of sophisticated purchasers in a nonpublic offering. A financial intermediary in a private placement transaction acts solely as an agent of the issuer in soliciting purchasers and does not purchase the securities and attempt to resell them. Securities that are privately placed are not subject to the registration requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, and are offered only to financially sophisticated institutions and individuals and not to the public. Aros will not privately place registered securities and will only place securities with customers that qualify as accredited investors. "Riskless principal" is the term used in the securities business to refer to a transaction in which a broker-dealer, after receiving an order to buy (or sell) a security for a customer, purchases (or sells) the security for its own account to offset a contemporaneous sale to (or purchase from) the customer. Riskless principal transactions are understood in the industry to include only transactions in the secondary market. Thus, Aros would not act as a riskless principal in selling bank-ineligible securities at the order of a customer that is the issuer of the securities to be sold, or in any transaction where Aros has a contractual agreement to place the securities as agent of the issuer. Aros also would not act as a riskless principal in any transaction involving a bank-ineligible security for which it or an affiliate makes a market. The Board has determined that, subject to the limitations established by the Board in prior orders, the proposed private placement and riskless principal activities are so closely related to banking as to be a proper incident thereto within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. The Board also has determined that acting as agent in the private placement of securities, and purchasing and selling securities on the order of investors as a riskless principal, do not constitute underwriting and dealing in securities for purposes of section 20 of the Glass-Steagall Act, and that revenue derived from these activities is not subject to the 10-percent revenue limitation on bank-ineligible securities underwriting and dealing. Notificants have committed that Aros will conduct its private placement activities using the same methods and procedures and subject to the same prudential limitations as those established by the Board in Bankers Trust and J.P. Morgan , including the comprehensive framework of restrictions imposed by the Board in connection with underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities, which were designed to avoid potential conflicts of interests, unsound banking practices, and other adverse effects. Notificants also have committed that Aros will conduct its riskless principal activities subject to the limitations previously established by the Board. Financial Factors, Managerial Resources, and Other Considerations Under the proper incident to banking standard of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act, in order to approve this notice, the Board must determine that the performance of the proposed activities by Notificants can reasonably be expected to produce public benefits that would outweigh possible adverse effects. As part of the Board's evaluation of these factors, the Board considers the financial and managerial resources of the notificants and their subsidiaries and the effect the transaction would have on such resources. The Board notes that Notificants' capital ratios satisfy applicable risk-based standards under the Basle Accord, and are considered equivalent to the capital levels that would be required of a United States banking organization. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that financial and managerial factors are consistent with approval of the proposal. There is no evidence in the record indicating that consummation of this proposal is likely to result in significantly adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interest, or unsound banking practices. The Board expects, moreover, that consummation of the proposal would provide added convenience to Notificants' customers and would increase the level of competition among existing providers of these services. The Board has determined, therefore, that the performance of the proposed activities by Notificants can reasonably be expected to produce public benefits that outweigh possible adverse effects under the proper incident to banking standard of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Based on the foregoing and all the facts of record, including the commitments discussed in this order and all other commitments and representations made by Notificants in connection with this notice, and subject to the terms and conditions set forth in this order, the Board has determined that the notice should be, and hereby is, approved. The Board's determination is subject to all the conditions set forth in Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.23(g) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.7 and 225.23(g)), and to the Board's authority to require modification or termination of the activities of a bank holding company or any of its subsidiaries as the Board finds necessary to assure compliance with, and to prevent evasion of, the provisions of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders issued thereunder. The Board's decision is specifically conditioned on Notificants' compliance with the commitments and representations made in connection with this notice, including the commitments and conditions discussed in this order. The commitments, representations, and conditions relied on in reaching this decision shall be deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision and may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. This transaction shall not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, December 16, 1996. Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes Notificants previously received approval under section 4(c)(9) of the BHC Act to retain temporarily their ownership interest in Aros. See Letter dated August 14, 1996, from Jennifer J. Johnson, Deputy Secretary of the Board, to Robert L. Tortoriello, Esq. ("4(c)(9) Approval Letter"). Aros also engages in certain securities underwriting and dealing activities. Pursuant to the 4(c)(9) Approval Letter, Aros must discontinue such activities within six months of the date on which Notificants acquired control of Aros. Asset and ranking data are as of December 31, 1995, and use exchange rates then in effect. See 12 C.F.R. 225.25(b)(4) and (15). See SEC Rule 10b-10(a)(8)(i) (17 C.F.R. 240.10b-10(a)(8)(i)). The Board notes that Aros, as a registered broker-dealer, must conduct its riskless principal activities in accordance with the customer disclosure and other requirements of the federal securities laws. "Bank-ineligible securities" refers to securities that state member banks are not authorized to underwrite or deal in under 12 U.S.C. ï¿½ï¿½ 335 and 24(7). See J.P. Morgan & Company Incorporated , 76 Federal Reserve Bulletin 26 (1990) (" J.P. Morgan "); Bankers Trust New York Corporation , 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 829 (1989) (" Bankers Trust "). See Bankers Trust . Among the prudential limitations discussed more fully in Bankers Trust and J.P. Morgan are that Aros will not privately place open-end investment company securities or securities of investment companies that are advised by Notificants or any of their affiliates. In addition, Aros will make no general solicitation or general advertising for securities it places. See The Bank of New York Company, Inc. , 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 748 (1996). Neither Aros nor its affiliates will hold themselves out as making a market in the bank-ineligible securities that Aros buys and sells as riskless principal, or enter quotes for specific bank-ineligible securities in any dealer quotation system in connection with Aros' riskless principal transactions, except that Aros and its affiliates may enter bid or ask quotations, or publish "offering wanted" or "bid wanted" notices on trading systems other than NASDAQ or an exchange, if Aros or the affiliate does not enter price quotations on different sides of the market for a particular security for two business days. In other words, Aros or its affiliate must wait at least two business days after entering a "bid" quote on a security before entering an "ask" quote on the same security and vice versa. Aros will not act as riskless principal for registered investment company securities or for any securities of investment companies that are advised by Notificants or their affiliates. In addition, because Aros proposes to provide riskless principal services in combination with investment advisory services, Aros will conduct its riskless principal activities in accordance with the limitations established by the Board for the full-service brokerage activities of bank holding companies. See 12 C.F.R. 225.25(b)(15)(ii). See 12 C.F.R. 225.24; see also The Fuji Bank, Limited , 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 94 (1989); Bayerische Vereinsbank AG , 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 155 (1987). Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Lindsey, Phillips, Yellen, and Meyer.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board said today it has expanded its audit contract with Coopers & Lybrand to include an annual financial audit of each of the 12 Federal Reserve Banks. These audits by the independent outside auditor will be in addition to the annual audit of the combined Reserve Bank financial statements that Coopers & Lybrand has conducted since 1995. The use of an outside accounting firm to audit all 12 Reserve Banks was announced recently by Chairman Alan Greenspan during a Washington, D.C. speech. Since 1995, Coopers & Lybrand has conducted year-end audits of the combined Reserve Bank financial statements, as well as the individual financial statements of two or three Reserve Banks per year. The audit of the 1995 combined Reserve Bank financial statements represented the first such audit conducted by an independent accounting firm. Based on the success of this program, the Board has decided to extend the outside audit to all 12 Reserve Banks. The Reserve Banks will continue to be audited by each Bank's internal audit function and by the Board's financial examiners. The General Accounting Office also conducts audits of the Reserve Banks.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today requested comment on proposed revisions to Regulation M to implement amendments of the Consumer Leasing Act. The act requires lessors to provide uniform cost and other disclosures for car leasing and other types of consumer lease transactions. Comment is requested by February 7, 1997 . The proposed revisions primarily implement amendments to the act contained in the Economic Growth and Regulatory paperwork Reduction Act of 1996, which streamline the advertising disclosures for lease transactions. In addition, the proposal contains several technical amendments that would be made to the regulation. The Board's notice is attached. | |
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced a month-long extension of time to receive public comments on proposed amendments to its margin regulations (Regulations G, T, and U) issued in response to the enactment of the National Securities Markets Improvement Act. Comment must now be received by January 31, 1997 . The Board has taken this action at the request of commenters to allow more time to analyze the proposal and provide more meaningful comments. The Board's extension order is attached. FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM 12 CFR Parts 207, 220, and 221 [Regulations G, T, and U; Docket No. R-0944] Securities Credit Transactions AGENCY: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. ACTION: Proposed rule; extension of comment period. SUMMARY: The Board is extending the comment period on its proposal to amend its margin regulations, Regulations G, T, and U, to give the public additional time to comment on the proposal. The Secretary of the Board, acting pursuant to delegated authority, has extended the comment period from December 26, 1996, to January 31, 1997, to give the public additional time to provide comments. DATES: Comments should be received on or before January 31, 1997 . ADDRESSES: Comments should refer to Docket R-0944, and may be mailed to William Wiles, Secretary, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 20th Street and Constitution Avenue, N.W., Washington, DC 20551. Comments addressed to Mr. Wiles also may be delivered to Room B-2222 of the Eccles Building between 8:45 a.m. and 5:15 p.m. weekdays, or to the guard station in the Eccles Building courtyard on 20th Street N.W. (between Constitution Avenue and C Street N.W.) at any time. Comments received will be available for inspection in Room MP-500 of the Martin Building between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. weekdays, except as provided in 12 CFR 261.9 of the Board's Rules Regarding the Availability of Information. FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Oliver Ireland, Associate General Counsel (202) 452-3625, Gregory Baer, Managing Senior Counsel (202) 452-3236, or Scott Holz, Senior Attorney (202) 452-2966, Legal Division; for the hearing impaired only , Telecommunications Device for the Deaf (TDD), Dorothea Thompson (202) 452-3544. SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: On November 26, 1996, the Board requested comment on amendments to its margin regulations, Regulations G, T, and U (61 FR 60168). By order of the Secretary of the Board, acting pursuant to delegated authority for the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, December 17, 1996. William W. Wiles Secretary of the Board
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application by Ida Grove Bancshares, Inc., Ida Grove, and American Bancshares, Inc., Holstein, to acquire all of the voting shares of Pierson Bancorporation, and thereby acquire Farmers Savings Bank, both of Pierson, and all in Iowa. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Ida Grove Bancshares, Inc. Ida Grove, Iowa American Bancshares, Inc. Holstein, Iowa Order Approving the Acquisition of a Bank Holding Company Ida Grove Bancshares, Inc., Ida Grove, and American Bancshares, Inc., Holstein ("American") (collectively "Ida Grove"), bank holding companies within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), have applied for the Board's approval under section 3 of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1842) to acquire all of the voting shares of Pierson Bancorporation ("Pierson"), and thereby acquire Farmers Savings Bank ("Farmers"), both of Pierson, and all in Iowa. Notice of the application, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (61 Federal Register 51,114 (1996)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the application and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 3 of the BHC Act. Ida Grove, with total consolidated assets of approximately $197 million, is the 29th largest commercial banking organization in Iowa, controlling deposits of approximately $174.6 million, representing less than 1 percent of total deposits in commercial banking organizations in the state. Pierson, with total consolidated assets of approximately $15.5 million, is the 364th largest commercial banking organization in Iowa, controlling deposits of approximately $12.6 million, representing less than 1 percent of total deposits in commercial banking organizations in the state. On consummation of this proposal, Ida Grove would become the 27th largest commercial banking organization in Iowa, controlling deposits of approximately $187.2 million. After the acquisition of Pierson, Ida Grove proposes to effect a series of transactions which would result in its subsidiary bank, Western Bank and Trust, Moville, Iowa ("Western Bank"), operating branches in Kingsley and Pierson, Iowa. The Board has carefully reviewed comments that assert that the proposal, when viewed in its entirety, would permit Ida Grove to evade state law branching restrictions. Iowa law generally prohibits the establishment of a de novo branch in a town that has an office of another bank. Each transaction proposed by Ida Grove is separately authorized by state statute, and the overall transaction has been approved by the Iowa Department of Banking. In this light, the Board concludes that the overall transaction is not prohibited by state law. The Board also notes that the first and only step in the overall transaction requiring the Board's approval--the acquisition of Pierson by Ida Grove--is clearly authorized by state law. Western Bank and Farmers compete directly in the Sioux City, Iowa, banking market ("Sioux City banking market"). On consummation of the proposal, Western Bank would become the 15th largest commercial banking or thrift organization ("depository organization") in the market, controlling deposits of approximately $13.8 million, representing approximately 1 percent of total deposits in depository organizations in the market ("market deposits"). Concentration in the banking market, as measured by the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index ("HHI"), would remain at a level of 1555, and numerous competitors would remain in the market after consummation. Based on these and all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that consummation of this proposal would not have a significantly adverse effect on competition or the concentration of banking resources in the Sioux City banking market or any other relevant banking market. Based on all the facts of record, the Board also has concluded that the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of Ida Grove, Pierson, and their respective subsidiaries, and all other supervisory factors that the Board must consider under section 3 of the BHC Act, are consistent with approval of this proposal. The Board also has considered the convenience and needs of the communities to be served, including the records of performance of the institutions involved under the Community Reinvestment Act (12 U.S.C. § 2901 et seq. ) ("CRA"). The Board notes that Farmers--the bank being acquired in this case--received a "needs to improve" rating at its most recent examination for CRA performance from its primary federal supervisor, the FDIC, as of May 1996. Ida Grove has stated that it will implement CRA policies and programs similar to those of Ida Grove's lead bank, United Bank of Iowa, Ida Grove, Iowa ("United Bank"), after consummation of the proposal. United Bank received an "outstanding" rating for CRA performance at its most recent examination for CRA performance by the FDIC as of March 1996. In addition, Western Bank plans to advertise extensively in the community through various media, as well as to implement a comprehensive officer calling program, to promote its credit products and services. Moreover, Western Bank will enter into a regulatory compliance services agreement with United Bank whereby experienced staff of United Bank will review and monitor compliance policies and procedures, and train and consult with Western's staff on regulatory compliance issues, including the CRA. The Board expects that the actions proposed by Ida Grove will address the deficiencies in Farmers' record of performance, particularly in the types and geographic distribution of its loans. In light of these commitments, and based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that considerations relating to the convenience and needs of the communities to be served, including the CRA performance records of the institutions involved, are consistent with approval. The Board will review the effectiveness of these efforts in future applications by Ida Grove to establish depository facilities. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that this application should be, and hereby is, approved. The Board's approval is specifically conditioned on compliance by Ida Grove with all the commitments made in connection with the application and with the conditions referenced in this order. For purposes of this action, these commitments and conditions are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision, and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The transaction shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day following the effective date of this order, or later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective December 20, 1996. Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes Ida Grove Bancshares, Inc. owns approximately 80.1 percent of the voting shares of American. Asset and state deposit data are as of June 30, 1996. Ida Grove has applied for the Board's approval to acquire Pierson, and to merge Pierson into American. American would survive the merger and directly own all the voting shares of Farmers. After these transactions, Ida Grove would cause Farmers to relocate its main office to Kingsley and to establish a branch at its former location in Pierson, both in Iowa. Farmers would then merge into Western Bank, and Western Bank would operate branches in Kingsley and Pierson, Iowa. Section 524.1202 of the Iowa Code provides that a bank with headquarters in one county may establish a branch in a town in the same or a contiguous county if that town does not have an office of another bank in operation. Iowa Code Ann. § 524.1202. Kingsley, Pierson, and Moville are all located in the same or contiguous Iowa counties. A bank with headquarters in a contiguous county may relocate its main office to another town. See Iowa Code Ann. § 524.312. Therefore, Farmers may relocate to Kingsley. Farmers also may operate a branch office in Pierson, the town from which it relocated, because no office of another bank is located in Pierson. See Iowa Code Ann. § 524.1202(1). Western Bank also may operate branches in Kingsley and Pierson after its merger with Farmers because the Iowa branching restrictions prohibiting the establishment of a branch office in a town with an office of another bank do not apply to branches acquired in a merger between banks located in the same or contiguous counties. See Iowa Code Ann. § 524.1202(3). Iowa Code Ann. § 524.1804. The Sioux City banking market is approximated by Woodbury County, excluding the townships of Lakeport, Sloan, Willow, and Little Sioux; the townships of Garfield and Elkhorn in Plymouth County, all in Iowa; and the Sioux City Rand McNally Area located in South Dakota and Nebraska. Market deposit data are as of June 30, 1995, and include data from Western Bank, a newly formed bank subsidiary of Ida Grove, as of November 29, 1996. Market share data are based on calculations in which the deposits of thrift institutions are included at 50 percent. The Board previously has indicated that thrift institutions have become, or have the potential to become, significant competitors of commercial banks. See Midwest Financial Group , 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 386 (1989); National City Corporation , 70 Federal Reserve Bulletin 743 (1984). Thus, the Board has regularly included thrift deposits in the calculation of market share on a 50-percent weighted basis. See, e.g., First Hawaiian Inc ., 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 52 (1991). Under the revised Department of Justice Merger Guidelines, 49 Federal Register 26,823 (June 29, 1984), a market in which the post-merger HHI is above 1800 is considered to be highly concentrated. In such markets, the Justice Department is likely to challenge a merger that increases the HHI by more than 50 points. The Justice Department has informed the Board that a bank merger or acquisition generally will not be challenged, in the absence of other factors indicating anticompetitive effects, unless the post-merger HHI is at least 1800 and the merger increases the HHI by more than 200 points. The Justice Department has stated that the higher than normal threshold for an increase in the HHI when screening bank mergers and acquisitions for anticompetitive effects implicitly recognizes the competitive effect of limited-purpose lenders and other non-depository financial entities. Two financial institutions ("Protestants") contend that numerous competitors serve the credit needs of Moville and Kingsley, Iowa, both of which are in the Sioux City banking market, and that an additional competitor could adversely affect the existing banks in these "over-banked" towns. As noted above, Western Bank currently operates in Moville and the proposal would not increase the number of competitors in that town. The Board has previously concluded that the BHC Act requires the Board to focus on whether a proposal would substantially lessen competition or create a monopoly, and that the de novo entry of a bank would have a positive effect on competition in any banking market. See Wilson Bank Holding Company , 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 568 (1996). The Board concludes that the entry into Kingsley by Ida Grove would enhance competition for banking services. One protestant contends that a loan from Ida Grove to American violates section 23A of the Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. § 371c) ("Section 23A"). Section 23A imposes restrictions on loans between a subsidiary bank and its affiliates, and by its terms would not apply to a loan between affiliated bank holding companies. Protestants allege that Ida Grove and its subsidiary banks are and will be undercapitalized. In addition, Protestants contend that Western Bank's pricing policies (interest rates paid on certificates of deposits and charged for loans) will adversely affect Western Bank's financial condition, thereby adversely affecting American's capacity to retire the debt to be incurred in connection with the acquisition of Pierson, and that these pricing policies constitute unfair competitive practices. The Board has carefully reviewed these comments in light of all facts of record, including the most recent reports of examination assessing the managerial and financial resources of the relevant companies. The Board has consulted the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ("FDIC") on the effect of Western Bank's pricing policies on the financial condition of the bank and on the FDIC's assessment of the bank's current management. The Board notes that Ida Grove would remain well-capitalized after consummation of this proposal and would retire the proposal's acquisition debt in accordance with the Board's guidelines. The Board also has reviewed the interest rates offered under Western Bank's pricing policies for evidence of predatory pricing in light of pricing information nationwide and in the local market where Western Bank competes. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that all the supervisory factors considered under the BHC Act are consistent with approval. As noted above, Farmers would be merged into Western Bank. Although Western Bank has not been examined for CRA performance by the FDIC, Ida Grove is initiating CRA policies and programs at Western Bank that are similar to those of United Bank. One depository institution argues that, because it has a satisfactory record of CRA performance in Kingsley, the convenience and needs of the community are already being served. The CRA was not intended to limit either the number of service providers or competition in providing services to a community. Rather, the CRA recognizes the responsibility of each depository institution in a community to help meet the credit needs of the community. CRA performance ratings evaluate the efforts of a particular institution in helping meet the credit needs of the community, and do not reflect a judgment regarding whether the community would benefit from additional services that may be provided by other depository institutions. The Board, moreover, concludes that the steps proposed by Ida Grove to strengthen Farmers' CRA performance will have a positive effect on serving the overall credit needs of the community. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Lindsey, Phillips, and Meyer. Absent and not voting: Governor Yellen.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application of JDOB Inc., Sandstone, Minnesota, to acquire Centennial National Bank, Walker, Minnesota. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. JDOB Inc. Sandstone, Minnesota Order Approving Acquisition of a Bank JDOB Inc., Sandstone, Minnesota ("JDOB"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has applied for the Board's approval under section 3 of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1842) to acquire Centennial National Bank ("Bank"), Walker, Minnesota, a de novo nationally chartered bank. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (61 Federal Register 53,746 (1996)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the application and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 3 of the BHC Act. JDOB is the 166th largest commercial banking organization in Minnesota, controlling deposits of approximately $39.1 million, representing less than 1 percent of total deposits in commercial banking organizations in the state. Bank's de novo entry into the Brainerd, Minnesota banking market would enhance competition in that market. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposal would not have any significantly adverse effects on competition or the concentration of banking resources in any relevant market. The Board also has determined in light of all the facts of record that financial and managerial resources and future prospects of JDOB, its subsidiaries, and Bank, and considerations relating to the convenience and needs of the communities to be served, are consistent with approval of the application, as are the other supervisory factors the Board must consider under section 3 of the BHC Act. Based on the foregoing and all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the application should be, and hereby is, approved. The Board's approval of the proposal is conditioned on compliance by JDOB with commitments made in connection with the application. The commitments and conditions relied on by the Board in reaching this decision shall be deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision, and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The acquisition shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day following the effective date of this order, or later than three months after the effective date of this order, and Bank shall be open for business within six months after the effective date of this order, unless such periods are extended for good cause by the Board or the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective December 20, 1996. Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes All banking data are as of June 30, 1996. The Brainerd banking market consists of Crow Wing County and portions of southern Cass County, all in Minnesota. Comments by First National Bank of Walker, Walker, Minnesota ("First National"), contend that information in JDOB's application to charter Bank, primarily financial data and projections, is incorrect. In addition, First National maintains that Bank's proposed chief executive officer cannot effectively manage both Bank and another JDOB subsidiary bank and that numerous financial institutions currently serve the credit needs of the community. First National also has asserted that the banking market cannot support an additional competitor. The Board has carefully reviewed these comments in light of all the facts of record, including information from JDOB that substantiates its financial information, reports of examination assessing the financial and managerial resources of JDOB and the Bank's effect on those resources, and the "satisfactory" rating of JDOB's current subsidiary bank at its most recent examination for Community Reinvestment Act performance by its primary federal supervisor, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency ("OCC"). The Board previously has concluded that the BHC Act requires the Board to focus on whether a proposal would substantially lessen competition or create a monopoly and that the establishment of a de novo bank would have a positive effect on competition in any banking market. See Wilson Bank Holding Company , 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 568 (1996). In addition, the OCC has reviewed First National's contentions and reaffirmed its preliminary determination to approve Bank's charter. For these reasons, and based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that all the factors required to be considered under the BHC Act are consistent with approval. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin and Governors Kelley, Lindsey, Phillips, and Meyer. Absent and not voting: Governor Yellen.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today requested public comment on issues to be addressed in a proposed consumer information study required by the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act of 1996. Comment is requested by January 31, 1997 . The study will determine the public availability of sensitive identifying information about consumers (such as social security numbers, mothers' maiden names, prior addresses, and dates of birth), the possibility that such information could be used for financial fraud, and the potential for fraud or risk of loss, if any, to insured depository institutions. The Board's notice is attached. FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM [Docket No. R-0953] Fair Credit Reporting AGENCY : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (Board) ACTION : Notice; request for comments. SUMMARY : The Board solicits comment on issues to be addressed in a study concerning the public availability and use of social security numbers and other sensitive identifying information about consumers. The Board's study is required by the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act of 1996. DATES : Comments must be received on or before January 31, 1997. ADDRESS : Comments should refer to Docket No. R-0953, and may be mailed to William W. Wiles, Secretary, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 20th Street and Constitution Avenue, N.W., Washington, DC 20551. Comments also may be delivered to Room B-2222 of the Eccles Building between 8:45 a.m. and 5:15 p.m. weekdays, or to the guard station in the Eccles Building courtyard on 20th Street, N.W. (between Constitution Avenue and C Street) at any time. Comments may be inspected in Room MP-500 of the Martin Building between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. weekdays, except as provided in 12 CFR 261.8 of the Board's rules regarding the availability of information. FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT : Jane Jensen Gell or Sheilah Goodman, Staff Attorneys, Division of Consumer and Community Affairs, at (202) 452-2412 or (202) 452-3667; for users of Telecommunications Device for the Deaf (TDD) only, please contact Dorothea Thompson at (202) 452-3544. SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION : I. Background On September 30, 1996, the President signed into law the Economic Growth and Paperwork Reduction Act of 1996 ( Pub. L. No. 104-208, 110 Stat. 3009) (the 1996 Act). The 1996 Act amends several consumer credit laws, including the Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA). An amendment to the FCRA directs the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (Board), in consultation with the Federal Trade Commission (the Commission) and the federal financial regulatory agencies, to conduct a study to determine the availability to the public of sensitive identifying information about consumers, the possibility that such information could be used for financial fraud, and the potential for fraud or risk of loss, if any, to insured depository institutions. By March 31, 1997, the Board must report the results of the study to the Congress, including any suggestions for legislative change. The Board solicits the comment of interested parties on these issues. The comments received will be used in the Board's study. Because of the short time frame the Congress gave the Board to study this matter, all comments must be received by January 31, 1997. II. Availability of Sensitive Consumer Information The Congress became concerned about the availability of sensitive identifying information about consumers after a widely-publicized incident in which a large database service offered personal information for sale--including individuals' social security numbers-- from one of its electronic databases. After a few days, the service discontinued the practice of making social security numbers available but continued to permit users to search for information by social security number. At about the same time, members of Congress learned of situations in which such identifying information was being used for financial fraud. In addition, testimony at a recent Federal Trade Commission hearing highlighted how easy it is to obtain identifying information about a consumer and to use that information to fraudulently receive credit in the consumer's name--without the knowledge of the consumer or the credit granting institution. This practice is often referred to as "identity theft." Armed with such information, criminals can request and receive credit or negotiate checks in the consumer's name, with devastating results for the consumer. Sometimes identity theft begins with the use of publicly available information. A government employee who participated in the Commission hearings related such an incident. General information about this witness was listed in a publicly-available government directory. Using that information, an unknown individual was able to obtain a copy of the employee's college transcript, which showed his social security number. The individual was able subsequently to get a copy of the employee's birth certificate using the social security number. The thief then had all he needed to "assume" the employee's identity and use the information to commit fraud. III. Request for Comment In response to concerns about the availability of identifying information about consumers, and anecdotal evidence suggesting an increase in identity theft and financial fraud, the Congress has directed the Board to conduct a study regarding the availability to the public of sensitive information used to identify consumers. The Board is to determine whether there are organizations "engaged in the business of making sensitive consumer identification information, including social security numbers, mothers' maiden names, prior addresses, and dates of birth, available to the general public." To help make this determination, the Board solicits comment on the following issues: What is or should be considered sensitive consumer information for purposes of the study? What information is currently used, or might be used in the future, to identify individuals, and what types of public or private organizations, repositories, or databases make such information available to certain entities or to the general public? How is the information obtained (for example, by phone, through the mail, or on the Internet), what costs are associated with obtaining the information, what are the specific uses for which the information is obtained, and does the furnisher place any restrictions on the distribution or use of this information on the purchaser? If so, how does the furnisher ensure that use of the data is limited to its intended purposes? Is the compilation, sale, and use of sensitive identifying information about consumers subject to industry guidelines or regulations, and if not, what guidelines, or regulatory and legal requirements might be appropriate? If sensitive information about consumers is available, the Board must determine whether the availability of the information creates "undue potential for fraud and risk of loss to insured depository institutions." In order to make this assessment, the Board seeks comment on the following issues: How is sensitive identifying information about consumers used for financial fraud (for example, to obtain a credit card in another person's name)? What types of identifying information about consumers are most meaningful in granting and verifying credit, and how can consumers, financial institutions, and others control the fraudulent use of this information? What magnitude of financial loss do institutions attribute to fraudulent use of consumer information? Finally, if the Board determines that additional laws are needed to lessen the risks of fraud and loss to the banking system, the Board is directed to make legislative recommendations to the Congress. Accordingly, the Board is seeking comment on the following issues: What, if any, legislative changes should be considered to help protect sensitive identifying information about consumers? What, if any, legislative changes should be considered to limit the use of such information and reduce the risk of fraud or other loss to the banking system? IV. Form of Comment Letters Comment letters should refer to Docket No. R- 0953, and, when possible, should use a standard courier typeface with a type size of 10 or 12 characters per inch. This will enable the Board to convert the text to machine-readable form through electronic scanning, and will facilitate automated retrieval of comments for review. Also, if accompanied by an original document in paper form, comments may be submitted on 3 ï¿½ inch or 5 ï¿½ inch computer diskettes in any IBM-compatible DOS-based format. By order of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, December 17, 1996. William W. Wiles Secretary of the Board
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today published for public comment proposed revisions to its Regulation B, Equal Credit Opportunity. Comment is requested by January 31, 1997 . The proposed revisions would implement recent changes in the Equal Credit Opportunity Act that create a legal privilege for information developed by creditors as a result of "self-tests" that they voluntarily conduct to determine the level of their compliance with the Act. The Board expects to publish a final rule in March 1997, that would become effective 30 days later. The Board's notice is attached. |
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today withdrew a proposed amendment to Regulation B, Equal Credit Opportunity, relating to the collection of race and other data in credit transactions. The proposed amendments would have eliminated a rule that generally bars creditors from asking about sex, race, color, religion, and national origin. Under the proposal, creditors would have been allowed but not required to collect this information for all types of nonmortgage credit applications. In withdrawing the proposal, the Board stated its belief that the issue was one that is best left for Congress to consider. The Board's notice is attached. FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM 12 CFR Part 202 Regulation B; Docket No. R-0876 Equal Credit Opportunity AGENCY : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. ACTION : Withdrawal of proposed rule. SUMMARY : The Board is withdrawing a proposed amendment to Regulation B (Equal Credit Opportunity) that would have eliminated the general prohibition on collecting data relating to an applicant's sex, race, color, religion, and national origin. EFFECTIVE DATE : December 24, 1996. FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT : Jane Jensen Gell, Sheilah Goodman or Natalie Taylor, Staff Attorneys, Division of Consumer and Community Affairs, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, at (202) 452-3667 or 452-2412; for the hearing impaired only, Dorothea Thompson, Telecommunications Device for the Deaf, at (202) 452-3544. SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION : I. Background The Equal Credit Opportunity Act (ECOA) makes it unlawful for creditors to discriminate in any aspect of a credit transaction on the basis of sex, race, color, religion, national origin, marital status, or age (provided the applicant has the capacity to contract), because all or part of an applicant's income derives from any public assistance, or because an applicant has in good faith exercised any right under the Consumer Credit Protection Act. The ECOA, which is implemented by the Board's Regulation B, is generally silent regarding what information a creditor may collect from an applicant. Regulation B prohibits creditors from asking for or otherwise noting an applicant's sex, race, color, and national origin, except in connection with home mortgage loans. The regulation also prohibits creditors from collecting information concerning an applicant's religion. On April 26, 1995, the Board published for public comment a proposed amendment that would eliminate these prohibitions; the proposed amendment would have allowed, but not required, creditors to collect these data for any credit products (60 FR 20436). Creditors that collected these data would not have been required to report or disclose them to the public. The Board proposed that if a creditor requested this information and the applicant chose not to provide it, the creditor would have been prohibited from collecting the information through visual observation or other means. The regulation would have continued to bar creditors from considering this information in a credit decision. II. Comments Received Approximately 250 comment letters were received. Nearly 70 percent of them opposed the Board's proposal; the majority of these comments were from creditors and their trade associations. These commenters generally expressed concern that the amendment would lead to mandatory data collection and result in substantially increased costs and burden. In addition, these commenters raised concerns about the quality of the data that would be obtained, given that supplying the information would be voluntary and not all applicants would choose to provide it. Of the 30 percent of commenters that supported the Board's proposal, approximately half were creditors and half were community representatives. Both groups believed that the data would allow creditors to better identify underserved groups and design programs that would address unmet credit needs. Creditors who supported the proposal believed that it would reduce compliance burden (by allowing them to streamline training and use one application form for multiple credit products, for example). These creditors also stated that having the data would give them the ability to evaluate their compliance with fair lending laws. III. Discussion In 1977, when the Board chose to prohibit creditors from collecting these data, the policy choice was seen as a way to discourage discrimination: If creditors did not have these data, they could not use them to discriminate. In addition, the prohibition was intended to emphasize that factors unrelated to creditworthiness such as sex or race should not be part of the credit decision. The fundamental question raised by the proposal is whether the rule prohibiting data collection furthers the ECOA's goal of preventing discrimination in credit transactions. The comments, while helpful, tended to focus on practical issues (such as data quality) rather than how best to ensure fair lending. Ultimately, there is no easy way to measure the extent to which discrimination occurs in credit transactions, nor the effect the rule has had on the incidence of discrimination. It is impossible to know precisely how, if at all, lifting the prohibition and making these data available would affect creditors' actions. On the one hand, it is likely that the prohibition has helped to prevent discrimination in at least some credit transactions. On the other hand, creditors have collected data in connection with mortgage loan applications for nearly twenty years, and there is no indication from this experience that data collection increases the potential for discrimination. In the past the Congress has expressed interest in this issue, at least with respect to data collection for small business loans. Given this history and the significant policy issues involved in any decision to remove the prohibition, the Board believes that this is an issue more appropriate for the Congress to consider. Consequently, the Board is withdrawing the proposed amendment pending further congressional guidance. IV. Regulatory flexibility analysis The Board's Office of the Secretary has determined that no analysis is needed since the proposal is being withdrawn. By order of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, December 20, 1996. William W. Wiles Secretary of the Board
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced adoption of a revised interagency Uniform Financial Institutions Rating System (UFIRS), commonly known as the CAMEL rating system, to include an increase in the emphasis on risk management processes and the addition of a sixth rating component for sensitivity to market risk. The revised rating system is effective January 1, 1997, for use at examinations of state member banks. The existing CAMEL rating system produces a composite rating of an institution's overall condition and performance by assessing five components: C apital adequacy, A sset quality, M anagement administration, E arnings, and L iquidity. The updated rating system now will be referred to as the CAMELS rating system, to include S ensitivity to Market Risk. The UFIRS is an internal supervisory tool used by Federal supervisory agencies represented on the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC) to evaluate the soundness of financial institutions on a uniform basis and to identify those institutions requiring special supervisory attention or concern. The revised UFIRS is attached. UNIFORM FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS RATING SYSTEM Introduction The Uniform Financial Institutions Rating System (UFIRS) was adopted by the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC) on November 13, 1979. Over the years, the UFIRS has proven to be an effective internal supervisory tool for evaluating the soundness of financial institutions on a uniform basis and for identifying those institutions requiring special attention or concern. A number of changes, however, have occurred in the banking industry and in the Federal supervisory agencies' policies and procedures which have prompted a review and revision of the 1979 rating system. The revisions to UFIRS include the addition of a sixth component addressing sensitivity to market risks, the explicit reference to the quality of risk management processes in the management component, and the identification of risk elements within the composite and component rating descriptions. The revisions to UFIRS are not intended to add to the regulatory burden of institutions nor require additional policies or processes. The revisions are intended to promote and complement efficient examination processes. The revisions have been made to update the rating system, while retaining the basic framework of the original rating system. The UFIRS takes into consideration certain financial, managerial, and compliance factors that are common to all institutions. Under this system, the supervisory agencies endeavor to ensure that all financial institutions are evaluated in a comprehensive and uniform manner, and that supervisory attention is appropriately focused on the financial institutions exhibiting financial and operational weaknesses or adverse trends. The UFIRS also serves as a useful vehicle for identifying problem or deteriorating financial institutions, as well as for categorizing institutions with deficiencies in particular component areas. Further, the rating system assists Congress in following safety and soundness trends and in assessing the aggregate strength and soundness of the financial industry. As such, the UFIRS assists the agencies in fulfilling their collective mission of maintaining stability and public confidence in the nation's financial system. Overview Under the UFIRS, each financial institution is assigned a composite rating based on an evaluation and rating of six essential components of an institution's financial condition and operations. These component factors address the adequacy of capital, the quality of assets, the capability of management, the quality and level of earnings, the adequacy of liquidity, and the sensitivity to market risk. Evaluations of the components take into consideration the institution's size and sophistication, the nature and complexity of its activities, and its risk profile. Composite and component ratings are assigned based on a 1 to 5 numerical scale. A 1 indicates the highest rating, strongest performance and risk management practices, and least degree of supervisory concern, while a 5 indicates the lowest rating, weakest performance, inadequate risk management practices and, therefore, the highest degree of supervisory concern. The composite rating generally bears a close relationship to the component ratings assigned. However, the composite rating is not derived by computing an arithmetic average of the component ratings. Each component rating is based on a qualitative analysis of the factors comprising that component and its interrelationship with the other components. When assigning a composite rating, some components may be given more weight than others depending on the situation at the institution. In general, assignment of a composite rating may incorporate any factor that bears significantly on the overall condition and soundness of the financial institution. Assigned composite and component ratings are disclosed to the institution's board of directors and senior management. The ability of management to respond to changing circumstances and to address the risks that may arise from changing business conditions, or the initiation of new activities or products, is an important factor in evaluating a financial institution's overall risk profile and the level of supervisory attention warranted. For this reason, the management component is given special consideration when assigning a composite rating. The ability of management to identify, measure, monitor, and control the risks of its operations is also taken into account when assigning each component rating. It is recognized, however, that appropriate management practices vary considerably among financial institutions, depending on their size, complexity, and risk profile. For less complex institutions engaged solely in traditional banking activities and whose directors and senior managers, in their respective roles, are actively involved in the oversight and management of day-to-day operations, relatively basic management systems and controls may be adequate. At more complex institutions, on the other hand, detailed and formal management systems and controls are needed to address their broader range of financial activities and to provide senior managers and directors, in their respective roles, with the information they need to monitor and direct day-to-day activities. All institutions are expected to properly manage their risks. For less complex institutions engaging in less sophisticated risk taking activities, detailed or highly formalized management systems and controls are not required to receive strong or satisfactory component or composite ratings. Foreign Branch and specialty examination findings and the ratings assigned to those areas are taken into consideration, as appropriate, when assigning component and composite ratings under UFIRS. The specialty examination areas include: Compliance, Community Reinvestment, Government Security Dealers, Information Systems, Municipal Security Dealers, Transfer Agent, and Trust. The following two sections contain the composite rating definitions, and the descriptions and definitions for the six component ratings. COMPOSITE RATINGS Composite ratings are based on a careful evaluation of an institution's managerial, operational, financial, and compliance performance. The six key components used to assess an institution's financial condition and operations are: capital adequacy, asset quality, management capability, earnings quantity and quality, the adequacy of liquidity, and sensitivity to market risk. The rating scale ranges from 1 to 5, with a rating of 1 indicating: the strongest performance and risk management practices relative to the institution's size, complexity, and risk profile; and the level of least supervisory concern. A 5 rating indicates: the most critically deficient level of performance; inadequate risk management practices relative to the institution's size, complexity, and risk profile; and the greatest supervisory concern. The composite ratings are defined as follows: Composite 1 Financial institutions in this group are sound in every respect and generally have components rated 1 or 2. Any weaknesses are minor and can be handled in a routine manner by the board of directors and management. These financial institutions are the most capable of withstanding the vagaries of business conditions and are resistant to outside influences such as economic instability in their trade area. These financial institutions are in substantial compliance with laws and regulations. As a result, these financial institutions exhibit the strongest performance and risk management practices relative to the institution's size, complexity, and risk profile, and give no cause for supervisory concern. Composite 2 Financial institutions in this group are fundamentally sound. For a financial institution to receive this rating, generally no component rating should be more severe than 3. Only moderate weaknesses are present and are well within the board of directors' and management's capabilities and willingness to correct. These financial institutions are stable and are capable of withstanding business fluctuations. These financial institutions are in substantial compliance with laws and regulations. Overall risk management practices are satisfactory relative to the institution's size, complexity, and risk profile. There are no material supervisory concerns and, as a result, the supervisory response is informal and limited. Composite 3 Financial institutions in this group exhibit some degree of supervisory concern in one or more of the component areas. These financial institutions exhibit a combination of weaknesses that may range from moderate to severe; however, the magnitude of the deficiencies generally will not cause a component to be rated more severely than 4. Management may lack the ability or willingness to effectively address weaknesses within appropriate time frames. Financial institutions in this group generally are less capable of withstanding business fluctuations and are more vulnerable to outside influences than those institutions rated a composite 1 or 2. Additionally, these financial institutions may be in significant noncompliance with laws and regulations. Risk management practices may be less than satisfactory relative to the institution's size, complexity, and risk profile. These financial institutions require more than normal supervision, which may include formal or informal enforcement actions. Failure appears unlikely, however, given the overall strength and financial capacity of these institutions. Composite 4 Financial institutions in this group generally exhibit unsafe and unsound practices or conditions. There are serious financial or managerial deficiencies that result in unsatisfactory performance. The problems range from severe to critically deficient. The weaknesses and problems are not being satisfactorily addressed or resolved by the board of directors and management. Financial institutions in this group generally are not capable of withstanding business fluctuations. There may be significant noncompliance with laws and regulations. Risk management practices are generally unacceptable relative to the institution's size, complexity, and risk profile. Close supervisory attention is required, which means, in most cases, formal enforcement action is necessary to address the problems. Institutions in this group pose a risk to the deposit insurance fund. Failure is a distinct possibility if the problems and weaknesses are not satisfactorily addressed and resolved. Composite 5 Financial institutions in this group exhibit extremely unsafe and unsound practices or conditions; exhibit a critically deficient performance; often contain inadequate risk management practices relative to the institution's size, complexity, and risk profile; and are of the greatest supervisory concern. The volume and severity of problems are beyond management's ability or willingness to control or correct. Immediate outside financial or other assistance is needed in order for the financial institution to be viable. Ongoing supervisory attention is necessary. Institutions in this group pose a significant risk to the deposit insurance fund and failure is highly probable. COMPONENT RATINGS Each of the component rating descriptions is divided into three sections: an introductory paragraph; a list of the principal evaluation factors that relate to that component; and, a brief description of each numerical rating for that component. Some of the evaluation factors are reiterated under one or more of the other components to reinforce the interrelationship between components. The listing of evaluation factors for each component rating is in no particular order of importance. Capital Adequacy A financial institution is expected to maintain capital commensurate with the nature and extent of risks to the institution and the ability of management to identify, measure, monitor, and control these risks. The effect of credit, market, and other risks on the institution's financial condition should be considered when evaluating the adequacy of capital. The types and quantity of risk inherent in an institution's activities will determine the extent to which it may be necessary to maintain capital at levels above required regulatory minimums to properly reflect the potentially adverse consequences that these risks may have on the institution's capital. The capital adequacy of an institution is rated based upon, but not limited to, an assessment of the following evaluation factors: The level and quality of capital and the overall financial condition of the institution. The ability of management to address emerging needs for additional capital. The nature, trend, and volume of problem assets, and the adequacy of allowances for loan and lease losses and other valuation reserves. Balance sheet composition, including the nature and amount of intangible assets, market risk, concentration risk, and risks associated with nontraditional activities. Risk exposure represented by off-balance sheet activities. The quality and strength of earnings, and the reasonableness of dividends. Prospects and plans for growth, as well as past experience in managing growth. Access to capital markets and other sources of capital, including support provided by a parent holding company. Ratings A rating of 1 indicates a strong capital level relative to the institution's risk profile. A rating of 2 indicates a satisfactory capital level relative to the financial institution's risk profile. A rating of 3 indicates a less than satisfactory level of capital that does not fully support the institution's risk profile. The rating indicates a need for improvement, even if the institution's capital level exceeds minimum regulatory and statutory requirements. A rating of 4 indicates a deficient level of capital. In light of the institution's risk profile, viability of the institution may be threatened. Assistance from shareholders or other external sources of financial support may be required. A rating of 5 indicates a critically deficient level of capital such that the institution's viability is threatened. Immediate assistance from shareholders or other external sources of financial support is required. Asset Quality The asset quality rating reflects the quantity of existing and potential credit risk associated with the loan and investment portfolios, other real estate owned, and other assets, as well as off-balance sheet transactions. The ability of management to identify, measure, monitor, and control credit risk is also reflected here. The evaluation of asset quality should consider the adequacy of the allowance for loan and lease losses and weigh the exposure to counterparty, issuer, or borrower default under actual or implied contractual agreements. All other risks that may affect the value or marketability of an institution's assets, including, but not limited to, operating, market, reputation, strategic, or compliance risks should also be considered. The asset quality of a financial institution is rated based upon, but not limited to, an assessment of the following evaluation factors: The adequacy of underwriting standards, soundness of credit administration practices, and appropriateness of risk identification practices. The level, distribution, severity, and trend of problem, classified, nonaccrual, restructured, delinquent, and nonperforming assets for both on- and off-balance sheet transactions. The adequacy of the allowance for loan and lease losses and other asset valuation reserves. The credit risk arising from or reduced by off-balance sheet transactions, such as unfunded commitments, credit derivatives, commercial and standby letters of credit, and lines of credit. The diversification and quality of the loan and investment portfolios. The extent of securities underwriting activities and exposure to counterparties in trading activities. The existence of asset concentrations. The adequacy of loan and investment policies, procedures, and practices. The ability of management to properly administer its assets, including the timely identification and collection of problem assets. The adequacy of internal controls and management information systems. The volume and nature of credit documentation exceptions. Ratings A rating of 1 indicates strong asset quality and credit administration practices. Identified weaknesses are minor in nature and risk exposure is modest in relation to capital protection and management's abilities. Asset quality in such institutions is of minimal supervisory concern. A rating of 2 indicates satisfactory asset quality and credit administration practices. The level and severity of classifications and other weaknesses warrant a limited level of supervisory attention. Risk exposure is commensurate with capital protection and management's abilities. A rating of 3 is assigned when asset quality or credit administration practices are less than satisfactory. Trends may be stable or indicate deterioration in asset quality or an increase in risk exposure. The level and severity of classified assets, other weaknesses, and risks require an elevated level of supervisory concern. There is generally a need to improve credit administration and risk management practices. A rating of 4 is assigned to financial institutions with deficient asset quality or credit administration practices. The levels of risk and problem assets are significant, inadequately controlled, and subject the financial institution to potential losses that, if left unchecked, may threaten its viability. A rating of 5 represents critically deficient asset quality or credit administration practices that present an imminent threat to the institution's viability. Management The capability of the board of directors and management, in their respective roles, to identify, measure, monitor, and control the risks of an institution's activities and to ensure a financial institution's safe, sound, and efficient operation in compliance with applicable laws and regulations is reflected in this rating. Generally, directors need not be actively involved in day-to-day operations; however, they must provide clear guidance regarding acceptable risk exposure levels and ensure that appropriate policies, procedures, and practices have been established. Senior management is responsible for developing and implementing policies, procedures, and practices that translate the board's goals, objectives, and risk limits into prudent operating standards. Depending on the nature and scope of an institution's activities, management practices may need to address some or all of the following risks: credit, market, operating or transaction, reputation, strategic, compliance, legal, liquidity, and other risks. Sound management practices are demonstrated by: active oversight by the board of directors and management; competent personnel; adequate policies, processes, and controls taking into consideration the size and sophistication of the institution; maintenance of an appropriate audit program and internal control environment; and effective risk monitoring and management information systems. This rating should reflect the board's and management's ability as it applies to all aspects of banking operations as well as other financial service activities in which the institution is involved. The capability and performance of management and the board of directors is rated based upon, but not limited to, an assessment of the following evaluation factors: The level and quality of oversight and support of all institution activities by the board of directors and management. The ability of the board of directors and management, in their respective roles, to plan for, and respond to, risks that may arise from changing business conditions or the initiation of new activities or products. The adequacy of, and conformance with, appropriate internal policies and controls addressing the operations and risks of significant activities. The accuracy, timeliness, and effectiveness of management information and risk monitoring systems appropriate for the institution's size, complexity, and risk profile. The adequacy of audits and internal controls to: promote effective operations and reliable financial and regulatory reporting; safeguard assets; and ensure compliance with laws, regulations, and internal policies. Compliance with laws and regulations. Responsiveness to recommendations from auditors and supervisory authorities. Management depth and succession. The extent that the board of directors and management is affected by, or susceptible to, dominant influence or concentration of authority. Reasonableness of compensation policies and avoidance of self-dealing. Demonstrated willingness to serve the legitimate banking needs of the community. The overall performance of the institution and its risk profile. Ratings A rating of 1 indicates strong performance by management and the board of directors and strong risk management practices relative to the institution's size, complexity, and risk profile. All significant risks are consistently and effectively identified, measured, monitored, and controlled. Management and the board have demonstrated the ability to promptly and successfully address existing and potential problems and risks. A rating of 2 indicates satisfactory management and board performance and risk management practices relative to the institution's size, complexity, and risk profile. Minor weaknesses may exist, but are not material to the safety and soundness of the institution and are being addressed. In general, significant risks and problems are effectively identified, measured, monitored, and controlled. A rating of 3 indicates management and board performance that need improvement or risk management practices that are less than satisfactory given the nature of the institution's activities. The capabilities of management or the board of directors may be insufficient for the type, size, or condition of the institution. Problems and significant risks may be inadequately identified, measured, monitored, or controlled. A rating of 4 indicates deficient management and board performance or risk management practices that are inadequate considering the nature of an institution's activities. The level of problems and risk exposure is excessive. Problems and significant risks are inadequately identified, measured, monitored, or controlled and require immediate action by the board and management to preserve the soundness of the institution. Replacing or strengthening management or the board may be necessary. A rating of 5 indicates critically deficient management and board performance or risk management practices. Management and the board of directors have not demonstrated the ability to correct problems and implement appropriate risk management practices. Problems and significant risks are inadequately identified, measured, monitored, or controlled and now threaten the continued viability of the institution. Replacing or strengthening management or the board of directors is necessary. Earnings This rating reflects not only the quantity and trend of earnings, but also factors that may affect the sustainability or quality of earnings. The quantity as well as the quality of earnings can be affected by excessive or inadequately managed credit risk that may result in loan losses and require additions to the allowance for loan and lease losses, or by high levels of market risk that may unduly expose an institution's earnings to volatility in interest rates. The quality of earnings may also be diminished by undue reliance on extraordinary gains, nonrecurring events, or favorable tax effects. Future earnings may be adversely affected by an inability to forecast or control funding and operating expenses, improperly executed or ill-advised business strategies, or poorly managed or uncontrolled exposure to other risks. The rating of an institution's earnings is based upon, but not limited to, an assessment of the following evaluation factors: The level of earnings, including trends and stability. The ability to provide for adequate capital through retained earnings. The quality and sources of earnings. The level of expenses in relation to operations. The adequacy of the budgeting systems, forecasting processes, and management information systems in general. The adequacy of provisions to maintain the allowance for loan and lease losses and other valuation allowance accounts. The earnings exposure to market risk such as interest rate, foreign exchange, and price risks. Ratings A rating of 1 indicates earnings that are strong. Earnings are more than sufficient to support operations and maintain adequate capital and allowance levels after consideration is given to asset quality, growth, and other factors affecting the quality, quantity, and trend of earnings. A rating of 2 indicates earnings that are satisfactory. Earnings are sufficient to support operations and maintain adequate capital and allowance levels after consideration is given to asset quality, growth, and other factors affecting the quality, quantity, and trend of earnings. Earnings that are relatively static, or even experiencing a slight decline, may receive a 2 rating provided the institution's level of earnings is adequate in view of the assessment factors listed above. A rating of 3 indicates earnings that need to be improved. Earnings may not fully support operations and provide for the accretion of capital and allowance levels in relation to the institution's overall condition, growth, and other factors affecting the quality, quantity, and trend of earnings. A rating of 4 indicates earnings that are deficient. Earnings are insufficient to support operations and maintain appropriate capital and allowance levels. Institutions so rated may be characterized by erratic fluctuations in net income or net interest margin, the development of significant negative trends, nominal or unsustainable earnings, intermittent losses, or a substantive drop in earnings from the previous years. A rating of 5 indicates earnings that are critically deficient. A financial institution with earnings rated 5 is experiencing losses that represent a distinct threat to its viability through the erosion of capital. Liquidity In evaluating the adequacy of a financial institution's liquidity position, consideration should be given to the current level and prospective sources of liquidity compared to funding needs, as well as to the adequacy of funds management practices relative to the institution's size, complexity, and risk profile. In general, funds management practices should ensure that an institution is able to maintain a level of liquidity sufficient to meet its financial obligations in a timely manner and to fulfill the legitimate banking needs of its community. Practices should reflect the ability of the institution to manage unplanned changes in funding sources, as well as react to changes in market conditions that affect the ability to quickly liquidate assets with minimal loss. In addition, funds management practices should ensure that liquidity is not maintained at a high cost, or through undue reliance on funding sources that may not be available in times of financial stress or adverse changes in market conditions. Liquidity is rated based upon, but not limited to, an assessment of the following evaluation factors: The adequacy of liquidity sources compared to present and future needs and the ability of the institution to meet liquidity needs without adversely affecting its operations or condition. The availability of assets readily convertible to cash without undue loss. Access to money markets and other sources of funding. The level of diversification of funding sources, both on- and off-balance-sheet. The degree of reliance on short-term, volatile sources of funds, including borrowings and brokered deposits, to fund longer term assets. The trend and stability of deposits. The ability to securitize and sell certain pools of assets. The capability of management to properly identify, measure, monitor, and control the institution's liquidity position, including the effectiveness of funds management strategies, liquidity policies, management information systems, and contingency funding plans. Ratings A rating of 1 indicates strong liquidity levels and well-developed funds management practices. The institution has reliable access to sufficient sources of funds on favorable terms to meet present and anticipated liquidity needs. A rating of 2 indicates satisfactory liquidity levels and funds management practices. The institution has access to sufficient sources of funds on acceptable terms to meet present and anticipated liquidity needs. Modest weaknesses may be evident in funds management practices. A rating of 3 indicates liquidity levels or funds management practices in need of improvement. Institutions rated 3 may lack ready access to funds on reasonable terms or may evidence significant weaknesses in funds management practices. A rating of 4 indicates deficient liquidity levels or inadequate funds management practices. Institutions rated 4 may not have or be able to obtain a sufficient volume of funds on reasonable terms to meet liquidity needs. A rating of 5 indicates liquidity levels or funds management practices so critically deficient that the continued viability of the institution is threatened. Institutions rated 5 require immediate external financial assistance to meet maturing obligations or other liquidity needs. Sensitivity to Market Risk The sensitivity to market risk component reflects the degree to which changes in interest rates, foreign exchange rates, commodity prices, or equity prices can adversely affect a financial institution's earnings or economic capital. When evaluating this component, consideration should be given to: management's ability to identify, measure, monitor, and control market risk; the institution's size; the nature and complexity of its activities; and the adequacy of its capital and earnings in relation to its level of market risk exposure. For many institutions, the primary source of market risk arises from nontrading positions and their sensitivity to changes in interest rates. In some larger institutions, foreign operations can be a significant source of market risk. For some institutions, trading activities are a major source of market risk. Market risk is rated based upon, but not limited to, an assessment of the following evaluation factors: The sensitivity of the financial institution's earnings or the economic value of its capital to adverse changes in interest rates, foreign exchange rates, commodity prices, or equity prices. The ability of management to identify, measure, monitor, and control exposure to market risk given the institution's size, complexity, and risk profile. The nature and complexity of interest rate risk exposure arising from nontrading positions. Where appropriate, the nature and complexity of market risk exposure arising from trading and foreign operations. Ratings A rating of 1 indicates that market risk sensitivity is well controlled and that there is minimal potential that the earnings performance or capital position will be adversely affected. Risk management practices are strong for the size, sophistication, and market risk accepted by the institution. The level of earnings and capital provide substantial support for the degree of market risk taken by the institution. A rating of 2 indicates that market risk sensitivity is adequately controlled and that there is only moderate potential that the earnings performance or capital position will be adversely affected. Risk management practices are satisfactory for the size, sophistication, and market risk accepted by the institution. The level of earnings and capital provide adequate support for the degree of market risk taken by the institution. A rating of 3 indicates that control of market risk sensitivity needs improvement or that there is significant potential that the earnings performance or capital position will be adversely affected. Risk management practices need to be improved given the size, sophistication, and level of market risk accepted by the institution. The level of earnings and capital may not adequately support the degree of market risk taken by the institution. A rating of 4 indicates that control of market risk sensitivity is unacceptable or that there is high potential that the earnings performance or capital position will be adversely affected. Risk management practices are deficient for the size, sophistication, and level of market risk accepted by the institution. The level of earnings and capital provide inadequate support for the degree of market risk taken by the institution. A rating of 5 indicates that control of market risk sensitivity is unacceptable or that the level of market risk taken by the institution is an imminent threat to its viability. Risk management practices are wholly inadequate for the size, sophistication, and level of market risk accepted by the institution. Footnotes For purposes of this rating system, the term "financial institution" refers to those insured depository institutions whose primary Federal supervisory agency is represented on the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC). The agencies comprising the FFIEC are the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the National Credit Union Administration, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Office of Thrift Supervision. The term "financial institution" includes Federally supervised commercial banks, savings and loan associations, mutual savings banks and credit unions. Footnotes For purposes of this rating system, the term "financial institution" refers to those insured depository institutions whose primary Federal supervisory agency is represented on the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC). The agencies comprising the FFIEC are the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the National Credit Union Administration, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Office of Thrift Supervision. The term "financial institution" includes Federally supervised commercial banks, savings and loan associations, mutual savings banks and credit unions.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today joined with the Department of Housing and Urban Development in issuing a request for public comment on possible amendments to the Truth in Lending Act (TILA) and Real Estate Settlement Procedures Acts (RESPA). Comment is requested by January 31, 1997 . The agencies' notice specifically requests comment on how to improve and consolidate disclosures given in home mortgage loan transactions subject to both TILA and RESPA. The Board's notice is attached. FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM 12 CFR Part 226 [Regulation Z; Docket No. R-0954] Truth in Lending DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT 24 CFR Part 3500 [Regulation X; Docket No. FR-4184-P-01] RIN 2502-AG86 Real Estate Settlement Procedures Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking on Improvement of Disclosures under the Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act and the Truth in Lending Act AGENCIES : Office of the Assistant Secretary for Housing-Federal Housing Commissioner, (HUD); Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (the Board) (collectively, the agencies). ACTION : Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking. SUMMARY : This notice is issued jointly by HUD and the Board to initiate fact finding that will assist the agencies in revising disclosures to consumers under the Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act (RESPA) and the Truth in Lending Act (TILA). The Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act of 1996 requires the agencies to simplify and improve these disclosures where possible, and to provide a single format satisfying the requirements of RESPA and TILA. To ensure that these disclosures meet the consumer protection goals of the statutes with minimal compliance burdens, HUD and the Board are soliciting comments from the public on what specific regulatory or legislative changes might achieve these goals. Following the consideration of the public comments and the agencies' own reviews, HUD and the Board plan to publish proposed amendments to their respective regulations, as appropriate, by March 1997. DATES : Comments are due January 31, 1997 . ADDRESSES : Comments regarding this advance notice of proposed rulemaking may be sent to either agency. HUD : Comments to HUD should be addressed to the Rules Docket Clerk, Office of General Counsel, Room 10276, Department of Housing and Urban Development, 451 Seventh Street, SW, Washington, DC 20410-0500. Communications should refer to the above docket number and title. Facsimile (FAX) comments are not acceptable. A copy of comments received will be available for public inspection and copying between 7:30 a.m. and 5:30 p.m. weekdays at the above address. Board : Comments to the Board should refer to Docket No. R-0954, and may be mailed to William W. Wiles, Secretary, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 20th Street and Constitution Avenue, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20551. Comments also may be delivered to Room B-2222 of the Eccles Building between 8:45 a.m. and 5:15 p.m. weekdays, or to the guard station in the Eccles Building courtyard on 20th Street, N.W. (between Constitution Avenue and C Street) at any time. When possible, comment letters should use a standard Courier typeface with a type size of 10 or 12 characters per inch. This will enable the Board to convert the text in machine-readable form through electronic scanning, and will facilitate automated retrieval of comments for review. Also, if accompanied by an original document in paper form, comments may be submitted on 3 1/2 inch or 5 1/4 inch computer diskettes in any IBM-compatible DOS-based format. Comments received will be available for inspection in Room MP-500 of the Martin Building between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. weekdays, except as provided in 12 CFR 261.8 of the Board's rules regarding availability of information. FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT : HUD : David R. Williamson, Director, Office of Consumer and Regulatory Affairs, Room 9146, telephone (202) 708-4560; or for legal questions, Kenneth A. Markison, Assistant General Counsel for GSE/RESPA, Grant E. Mitchell, Senior Attorney for RESPA, or Rodrigo J. Alba, Attorney, Office of General Counsel, Room 9262, telephone (202) 708-1550. For hearing- and speech-impaired persons, these numbers may be accessed via TTY (text telephone) by calling the Federal Information Relay Service at 1-800-877-8339. The address for the above-listed persons is: Department of Housing and Urban Development, 451 Seventh Street, S.W., Washington, DC 20410. Board : Sheilah A. Goodman or Manley Williams, Staff Attorneys, Division of Consumer and Community Affairs, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, at (202) 452-3667 or (202) 452-2412; for the hearing impaired only , Dorothea Thompson, Telecommunications Device for the Deaf, at (202) 452-3544. The telephone numbers for the agencies are not toll-free. At or before referral Affiliated business arrangement disclosure (3500.15) At or before application Within three days of application TILA disclosure (including APR and finance charge) (226.19a) Special information booklet (3500.6) Good faith estimate (3500.7) Required providers (3500.7) Initial transfer of servicing disclosure (3500.21) Three days before closing/ consummation Section 32 disclosures (226.32) Reverse mortgage disclosures (226.33) One day before closing/ consummation Right to inspect HUD-1 or HUD-1A (3500.10) At closing/consummation TILA disclosure (226.18) Rescission notice (226.23) HUD-1 or HUD-1A (3500.8) Initial escrow account statement (within 45 days of closing) (3500.17) Dated: December 23, 1996 (signed) Nicolas P. Retsinas Nicolas P. Retsinas, Assistant Secretary for Housing-Federal Housing Commissioner By order of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, December 26, 1996. (signed) William W. Wiles William W. Wiles Secretary of the Board
For immediate release