Testimony of Herbert A. Biern Deputy Associate Director, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation "Prime bank" schemes Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate July 17, 1996 I am pleased to appear before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs to discuss actions that the Federal Reserve has taken over the past several years to address the problem of "prime bank" financial instruments and related illegal financial schemes. The Federal Reserve has taken an active role in alerting the banking industry and the public about the illicit activities of individuals trying to peddle nonexistent financial instruments here in the United States and abroad, and we have worked closely with the law enforcement community to assist their efforts to investigate and prosecute these wrongdoers. "Prime Bank" Schemes and Advisories In late 1993, Federal Reserve staff was alerted by domestic and foreign banking organizations that their names were being used for apparently unlawful purposes in connection with the attempted sale of questionable financial instruments. We were also contacted by individuals who had been approached to purchase questionable, highly complex investment-type instruments. The transactions that were brought to our attention involved notes, guarantees, letters of credit, debentures, or other seemingly legitimate types of financial instruments being issued by an unidentified "prime bank," or by a domestic or foreign banking organization that was said to be keeping the issuance of the instruments secret. The various proposals that involved "prime bank"-related financial instruments had similar characteristics: (1) the investor could realize extremely high rates of return on an instrument described as risk free; (2) the investor was buying a part of a large tranche of securities or financial instruments that was almost fully subscribed by other investors or was part of a "roll program" that automatically put the investor into an investor group of some sort; (3) the financial instrument that was being purchased was traded on a worldwide secret exchange; (4) the documentation related to a "prime bank" investment was extremely complex and difficult to comprehend; (5) a secure escrow account maintained at a "prime bank" or by an attorney would be used to hold the investors' funds and payments into this account would be made by some sort of "key tested telex" message; (6) the financial instruments being issued were in formats purportedly approved by the International Chamber of Commerce or fully sanctioned by the Federal Reserve, the World Bank, or some other known international organization. Some "prime bank" schemes appeared to be targeted to individuals and companies who needed loans. These potential borrowers were advised that their loans would be funded by a "prime bank" provided they paid a large, up-front fee to secure the funding. Board staff believed that the proposed payment of unrealistic rates of return was indicative of a fraudulent scheme and contacted several banks to make sure that legitimate banking organizations were not referring to themselves as "prime banks" or using financial instruments that in any manner referred to "prime banks." Once assured that there was no legitimate use of the term "prime bank" or lawful use of a "prime bank" instrument, we drafted an interagency advisory on "prime bank" schemes and began to work through the Department of Justice's Interagency Bank Fraud Working Group in order to issue the pronouncement. Coordination efforts to address the problem were also initiated with some of the other 12 agencies participating in the Working Group, including the Securities and Exchange Commission, as well as with international law enforcement authorities, including Britain's Scotland Yard and Department of Trade and Industry. On October 21, 1993, the Federal Reserve and the other federal banking agencies issued the first interagency advisory entitled "Warning Concerning Prime Bank Notes, Guarantees, and Letters of Credit and Similar Financial Instruments." The advisory, which is attached to my prepared statement, informed banking organizations and the public that the Federal Reserve and the other regulators know of no legitimate use of any "prime bank"-related financial instrument. The advisory also asked the public to contact agency representatives if approached to invest in a "prime bank" instrument or pay an advance fee to secure a loan funded by a "prime bank" note, letter of credit, or other type of questionable financial instrument. The banking agencies committed to refer cases of potential illegal conduct associated with supposed "prime bank" documents to a senior official in the Washington, D.C., office of the SEC and to the local offices of the FBI because almost all "prime bank" schemes appeared to involve fraud, including securities fraud. The advisory prompted numerous calls and letters about "prime bank" matters. Between late 1993 and mid-1995, hundreds of inquiries were received from individuals who had been solicited to purchase "prime bank" financial instruments, from investment advisors considering potential investments on behalf of clients, and from banking organizations that had received faxed solicitations. Calls and letters came from as far as South Africa, Germany, Australia, France, and Singapore. The correspondents were highly suspicious of the proposed schemes and many indicated they wanted to check with the government "to be sure" that their suspicions were justified. During this period, Board staff assisted federal prosecutors in New Jersey, Oklahoma, Virginia and in other districts to investigate and eventually convict individuals for "prime bank"-associated federal criminal law violations. Calls and letters to the Federal Reserve regarding "prime bank" scams began to slow in late 1995 and early 1996 but, unfortunately, began again in recent months. The new inquiries have focused on the role of the Federal Reserve itself, with callers asking whether the Federal Reserve registers agents in certain European countries, licenses traders on secret "prime bank" exchanges, clears the transfers of "prime bank" securities, or oversees investment plans comprised of "prime bank" instruments. The Federal Reserve responded with a new advisory, released on June 11, 1996, to dispel any misconceptions that the Federal Reserve plays a role in "prime bank"-related investments. The recent advisory is also included with my statement. The Effect of "Prime Bank" Schemes The Federal Reserve is not aware that banking organizations supervised by the Board or any other federal banking agency have engaged, or otherwise knowingly participated in, any illegal "prime bank"-related conduct. We know of no domestic bank that has suffered losses from "investments" in "prime bank" financial instruments or from any other enterprise involving such instruments. Most "prime bank" scams entail multi-million dollar investments, and as such we are not aware of losses to individual, as opposed to institutional, investors. Some well- known organizations, however, have suffered large losses because of their investments in phony "prime bank" financial instruments. In criminal matters involving "prime bank" schemes, U.S. Attorney's Offices have prosecuted and won cases under existing criminal statutes, and the SEC has been able to freeze accounts of wrongdoers and obtain other injunctive relief. Legislation The Committee has asked the Federal Reserve to comment on the need for additional legislation addressing misconduct by fraudsters selling these instruments. The Board generally defers to the law enforcement community and to the securities regulators regarding legislative proposals such as S. 1009, the "Financial Instruments Anti-Fraud Act of 1995" proposed by Senator D'Amato. It is our view, however, that continuing successful prosecution of these cases is crucial in sending a message to potential "prime bank" fraudsters. Thus, new statutory authority enhancing law enforcement's ability to prosecute wrongdoers may prove useful. I am happy to address any questions you may have about the Federal Reserve's efforts to address the problems associated with these illegal financial schemes.
Testimony of Governor Janet L. Yellen Trends in consumer lending Before the Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Regulatory Relief of the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate July 24, 1996 I am pleased to appear before this Subcommittee today to discuss trends in consumer lending and the Federal Reserve Board's view of how recent developments in this sector are affecting U.S. commercial banks. As the Subcommittee knows, consumer delinquencies on nonmortgage debt have increased in recent periods and are beginning to affect profit margins at some financial institutions. The Federal Reserve has been monitoring these conditions and discussing their implications with individual banking organizations and industry groups. However, given the generally strong financial condition of the institutions most affected by these developments and that of the U.S. banking system, we believe that these adverse trends do not currently present a material threat either to individual banking organizations or to the overall banking system. In my remarks, I would like to begin with an overview of the economic developments that have caused the Federal Reserve to devote greater attention to consumer lending matters. I shall then turn to the emerging--and still well contained--consequences that these developments are having on the banking organizations that are most affected and on the industry, overall. Since current concerns are predominantly centered on revolving credit portfolios, I shall focus my comments on a discussion of credit card lending activities. Finally, I shall discuss the steps taken by the Federal Reserve throughout the past year to caution its examiners, state member banks, and bank holding companies about the risks inherent in weakening credit standards and to ensure that financial institutions are taking appropriate action to address emerging problems in consumer loan portfolios. Economic Trends Economic conditions in the United States have in recent years been favorable to growth in spending and borrowing by the household sector and to strong growth in consumer lending by U.S. banks. Just since early 1992, nonfarm payroll employment has increased nearly 11 1/2 million, driving the U.S. unemployment rate to 5.3 percent in June of this year, its lowest level in six years. As one consequence, personal income has risen substantially. The dramatic rise in stock and bond prices in recent years has also produced sharp gains in wealth for some households. During this same time period, rates and fees on consumer financing products have been coming down. Average credit card rates which stood at about 18 1/4 percent in late 1991 declined to less than 15 1/2 percent by May of this year. At the same time, annual fees on credit cards were dropped by many institutions. In addition, declining residential mortgage rates throughout most of this interval contributed to a significant reduction in monthly payments on such debts. While mortgage rates have recently backed up, the relatively low mortgage rates of the early 1990s precipitated a refinancing boom that allowed many consumers to significantly reduce their monthly mortgage obligations. Combined, these generally favorable developments have given consumers the confidence and financial foundation to incur additional debt in order to finance major purchases. Nevertheless, some concerns remain about the increase in consumer debt. Aggregate statistics do not address conditions in individual households, an important consideration because the economic expansion has not affected all households equally. Further, while for some households the use of credit in making a purchase is simply a matter of convenience or a means of managing liquidity, for others, borrowing may be a means of sustaining consumption through a period of household economic distress. Nonmortgage consumer debt has grown at double-digit rates over the past two to three years. This rapid pace is not unusual for a period of economic expansion. Indeed, as the economy emerged from recession in 1991, growth in nonmortgage consumer debt was much slower than typical, reflecting sluggish spending on durable goods and lingering fears about long-term layoffs and other threats to job security. However, by 1994, consumer confidence had recovered considerably and demand for autos and other durable goods had strengthened. Nonmortgage consumer debt grew by about 15 percent that year and the next, but even this rapid pace remained below that of a decade earlier. Lower inflation in recent years can account for some of the difference. Recently, revolving credit--primarily credit card debt--has been, by far, the fastest growing component of consumer debt, averaging annual increases of 20 percent over the past two years. However, that performance--rapid growth during an expansion--is also typical of the last two decades. The cumulative effect has been a dramatic rise in the relative importance of revolving credit. In 1977, when first reported separately to the Federal Reserve, revolving debt of U.S. consumers totaled $30 billion, or 14 percent of all consumer debt. In May of this year, the amount outstanding was $444 billion, or nearly 40 percent of the total. Surveys show that 80 percent of U.S. households now have at least one credit card. A consequence of the increase in consumer borrowing of recent years is that debt servicing requirements--that is, the amount of scheduled payments of principal and interest--have consumed a bigger share of disposable income. Our staff estimates that this ratio, which includes both mortgage and nonmortgage payments, peaked in late 1989 at about 17 1/2 percent, and then declined over the next four years to about 15 1/2 percent in 1993, as households curtailed their borrowing and average interest rates on their debts fell. Since then, the ratio has risen to about 16 3/4 percent. This standard measure is based on aggregates that include households without debt and uses estimates of scheduled payments. The Survey of Consumer Finances, conducted periodically by the Federal Reserve, suggests that the median ratio of actual debt payments to pretax income of debtholders was relatively constant from 1989 to 1995, as was the proportion of the debtholders that had very high debt repayment to income ratios. What has tended to rise over time is the proportion of low income households with an unusually high fraction of their income absorbed by debt repayments. Unfortunately, the latest data-- which are still preliminary--are a year old. To be sure, some of the increase in consumer debt is merely a reflection of the greater prevalence of convenience use of credit cards as a substitute for cash or check payment, with card balances paid in full each month. This is a trend that has been reinforced in recent years by a variety of incentives, such as the availability of frequent flier miles. But--as our Survey of Consumer Finances suggests--there are also signs that some households have let their debts build up to the point where they may have difficulty servicing them: loan delinquency rates and personal bankruptcies are both up. Generally speaking, delinquency rates on nonmortgage consumer loans have been trending up for the past year, with some of the increase in delinquency rates merely the result of the "seasoning" of recently underwritten loans, a typical pattern. However, for credit cards, the widely followed statistics of the American Bankers Association show that the delinquency rate by number of accounts is historically high. The more comprehensive figures from the official bank call reports based on the dollar volumes of loan balances, however, show a much milder upturn in delinquencies--but still one warranting our attention. Credit Card Lending by Commercial Banks These economic and market developments have had clear effects on banks. As a percent of total bank loans, consumer debt (including mortgages) has been increasing steadily for some time--from 33 percent of total bank loans in 1980 to roughly 40 percent five years ago and about 44 percent today. This shift in asset allocation by banks reflects several factors, not the least of which is a declining market share of the credit extended to commercial customers. In part, it also reflects substantial growth in credit card debt. Since late in 1991, credit card debt has risen about twice as fast as total loans. If one adds back estimates of the outstanding securitized credit card debt of banks, such credit has risen almost three times as fast as total loans at banks. The industry's total increase in credit card loans has come about with the growing popularity of cards, supported by their aggressive marketing by some banks. Marketing campaigns typically involve broad-based, regional or nationwide solicitations and often include pre-approved lines of credit based on the results of "credit scoring" models that statistically evaluate an individual's creditworthiness. In addition, banks' success in securitizing consumer debt instruments for resale in capital markets has increased both their willingness and their ability to make such loans. Also encouraging more aggressive competition have been heavy investments in the technological infrastructure needed to evaluate, originate, and manage effectively such credits. Indeed, the major competitors have increasingly used special promotions offering reduced fees and rates to obtain market share and maximize the scale economies of their operations. Some have also been more willing to take on greater risk in the interest of increasing loan volumes. Such competitive zeal all too often attracts weak or otherwise marginal borrowers. The resultant adverse selection of credit risks has contributed to a decline in asset quality at some banks. While these problems have eroded returns at individual institutions, a critical factor that continues to contribute to the emphasis on such lending has been the significant, overall long-term profitability of the credit card business. This is not irrelevant for a banking system whose largest institutions had been under earnings pressure through much of the 1980s due to their exposures to developing countries, energy sector borrowers, and commercial real estate markets. One indication of the profitability of credit card lending can be seen in analyzing the so-called credit card banks (defined here to include banks with more than $1 billion in assets and with credit card balances comprising more than 50 percent of total assets). For various legal, tax, and operating reasons, most large banking organizations find it convenient to establish such banks, separate from their other operations, as a vehicle for booking most, if not all, of their credit card loans. These roughly 30 entities most recently reported an average return on assets of 2 percent, compared to 1.1 percent for all insured commercial banks. They also maintained average equity to asset and loan loss reserve to total loan ratios well above industry averages. The strong earnings profiles of the credit card banks, and their associated capital and reserve allocations, are reflections of the risks associated with this form of lending. Higher risk and higher return go hand- in-hand, and the higher capital and reserves associated with this form of credit are required to balance the risk. Put another way, lenders active in the credit card business are conscious of higher potential loss rates and expect returns that will fully absorb these losses and still provide an adequate profit margin. They also are aware of the necessity to take steps to assure that the variance in returns on these loans do not create significant solvency concerns for their organizations. Increased Incidence of Personal Bankruptcy On several occasions during the past year or so, various industry and professional groups have expressed concern about perceived weakening of credit standards within consumer lending, including the aggressive marketing of credit cards. At these meetings, some of the private sector participants have given anecdotal evidence of practices that they believe to be potentially harmful in the long run, either to financial institutions or to the consumer lending market, in general. Similar, and still anecdotal, indications of declining standards and increased competition have been provided by various state banking delegations that periodically visit the Federal Reserve and other bank regulatory agencies. One concern cited with increased frequency is a higher incidence of borrowers with substantial credit card debt declaring bankruptcy, without any previous record of missed or delinquent payments. Bankers often cite borrowers who have tens of thousands of dollars of outstanding loans on a number of credit card accounts with various financial institutions. Such borrowers may not always be readily detected by controls and monitoring procedures and could contribute to increased chargeoffs at card issuers. Several factors are said to be contributing to higher rates of personal bankruptcy, including greater social acceptability of the practice, changes in law that have made bankruptcy less onerous for individuals, and increased advertising by bankruptcy attorneys. Whatever the underlying causes, it is a reality that credit card issuers and others must address. Moreover, banks and nonbanks that issue credit cards and other consumer lines of credit should also consider the extent to which the trend is fueled by their willingness to lend to individuals whose credit history is dubious. One may not wish to foreclose the possibility of renewed credit access to those who have been forced by uncontrollable circumstances to seek the protection of bankruptcy, but it should be recognized that undue generosity on this score only encourages greater use of the bankruptcy remedy and consequent chargeoffs. Supervisory Response In response to these and other indications that terms of credit and credit standards may have been declining, about a year ago the Federal Reserve issued an advisory letter to its examiners and supervised banking organizations cautioning them about the risk of weakening standards. This advisory also requested Federal Reserve examiners to discuss any questionable easing of standards with bank management, regardless of whether quantitative measures of problem loans had begun to increase. Since March 1995, the Federal Reserve has also been conducting a quarterly survey of its most senior examiners to track their assessments of conditions in the banking market, including their assessments of any changes in lending terms and conditions for consumer loans. To supplement these surveys, regular discussions are conducted with bankers and supervisory officials at the Reserve Banks to ascertain their opinions on current lending conditions. The Federal Reserve has also recently undertaken a number of initiatives to focus its examinations more tightly on the activities exposing financial institutions to significant risks and to heighten its emphasis on evaluating management processes to identify, measure, monitor, and control the risk of banking activities. We believe that these enhancements to our supervisory procedures will further improve our ability to detect nascent problems--such as those arising from the increased and more accommodating consumer lending of recent years--and will foster appropriate responses by bank management. Consistent with these initiatives, an interdistrict task force of Federal Reserve examiners is currently conducting a comprehensive review of the retail credit and credit scoring operations of several large bank holding companies. Earlier this year, we also implemented procedures whereby examiners assign specific ratings to an institution's overall risk management processes, including its internal controls. This requirement, we believe, further highlights the importance of sound management practices and should help to provide more specific feedback to senior management of the examined institution. In the context of consumer lending, such assessments generally address a banking organization's operating strategies for increasing market share, its goals, and the controls in place to maintain credit standards, including ongoing review of the credit strength of its loan portfolio. Examiners also typically evaluate the adequacy of the institution's information systems and the appropriateness of the information provided to directors and senior managers. Recently, our supervisory activities, surveys of examiners, and discussions with bankers all have supported the view that banks are recognizing weaknesses in the consumer lending market and are actively adjusting their underwriting and monitoring procedures for these loans. Some banks have also increased their levels of reserves for these loans in recent months. I should also note that in each of the two most recent Federal Reserve Senior Loan Officer Surveys approximately one quarter of the respondent banks, on net, had tightened underwriting standards for approving new credit card applications. More broadly, the proportion of respondents less willing to make consumer installment loans slightly exceeded the proportion that was more willing to lend, for the first time since 1991. Such a revisiting of current credit standards and practices seems well considered, given the length of the current period of economic expansion and the signs of weakness in some elements of consumer finances that we have seen. Conclusion To sum up, the rapid growth in consumer lending by banks, particularly that involving credit card loans, reflects a natural evolution of banking activities toward the household sector and has generally enhanced consumer convenience and produced significant profits for banks. In recent years, this growth has been due, in part, to aggressive solicitations of credit card customers by a relatively small number of large bank and nonbank organizations and by an active market for securitized credit card debt. The recently emerging trend of higher delinquencies and personal bankruptcies has certainly increased the costs of making consumer credit card loans and is forcing some institutions to review and modify their marketing strategies and underwriting standards. It has also prompted the Federal Reserve to devote more attention to the monitoring of consumer loan exposures, both on and off bank balance sheets, and to the evaluation of risk management practices, including internal controls, for these activities. Nevertheless, the industry's condition is strong when measured in terms of its profitability, capital ratios, loss reserves, and overall asset quality. Moreover, banks price and reserve for credit card loans with the expectation of occasional periods of relatively high rates of loss. Therefore, unless future conditions deteriorate dramatically, we believe that the industry is well- positioned to absorb any problems resulting from the competitive consumer underwriting practices of the recent past.
Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan Recent reports on Federal Reserve operations Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate July 26, 1996 I appreciate this opportunity to appear before the Banking Committee today to address certain recent reports on the Federal Reserve´s operations. Of most relevance, the GAO has raised some significant issues with respect to the management of the Federal Reserve System. Both the GAO and the Congress deserve our full response. We are strongly committed to ensuring that the Federal Reserve System is managed efficiently and effectively. It is most important to us at the Federal Reserve Board and the Reserve Banks, not only to run a tight ship, but to foster the attitudes and processes that will ensure continuous improvement in the effectiveness of the Federal Reserve´s operations. We recognize that spending non-appropriated funds places a special obligation on us to be particularly diligent in the use and application of those funds. Accordingly, even though we may ultimately disagree with some of the specific suggestions of the GAO, we welcome all of them and their insights because they require us to rethink our positions and change them, if appropriate. Certain GAO recommendations for review of specific aspects of our management clearly have merit and reviews of a number of issues highlighted in the GAO´s report are currently underway. These reviews may lead to changes in the Federal Reserve´s administration that will further enhance our effectiveness. It is most important for any organization, including the Federal Reserve, periodically to reassess its businesses and how they are carried out. Strategic planning is particularly critical given our rapidly changing environment, in which technology is advancing at an extraordinary pace and the financial services industry is becoming ever more complex. It is essential that the Federal Reserve adapt to this changing environment with some foresight and as effectively as possible. To that end, in 1995 we formalized our strategic focus by establishing a System Strategic Planning Coordinating Group to assess how the Federal Reserve can most effectively meet its public policy objectives into the next century. Our strategic focus is also reflected in recent significant changes that the Federal Reserve has made in the way it carries out its major responsibilities. For example, we have undertaken a major redesign and upgrade of our computer systems, communications networks, and critical software applications to improve reliability, respond more quickly to changing business requirements, and improve our disaster recovery capabilities. We have placed an increasing reliance on automation to provide a more flexible approach to bank examinations -- an approach that is risk-oriented, cost-effective, and sensitive to the burden placed on banks. We have also consolidated certain fiscal agency functions that we provide for the government in order to improve cost effectiveness and quality, and a Reserve Bank policy committee has been established to coordinate the provision of Federal Reserve financial services. In addition, the Federal Reserve already had underway several specific initiatives related to recommendations made by the GAO. For example, we recently engaged an independent accounting firm to audit and certify the combined financial statements of the Reserve Banks. The firm issued an unqualified opinion on the 1995 financial statements, as prepared in accordance with the financial accounting manual for the Reserve Banks. In addition, we are actively reviewing the appropriate infrastructure for providing certain financial services, taking into consideration both cost efficiency and service quality. One difficult issue that has and will confront the Federal Reserve Board in our oversight of the System is the appropriate degree of consolidation of various activities. Certain Systemwide activities do appear to be more cost effective if consolidated. For example, we anticipate that the consolidation of our critical electronic payment applications will reduce our costs of providing these services. But it is also evident that the element of autonomy that is accorded to the Reserve Banks has created an environment within the Federal Reserve that attracts highly qualified staff who contribute importantly to the effectiveness and efficiency of the Federal Reserve System over the long run. The advantages of this environment must be balanced against the possible savings from consolidation. Federal Reserve´s Role as Service Provider Many of our resources are devoted to providing priced payment services. The Federal Reserve has played an integral role in the nation´s payments system since the System´s inception. Indeed, one of Congress´ original goals in establishing the Federal Reserve System was to improve the efficiency of check clearing. Prior to the passage of the Monetary Control Act in 1980, the Federal Reserve provided payment services to its member banks; the banks paid for these services implicitly with non-interest bearing reserves rather than through explicit fees. The MCA fundamentally changed the manner in which the Federal Reserve provided and received payment for these services. Because the Act expanded reserve requirements to all depository institutions, it also required that the Federal Reserve offer its payment services to all depository institutions. To offset the Act´s reduction in the level of required reserves, as well as to broaden and level the competitive market for interbank payment services, Congress required us to price our services at full cost with a rate of return comparable to that of private firms. I believe that the increased competition resulting from the MCA requirements has benefited the payments system. The GAO has recommended that we review our future role in providing payment services. We are in the process of conducting such a review in the context of our overall strategic plan. In general, we view our role as a payments service provider as crucial in carrying out our overall central bank mission. We believe it is important for the Federal Reserve to foster the integrity, efficiency, and accessibility of the U.S. dollar payments system, which in turn is important to maintain financial stability and maximize sustainable economic growth. The provision of services by the Federal Reserve has contributed directly to these goals. In addition, the knowledge and operational expertise we have gained as a service provider strengthens our efforts in containing systemic risks and is crucial in managing potential financial crises. We regard the wholesale payments services we provide, such as Fedwire and net settlement, as essential central bank services and important in limiting payments system risk. Our role in providing these services probably will not change significantly as the marketplace evolves, although the nature of the services themselves might. It is quite possible, if not likely, that as changes occur in the financial services marketplace over time, or owing to other considerations, our role in providing other services, such as check collection, may change as well. In this regard, we must be sensitive to the fact that, as the nation´s central bank, we have an unsurpassable credit rating that must not be used to unfairly compete with private-sector providers. We are continually assessing our available means of achieving our payments system goals, including our regulatory authority and our role as a direct participant in the payments system, with our public service role always kept paramount. For example, the Federal Reserve has adopted regulations that have fostered competition and efficiency in the provision of check collection services, even though they resulted in a reduction in the Federal Reserve´s direct participation in the check system. At the same time, the Federal Reserve has encouraged other efficiencies in the payments system through innovations in its service offerings. To the extent that we can achieve our payments system goals most effectively through our direct participation, our continued provision of these services will remain appropriate. Federal Reserve Cost Effectiveness In considering the cost structure of the Federal Reserve, it is necessary to keep in mind the unique combination of responsibilities that have been assigned to this institution. The Federal Reserve is responsible for conducting monetary policy; supervising and regulating certain financial institutions; promoting the efficiency and integrity of the payments system; and providing fiscal agency services to the Treasury and other government agencies at their direction. Different factors affect the cost structure of each of these functions. For example, priced services are subject to the inherent discipline of the marketplace as the Federal Reserve must control costs in order to meet the statutory directives for cost recovery in the Monetary Control Act. On the other hand, in providing depository and fiscal services to the Treasury, the Federal Reserve must respond to the instructions of the Treasury. We endeavor to carry out Treasury's directives in a cost effective manner, but cannot refuse legitimate requests because of their effect on our costs or because they are inconsistent with other Federal Reserve plans. In the areas of monetary policy and financial institution supervision, there are fewer external constraints on our expenses. Here we must be particularly vigilant. Given the critical nature of the Federal Reserve´s responsibilities, particularly in the areas of monetary policy, financial stability, and financial institution supervision, our major initiatives must be judged not only in terms of cost but also in the context of risk management and the appropriate level of resources to be devoted to each function. For example, Congress, in enacting the Foreign Bank Supervision Enhancement Act in 1991, clearly concluded that the additional costs of expanding the Federal Reserve´s supervisory responsibilities for U.S. operations of foreign banks were justified by the greater financial stability and protection that the enhanced supervision would bring. We focus our banking examination resources based on risk assessments, with the expectation that areas not covered extensively in the examinations will not become serious problems. Had we devoted more resources to Daiwa, and perhaps less elsewhere, would we have uncovered its wrongdoing at an early stage? We can´t know for sure, but the odds would have been higher. But, if we had the foresight to divert these resources from other activities, would we have increased our risk exposure elsewhere? As another example, the Federal Reserve´s recent investment in a major upgrade of our computer systems and personnel to adapt our surveillance and payments technologies to the major changes that have occurred in private financial markets was also driven in large part to improve risk management. While the costs of these improvements were not trivial, they have enhanced our ability to ensure the smooth functioning of the financial markets, even during periods of financial or operational disruptions. To hold the risk of systemic crises to acceptably low levels in both U.S. markets and U.S. dollar markets abroad requires some redundancy of resources. Given the vast scale of the value of payment transactions that flow through our systems--our Fedwire volume alone averages almost $1.5 trillion a day-- we believe that the benefits of this redundancy far exceed the associated incremental costs. The risk-management decisions that we make concerning the way we provide payment services to depository institutions are tested directly in the marketplace. These services comprise more than one-third of the Federal Reserve Banks´ total budget and the Monetary Control Act requires that, over the long run, we price these services to recover their costs, as well as costs that would be borne by private businesses, such as taxes and a return on equity. If we provide these services inefficiently, we price ourselves out of the market. Over the past decade, our track record has been good. The Reserve Banks have recovered 101 percent of their total cost of providing priced services, including the targeted return on equity. I should also note that, by recovering not only our actual costs but also the imputed costs that a private firm would incur, the Federal Reserve´s priced services have consistently contributed to the amount we have transferred to the Treasury. During the past decade, priced services revenue has exceed operating costs by almost $1 billion. Our fiscal agency services, which comprise another one-sixth of the Reserve Banks´ total budget, are provided at the direction of the Treasury and other federal government agencies for whom we provide these services and whose reimbursements to us are made primarily with appropriated funds. Here our difficulty has been in obtaining full reimbursement over the years. We understand that, as part of its FY97 funding request, the Treasury sought a permanent indefinite appropriation, similar to that in place for the Bureau of the Public Debt, for services provided to its Financial Management Service. The Federal Reserve and our fiscal principals continue to work closely to identify and implement initiatives that improve further the efficiency of these operations. With respect to staff compensation and some other aspects of our infrastructure that are necessary to support our varied responsibilities, only indirect market criteria are available to judge the Federal Reserve´s costs. For example, we try to set salary structures that can attract and retain the personnel with skills necessary to run the Federal Reserve System in a highly effective manner. In order to acquire and hold such personnel, we strive to provide salaries and benefits competitive with local private and public sector markets, tempered by the willingness of many professionals to accord a nonmonetary premium to Federal Reserve employment. Although the GAO report suggests that the Federal Reserve does not adequately review Federal Reserve employee salary and benefit levels to determine whether they continue to be justified, I can assure the Committee that these costs are scrutinized regularly to ensure that they are appropriate. We believe that the GAO´s comparison of growth in Federal Reserve employee benefits with those of the federal government is incorrect. The problem is that while we accrue such benefits according to generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP), the federal government does not. Were the federal government to use accrual accounting, presumably the comparisons would be straightforward. The federal government, however, employs an outmoded cash accounting system, which makes it difficult for us to reverse our accruals in a manner consistent with it. As best we can judge, when calculated on a comparable basis using federal government accounting principles, the cost of benefits per employee for the Federal Reserve and the federal government increased by approximately the same percentage during the 1988 to 1994 period -- 64 percent and 62 percent, respectively. We believe the GAO significantly overstated the increase in Federal Reserve benefit costs by including the cost of future pension benefits related to Federal Reserve early retirement plans on an accrual basis without considering the associated future savings attributable to those programs. Each of the early retirement programs has a positive net present value, indicating a net cost savings from such plans. Including the present value cost of early retirement plans without considering the present value of cost savings skews any comparison of the increase in total benefits costs for the Federal Reserve and federal government. Applying peer analysis more broadly, during the 1988 to 1994 period reviewed by the GAO, the increase in Federal Reserve operating costs was slightly less than the 51 percent increase in federal discretionary non-defense spending, which has been subject to increasing Congressional restraint in recent years. The GAO makes this as one of its comparisons. The Federal Reserve effectively contained its costs despite a significant expansion in its mandated responsibilities and expanded resources required to monitor and contain the financial market turmoil of that period. To also compare, however, as the GAO did in its report, the rate of our expense increases with that of total federal discretionary outlays, which are dominated by the major post-cold war retrenchment in defense, is clearly inappropriate. Moreover, with the significant expansion of our computer systems now close to completion and our adjustment to our expanded supervisory mandates reaching fruition, our costs during the past two years and those projected for the immediate future are definitely on a flattening trajectory. More generally, we believe that the GAO is mistaken in its notion that the Federal Reserve does not regularly assess certain ongoing programs to determine whether they are reasonable and justified. In particular, we do not use a current services approach to develop the Board and Reserve Bank budgets. The significant reallocation of System resources among the various responsibility areas during recent years clearly demonstrates that this is not the case. In summary, although the Board believes that much of the GAO´s analysis and recommendations have merit, we take exception to the broad implication of the GAO report that the Federal Reserve has not exercised appropriate budget constraint and that it has not adequately addressed the changing technological and financial environment in which it operates. In my experience, the Federal Reserve is as well run an organization as any with which I have been associated, private or public, over the decades. Is there nonetheless room for improvement? Certainly. I am not aware of any complex organization for which this is not the case. In particular, the Board plans to review several specific areas highlighted by the GAO related to management of health care benefits, Reserve Bank procurement and contracting procedures, and Reserve Bank travel reimbursement policies. The Federal Reserve Surplus One area discussed in the GAO report--the elimination or reduction of the Federal Reserve´s surplus--has received substantial, and often misleading, media coverage. I agree with the assessment of the Conference Report on the FY97 budget resolution on this matter. The Report concluded that a transfer of the Federal Reserve´s surplus to the Treasury would be a gimmick that has no real economic impact on the deficit. While a transfer of Federal Reserve surplus would increase unified receipts (because the Federal Reserve, for technical reasons, is not included in the unified budget), it would nonetheless be an intra-governmental transfer that would not change the government´s true economic and financial position with respect to the private sector. The Federal Reserve holds government securities as the asset counterpart to its surplus, interest on which it returns to the Treasury. If the Federal Reserve decreased its surplus, it would do so by selling government securities and transferring the proceeds to the Treasury. Consequently, the Federal Reserve´s future payments to the Treasury would decline permanently by the foregone amount of interest on the surplus funds transferred, exactly offsetting the Treasury´s savings on gross interest payments. The surplus is part of our capital account. In that context, I believe retention by the Federal Reserve of some level of surplus is desirable, but I acknowledge that the appropriate level of the Federal Reserve´s surplus is debatable. We would welcome the opportunity to work with Congress to review this issue. Other Recent Inquiries I would like to conclude my testimony by commenting on several recent inquiries into certain aspects of the Reserve Banks´ operations -- specifically, the management of our Interdistrict Transportation System (ITS) and cash statistical reporting problems experienced by the Los Angeles Branch of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. Earlier this year, Representative Henry Gonzalez issued a report on the administration of the Federal Reserve´s ITS network. The report asserts that the Federal Reserve may have violated the Monetary Control Act to the extent that it does not fully recover the costs of ITS through revenue attributable to its use. The GAO and the courts reviewed this issue in the mid-1980s and concluded that such cost recovery was not required by the Act. No integrated company in the private sector (such as one that provides check collection services) prices individual segments of its operation to achieve a uniform rate of return. Optimum profitability, i.e., minimum consolidated costs, is enhanced through transfer pricing flexibility. Even aside from the imprecisions associated with allocating fixed costs, it would not make sense for us to separately recover the costs of each input to a service, such as transportation, data processing, or labor, as implied by Representative Gonzalez. Rather, all of the costs the Reserve Banks incur in providing check services to depository institutions, including ITS costs (which represent less than 5 percent of the costs of our check service), are recovered through fees for their various check products. Representative Gonzalez´s report also alleges that certain contracting practices used by the Boston Reserve Bank in managing ITS were improper and wasteful. Administration of ITS requires Federal Reserve management to make numerous, rapid, and complex business decisions every day, constantly balancing efforts to improve service, reduce float, and control operating costs. In hindsight, are there some decisions that should have been made differently? Almost surely. But from a broad perspective, ITS has been managed effectively in our judgment. Finally, I would like to put in context the errors made by the Los Angeles Branch of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco in reporting certain statistical cash information to the Federal Reserve Board. Unfortunately, the press coverage of this matter, in our judgment, has significantly overstated the problem. First, these reports are used for informational purposes only. No taxpayer money has been lost. No key decision-making has been compromised. The errors have not affected the usefulness of the information derived from the Federal Reserve´s financial statements, nor have they affected the Federal Reserve´s calculation of the money supply, its conduct of monetary policy, or the amount of shipments of currency and coin to or from the Branch. Second, although there were reports of mistakes amounting to $178 million, the errors changed the Branch´s reported production volume by less than one-half of one percent. If the mistakes had not been discovered, at worst there would have been slight errors in forecasting future currency demand, which could have caused a slight increase to the Federal Reserve´s order to the Treasury to print new currency. The cost of this higher currency print order would have been offset, however, by a lower print order in the following year. Third, the Los Angeles Branch had identified the problems internally and was in the process of resolving them before Representative Gonzalez began his inquiry. The Los Angeles Branch is working diligently to ensure that all of the data used to prepare the cash statistical reports transmitted to the Board are accurate. In closing, let me state that we appreciate the GAO´s review in that it assists us in our ongoing evaluation of the Federal Reserve´s structure and functions and our efforts to continually improve operations. As I noted, many recommendations are useful and we are pursuing them. In my opinion, however, the general tenor of the report does not reflect the high level of effectiveness with which the Federal Reserve has fulfilled its mission. While, as is likely the case with any organization, the Federal Reserve has opportunities for further improvement, I believe these opportunities should be put in the context of our significant accomplishments.