For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application of NationsBank Corporation and NB Holdings Corporation, both of Charlotte, North Carolina, to retain, in a fiduciary capacity with sole voting authority, more than 5 percent, but less than 25 percent, of the voting shares of First National Security Company, De Queen, Arkansas; Calvin B. Taylor Bankshares, Inc., Berlin, Maryland; First Perry Bancorp, Inc., Pinckneyville, Illinois; and The First National Bank in Falfurrias, Falfurrias, Texas. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. NationsBank Corporation Charlotte, North Carolina NB Holdings Corporation Charlotte, North Carolina Order Approving the Ownership of Bank Shares In a Fiduciary Capacity NationsBank Corporation and NB Holdings Corporation, both of Charlotte, North Carolina (collectively, "NationsBank"), bank holding companies within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), have requested the Board's approval under section 3 of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1842) to retain, in a fiduciary capacity with sole voting authority, more than 5 percent, but less than 25 percent, of the voting shares of First National Security Company, De Queen, Arkansas; Calvin B. Taylor Bankshares, Inc., Berlin, Maryland; First Perry Bancorp, Inc., Pinckneyville, Illinois; and The First National Bank in Falfurrias, Falfurrias, Texas (collectively, the "Banks"). The voting shares of the Banks are held by the trust departments of two NationsBank subsidiary banks, NationsBank, N.A., Charlotte, North Carolina, and NationsBank of Texas, N.A., Dallas, Texas, and were acquired in connection with previous acquisitions by NationsBank. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (62 Federal Register 7,784 (1997)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the applications and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in the BHC Act. NationsBank, with total consolidated assets of approximately $226 billion, is the fourth largest commercial banking organization in the United States, controlling approximately 5.5 percent of total banking assets of insured commercial banks ("total banking assets"). Its subsidiary banks operate in North Carolina, Arkansas, Delaware, the District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Maryland, New Mexico, Oklahoma, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, and Virginia. State deposit and ranking data in light of the proposal are contained in Appendix A. NationsBank holds the shares of the Banks in a fiduciary capacity as trustee for predominately family trusts. NationsBank did not acquire or express an interest in acquiring any shares of the Banks on its own behalf, but instead, NationsBank received shares that had been purchased and placed in trust by the grantors. The trusts were only acquired by NationsBank in connection with the acquisition of the banking organization that was serving as trustee when it was acquired. In almost every case, the trusts were established by current or former officers or directors of the Banks. NationsBank eventually will be required to distribute the trusts' assets, over which it temporarily holds legal title, to the descendants of the current beneficiaries of the trusts. There are no director or officer interlocks between NationsBank and Banks. Based on these facts and all other facts of record, including commitments made by Nationsbank in connection with this proposal, it is the Board's judgment that, for purposes of the BHC Act, NationsBank's retention of less than 25 percent of the voting shares of the Banks would not result in control of the Banks by NationsBank. Competitive Considerations In reviewing the competitive aspects of the proposal, the Board notes that NationsBank controls a relatively small percentage of the voting shares of the Banks. The Board has, nevertheless, considered this proposal on the basis that NationsBank would have the ability to alter the market behavior of Banks in an anticompetitive manner. NationsBank and the Banks compete directly in the following banking markets: Scott County, Arkansas ("Scott County"); Eastern Shore and Worcester County ("Worcester County"), Maryland; and McCurtain County, Oklahoma. Consummation of the proposal would exceed the threshold levels of market concentration, as measured by the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index ("HHI"), in the Scott County and Worcester County banking markets. A number of considerations indicate that the market concentrations as measured by the HHI tend to overstate the competitive effects of this proposal in Scott County and Worcester County. In Scott County, for example, where NationsBank and First National Security Company ("First Security") compete, the largest principal shareholders of the banking organization and grantors of the trust holding First Security shares that are administered by NationsBank, control more than 72 percent of First Security's the voting shares. The shareholders also serve as officers of First Security. In Worcester County, ten competitors, including three of the largest commercial banking organizations in the Maryland, would remain and the banking market has characteristics that make it attractive for entry and expansion by potential competitors. Based on these and other facts of record, including the fiduciary nature of NationsBank's interest and its commitments to remain a passive shareholder, the Board concludes that the proposal would not have a significantly adverse effect on competition or concentration of banking resources in the Scott County or Worcester County banking markets, or any relevant banking market. Accordingly, the Board concludes that competitive considerations are consistent with approval of the proposal. Supervisory Factors In light of all the facts of record, including supervisory reports of examination, the Board also concluded that the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the institutions involved in this proposal, and considerations relating to the convenience and needs of the communities to be served, are consistent with approval, as are the other supervisory factors the Board must consider under section 3 of the BHC Act. Conclusion Based on the foregoing and all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the application should be, and hereby is, approved. The Board's approval of the proposal is conditioned on compliance by NationsBank with the commitments made in connection with this application, including the commitments referred to in the order and contained in Appendix B. The commitments and conditions relied on by the Board in reaching this decision shall be deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision, and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. By order of the Board of Governors, effective May 12, 1997. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Appendix A State deposit and ranking data if NationsBank were considered to control the Banks. Arkansas . NationsBank would be the largest commercial banking organization, controlling deposits of $3.5 billion, representing 13.1 percent of the total deposits in commercial banking organizations in the state. Maryland . NationsBank would be the largest commercial banking organization, controlling deposits of $9.6 billion, representing 23.9 percent of the total deposits in commercial banking organizations in the state. Illinois . NationsBank would be the 17th largest commercial banking organization, controlling deposits of approximately $1 billion, representing less than 1 percent of the total deposits in commercial banking organizations in the state. Oklahoma . NationsBank would be the largest commercial banking organization, controlling deposits of $3.1 billion, representing 10.6 percent of the total deposits in commercial banking organizations in the state. Texas . NationsBank would be the largest commercial banking organization, controlling deposits of $25.6 billion, representing 16.6 percent of the total deposits in commercial banking organizations in the state. Local banking markets where NationsBank and the Banks compete: (1) Scott County, Arkansas banking market -- approximated by Scott County, Arkansas. (2) Eastern Shore, Maryland banking market -- approximated by Accomack County and Northampton County Virginia; and the towns of Pocomoke City and Snow Hill, Maryland. The HHI would increase 66 points to 1480. (3) Worcester County, Maryland banking market -- approximated by Worcester County, Maryland. (4) McCurtain County, Oklahoma banking market -- approximated by McCurtain County, Oklahoma. The HHI would increase 179 points to 1865. Footnotes NationsBank would retain not more than the following percentages of voting shares of the Banks: (1) 15.6 percent of First National Security Company; (2) 8 percent of Calvin B. Taylor Bankshares; (3) 13.1 percent of First Perry Bancorp; and (4) 15.5 percent of The First National Bank in Falfurrias. The interests were acquired in connection with NationsBank's acquisition of MNC Financial, Inc., Baltimore, Maryland, and as successor to two failed institutions, First Republic Bank Midland, N.A., Midland, and NBC Bank-San Antonio, N.A. San Antonio, both in Texas. Consolidated asset data are as of December 31, 1996, and include the acquisition of Boatmen's Bancshares, Inc., St. Louis, Missouri. NationsBank also has made a number of commitments that are similar to commitments previously relied on by the Board to determine that an investing bank holding company would not exercise a controlling influence over another bank holding company or bank for purposes of the BHC Act. See, e.g., North Fork Bancorporation, Inc. , 81 Federal Reserve Bulletin 734 (1995) (acquisition of 19.9 percent of the voting shares of a bank holding company); Mansura Bancshares, Inc. , 79 Federal Reserve Bulletin 37 (1993) (acquisition of 9.7 percent of the voting shares of a bank holding company); and SunTrust Banks, Inc. , 76 Federal Reserve Bulletin 542 (1990) (acquisition of up to 24.99 percent of the voting shares of a bank). NationsBank has committed, for example, except to the extent required in its capacity as a fiduciary, not to exercise or attempt to exercise a controlling influence over the management or policies of the Banks; not to seek or accept representation on the board of directors of the Banks; not to challenge a nominee of management for the board of directors of the Banks; and not to have any representative of NationsBank serve as an officer, agent or employee of the Banks or any of their affiliates. The Board concludes that these commitments adequately limit NationsBank's ability to weaken or eliminate independent action by the Banks. The banking markets are described in Appendix A. The HHI would increase 844 points to 5141 in Scott County, and 299 points to 2045 in Worcester County. The increases in the HHI for the remaining banking markets are contained in Appendix A. Under the revised Department of Justice Merger Guidelines, 49 Federal Register 26,823 (June 29, 1984), a market in which the post-merger HHI is over 1800 is considered to be highly concentrated. The Department of Justice ("DOJ") has informed the Board that a bank merger or acquisition generally will not be challenged (in the absence of other factors indicating anticompetitive effects) unless the post-merger HHI is at least 1800 and the merger increases the HHI by more than 200 points. The DOJ has stated that the higher than normal HHI thresholds for screening bank mergers for anticompetitive effects implicitly recognize the competitive effect of limited-purpose lenders and other non-depository financial entities. From 1990 to 1995, the population in Worcester County increased by 15.1 percent whereas the average increase in population statewide was 6.1 percent. In the last five years, deposits in Worcester County increased by 1 percent whereas the average increase in deposits for non-Metropolitan Statistical Area counties in the state like Worcester County was approximately 0.01 percent. Voting for this action: Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Phillips, and Meyer. Absent and not voting: Chairman Greenspan. State deposit data are as of June 30, 1996.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice of Banc One Corporation, Inc., Columbus, Ohio, to merge with First USA, Inc., Dallas, Texas, and thereby engage in certain nonbanking activities. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Banc One Corporation, Inc. Columbus, Ohio Order Approving Notice to Acquire a Savings Association and to Engage in Certain Nonbanking Activities Banc One Corporation, Inc., Columbus, Ohio ("Banc One"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8)) and section 225.24(a) of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.24(a)) to merge with First USA, Inc., Dallas, Texas ("First USA"), and to acquire First USA's wholly owned subsidiary, First USA Federal Savings Bank, Wilmington, Delaware ("First USA FSB"). Banc One also has requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act to acquire the direct and indirect nonbank subsidiaries of First USA listed in the Appendix and thereby to operate nonbank depository institutions, and to engage in activities related to extending credit and data processing. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (62 Federal Register 11,895 (1997)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the notice and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Banc One, with total consolidated assets of approximately $102 billion, is the tenth largest commercial banking organization in the United States. Banc One operates subsidiary banks: Arizona, Colorado, Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, Louisiana, Ohio, Oklahoma, Texas, Utah, West Virginia, and Wisconsin, controlling approximately 2.7 percent of total banking assets in the United States. Banc One also engages through its subsidiaries in a broad range of permissible nonbanking activities in the United States. First USA, with total consolidated assets of $10.2 billion, controls deposits of $1.7 billion in its subsidiary depository institutions. After consummation of the proposal, Banc One would be the eighth largest commercial banking organization in the United States, with consolidated assets of $112.2 billion. The Board has determined that operating a savings association by a bank holding company is closely related to banking for purposes of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. The Board requires a savings association acquired by a bank holding company to conform its direct and indirect activities to those permissible for a bank holding company under section 4(c)(8) and Regulation Y. Banc One has committed to conform all activities of First USA FSB to those requirements. The Board also has determined by regulation that operating nonbanking depository institutions and engaging in activities related to extending credit and data processing, as discussed in the Appendix, are closely related to banking within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Applicant has committed to conduct these activities subject to the limitations set forth in Regulation Y. Competitive Considerations In order to approve the proposal, the Board also must determine that the performance of the proposed activities is a proper incident to banking, that is, that the proposed transaction "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public . . . that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices." As part of the Board's evaluation of these factors, the Board has carefully considered the competitive effects of the proposed transaction in light of all the facts of record, including comments contending that the proposal would have an adverse effect on competition in the credit card industry. Banc One and First USA compete as issuers of credit cards and as merchant credit card processors. Credit card issuers compete nationally for credit card customers. First USA is the fourth largest credit card issuer in the United States, controlling approximately 6.8 percent of outstanding credit card balances. Banc One is the 11th largest credit card issuer, controlling approximately 3.1 percent of outstanding credit card balances. After consummation, Banc One would become the third largest credit card issuer, controlling approximately 10 percent of outstanding credit card balances. The market would remain unconcentrated as measured by the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index ("HHI"), and numerous competitors would remain. Merchant credit card processors also compete nationally. First USA is the third largest merchant credit card processor, with approximately 7.3 percent of the total credit and debit transactions processed, and Banc One is the tenth largest processor, with approximately 2.7 percent of the total credit and debit transactions processed. After consummation, Banc One would become the third largest processor, controlling approximately 10 percent of the total credit and debit transactions processed. Market concentration as measured by the HHI would remain moderately concentrated, and numerous competitors would remain. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that consummation of this proposal would not have a significantly adverse effect on competition among credit card issuers or merchant credit card processors, or in any other relevant market. Other Considerations As part of its evaluation of the public interest factors, the Board has carefully reviewed the financial and managerial resources of Banc One, First USA, and their subsidiaries, and the effect the transaction would have on such resources in light of all the facts of record. The facts of record include confidential financial information from Banc One and reports of examination and other supervisory information received from the primary federal and state supervisors of the organizations assessing the financial and managerial resources of the organizations. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that the financial and managerial resources of the organizations involved in this proposal are consistent with approval. In acting on applications to acquire a savings association, the Board has traditionally reviewed the records of performance by the institutions involved under the Community Reinvestment Act (12 U.S.C. § 2901 et seq . ("CRA")). Commenters have criticized aspects of the CRA performance records of both institutions and the record of compliance with fair lending laws by Banc One. The Board has considered in detail almost identical comments relating to Banc One in connection with its proposal to acquire Liberty Bancorp, Inc., Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. Based on all the facts of record, including the facts and reasons discussed in the Banc One/Liberty Order, which are specifically incorporated herein by reference, the Board concludes that Banc One's record of performance under the CRA and record of compliance with fair lending laws are consistent with approval of the proposal. First USA FSB commenced operations in 1996, and has not yet been evaluated for CRA performance by the Office of Thrift Supervision, its primary federal supervisor. As noted, Banc One intends to merge First USA FSB with and into its lead subsidiary bank, Bank One, Columbus, N.A., Columbus, Ohio ("Columbus Bank"), which received an "outstanding" rating at its most recent CRA performance evaluation from the bank's primary federal supervisor, the OCC. First USA's other insured depository institutions, First USA Bank and First USA Financial Services, Inc., received "satisfactory" ratings for CRA performance from their primary federal supervisor, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ("FDIC"), as of August 1996 and September 1996, respectively. Based on all the facts of record, and for the reasons discussed above and in the Banc One/Liberty Order, the Board concludes that considerations relating to the CRA performance records of the institutions involved are consistent with approval of the proposal. The record indicates that consummation of the proposal would result in benefits to both consumers and merchants. The proposal would enable Banc One to provide First USA customers with access to a broad range of services. In addition, combined credit card operations of Banc One and First USA would enhance the services and products currently provided by each of these organizations. Additionally, there are public benefits to be derived from permitting capital markets to operate so that bank holding companies may make potentially profitable investments in nonbanking companies when those investments are consistent, as in this case, with the relevant considerations under the BHC Act, and from permitting banking organizations to allocate their resources in the manner they believe is most efficient. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that consummation of this proposal can reasonably by expected to produce public benefits that would outweigh any likely adverse effects under the proper incident to banking standard of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Request for a Hearing Commenters contend that their allegations raise issues of disputed material facts and that a hearing is necessary in order for commenters to obtain and to provide additional information relevant to their allegations, particularly regarding Banc One's record of CRA performance and compliance by Banc One's nonbanking subsidiaries with fair lending laws. Commenters also cite the examination of Banc One Mortgage Company ("BOMC"), a nonbank subsidiary of Banc One, which was discussed in the Banc One/Liberty Order, as evidence of disputed material facts. The Board's rules provide for a hearing on notices under section 4 of the BHC Act to acquire a savings association if there are disputed issues of material fact relating to the acquisition of the savings association that cannot be resolved in some other manner. See 12 C.F.R. 225.25(a)(2). After a careful review of all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that Commenters' arguments amount to a dispute with the weight that should be accorded to, and the conclusions that the Board should draw from, the facts of record, but do not identify disputed issues of fact that are material to the Board's decision. In addition, interested parties have had an opportunity to present their views, and commenters have submitted substantial written comments that have been considered by the Board. Commenters' request fails to show why a written presentation would not suffice and to summarize what evidence would be presented at a hearing or meeting. See 12 C.F.R. 262.3(e). The examination discussed in the Banc One/Liberty Order is intended to resolve a question about fair lending oversight, procedures and practices at Banc One Mortgage Company ("BOMC") based on certain preliminary information that was developed in the course of the Board's supervision of Banc One and on other complaints against Banc One's operations. The Board fully expects that Banc One will take all necessary steps, including adopting and implementing practices and procedures developed in consultation with the Board, to ensure that any areas of weakness in its fair lending policies and practices that may be identified through the Board's examination are adequately addressed, and the Board conditions its action on this proposal on Banc One taking such actions. Based on all the facts of record, including the fact that BOMC accounts for less than 1 percent of Banc One's consolidated net income, the fact that the Board has supervisory authority to require bank holding companies and their subsidiaries to address compliance deficiencies, Banc One's record of addressing supervisory and other issues identified by its supervisor, the condition stated in this order, and Banc One's overall record of performance under the CRA and fair lending laws, the Board does not believe that completion of the BOMC examination, or receipt of additional information at a public hearing or meeting, would provide facts material to the Board's consideration of the proposal at this time. On the basis of all the facts of record, the Board has determined that a public hearing or public meeting is not required or necessary to clarify the factual record in this proposal, or otherwise warranted in this case. Accordingly, the request for a public hearing or meeting on the proposal is hereby denied. Conclusion Based on the foregoing and all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the notice should be, and hereby is, approved. The Board's approval of the proposal is specifically conditioned on compliance by Banc One with the commitments made in connection with this notice and conditions referred to in this order. The Board's determination also is subject to all the conditions in Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.23(g) (12 C.F.R. 225.7 and 225.23(g)) and to the Board's authority to require such modification or termination of the activities of a holding company or any of its subsidiaries as the Board finds necessary to assure compliance with, or to prevent evasion of, the provisions and purposes of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders issued thereunder. The commitments and conditions relied on by the Board in reaching this decision shall be deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision, and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. This transaction shall not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good.cause by the Board or the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective May 14, 1997. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board APPENDIX Nonbanking Subsidiaries Banc One proposes to acquire all of the voting shares of the following nonbanking subsidiaries of First USA: (a) First USA Bank, Wilmington, Delaware, a credit card bank, and thereby engage in making revolving extensions of credit in connection with the issuance of its consumer credit cards, and conducting activities incidental to its credit card business, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(2); (b) First USA Financial Services, Inc., Murray, Utah, an industrial loan company, and thereby engage in making extensions of credit in connection with the issuance of commercial credit cards to businesses, governmental units and other entities, pursuant to sections 225.28(b)(2) and 225.28(b)(4); (c) First USA Merchant Services, Inc., Dallas, Texas, and thereby engage in processing credit and debit card transactions for merchants directly and indirectly through financial institutions and independent sales organizations, including card transaction authorization ("authorization"), processing of card transactions ("capture"), settlement of card transactions ("settlement"), and arranging for deposit of funds in merchants' accounts ("merchant funds deposit"), pursuant to sections 225.28(b)(2) and 225.28(b)(14); (d) First USA Technology, Inc., Dallas, Texas, and thereby engage in serving as licensor for software provided to merchants in connection with credit and debit card processing activities, pursuant to sections 225.28(b)(2) and 225.28(b)(14); (e) First Virtual Holdings Incorporated, San Diego, California, and thereby engage in providing merchants selling their products and services over the Internet with a payment system that verifies the identity of the purchaser and the seller to a credit card transaction, and engage in providing processing services, including authorization, capture, settlement, and merchant funds deposit activities for the credit card transaction; and operating a shared website on the Internet for sellers of information products by managing all aspects of the selling process such as confirmation of purchases, distribution of information products, accounting, settlement, and collection and payment of proceeds, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(14); (f) Gensar Technologies, Inc., Tampa, Florida, and thereby engage in providing certain credit and debit card transaction processing services and equipment for merchants directly and indirectly through financial institutions and independent sales organizations, and acting as licensor of personal computer-based software designed for the processing of financial data, pursuant to sections 225.28(b)(2) and 225.28(b)(14); (g) Merchant Link, Inc., Bethesda, Maryland, and thereby engage in providing specialized help-desk services only in connection with the operation of the bank card modules of certain integrated hotel, restaurant, and retail financial management systems, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(14); and (h) Paymentech New Hampshire, Inc., Salem, New Hampshire, and thereby engage in providing specialized credit and debit card transactions processing services, including authorization, capture, settlement, and merchant funds deposit activities, and providing specialized personal computer-based software that is used by direct response merchants in connection with the entry of customer card data and card transaction processing, pursuant to sections 2225.28(b)(2) and 225.28(b)(14). Other Interests Banc One proposes to acquire the following interest of First USA: 50 percent ownership interest in PHH/Paymentech, Wilmington, Delaware, a limited liability company that is a joint venture with Paymentech Fleet Services, Inc., a First USA subsidiary, and PHH Vehicle Management Services Corp., and thereby engage in providing credit card marketing, transaction processing and other services to organizations that operate fleets of vehicles, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(2).
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today its approval of the application of Agricultural Bank of China, Beijing, People's Republic of China, to establish a representative office in New York, New York. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Agricultural Bank of China Beijing, People's Republic of China Order Approving Establishment of a Representative Office Agricultural Bank of China ("Bank"), Beijing, People's Republic of China ("China"), a foreign bank within the meaning of the International Banking Act ("IBA"), has applied under section 10(a) of the IBA (12 U.S.C. § 3107(a)) to establish a representative office in New York, New York. The Foreign Bank Supervision Enhancement Act of 1991, which amended the IBA, provides that a foreign bank must obtain the approval of the Board to establish a representative office in the United States. Notice of the application, affording interested persons an opportunity to comment, has been published in a newspaper of general circulation in New York ( The New York Times , January 6, 1997). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the application and all comments received. Bank is the second largest of the four specialized banks in China and is wholly owned by the Chinese government. As of December 31, 1996, Bank had total assets of approximately $177 billion. Bank operates numerous offices and owns two subsidiaries in China. Outside China, Bank operates branches in Singapore and Hong Kong and representative offices in London, England, and Tokyo, Japan. Until recently, one of Bank's primary activities was receiving funds from China's federal, regional, and local authorities and other sources and lending such funds to support the development of agricultural and rural industrial production and expand the circulation of commodities. In connection with ongoing efforts to modernize the financial system, however, Bank now engages in more traditional commercial banking activities. The activities of Bank's proposed representative office would include marketing, research, and liaison activities. In addition, the representative office would engage in certain loan solicitation and servicing activities. All decisions regarding loans would be made by Bank's head office and the representative office would not receive or handle any funds in connection with its loan servicing activities. In acting on an application to establish a representative office, the IBA and Regulation K provide that the Board shall take into account whether the foreign bank engages directly in the business of banking outside of the United States and has furnished to the Board the information it needs to assess the application adequately. The Board also shall take into account whether the foreign bank and any foreign bank parent is subject to comprehensive supervision or regulation on a consolidated basis by its home country supervisor (12 U.S.C. § 3107(a)(2); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(d)). The Board may also take into account additional standards as set forth in the IBA (12 U.S.C. § 3105(d)(3)-(4)) and Regulation K (12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)). The Board previously has stated that the standards that apply to the establishment of a branch or agency need not in every case apply to the establishment of a representative office, because representative offices do not engage in a banking business and cannot take deposits or make loans. In evaluating an application to establish a representative office under the IBA and Regulation K, the Board will take into account the standards that apply to the establishment of branches and agencies, subject generally to the following considerations. With respect to supervision by home country authorities, a foreign bank that proposes to establish a representative office should be subject to a significant degree of supervision by its home country supervisor. A foreign bank's financial and managerial resources will be reviewed to determine whether its financial condition and performance demonstrate that it is capable of complying with applicable laws and has an operating record that would be consistent with the establishment of a representative office in the United States. Finally, all foreign banks, whether operating through branches, agencies or representative offices, will be required to provide adequate assurances of access to information on the operations of the bank and its affiliates necessary to determine compliance with U.S. laws. The Board has considered the following information with respect to home country supervision of Bank. The People's Bank of China (the "PBOC") is the licensing, regulatory, and supervisory authority for banks and all other financial institutions in China and, as such, is the home country supervisor of Bank. The PBOC, which has authorized Bank to establish the proposed representative office, supervises the foreign and domestic activities of Bank and its subsidiaries. The Board previously has determined, in connection with an application involving another bank from China, the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China ("ICBC"), that ICBC was subject to a significant degree of supervision by the PBOC. The Board has determined that Bank is supervised by the PBOC on substantially the same terms and conditions as ICBC. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that factors relating to the supervision of Bank by its home country supervisor are consistent with approval of the proposed representative office. The Board also has determined that, for purposes of the IBA and Regulation K, Bank engages directly in the business of banking outside of the United States through its operations in China. Bank has provided the Board with the information necessary to assess the application through submissions that address relevant issues. The Board also has taken into account the additional standards set forth in section 7 of the IBA and Regulation K ( see 12 U.S.C. § 3105(d)(3)-(4); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)(2)). As noted above, the PBOC has authorized Bank to establish the proposed representative office. Taking into consideration Bank's record of operations in its home country, its overall financial resources, and its standing with its home country supervisors, the Board also has determined that financial and managerial factors are consistent with approval of the proposed representative office. Bank appears to have the experience and capacity to support the proposed representative office and also has established controls and procedures for the proposed representative office to ensure compliance with U.S. law. Finally, with respect to access to information on Bank's operations, the Board has reviewed the relevant provisions of law in China and has communicated with appropriate government authorities regarding access to information. Bank has committed to make available to the Board such information on the operations of Bank and any of its affiliates that the Board deems necessary to determine and enforce compliance with the IBA, the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956, as amended, and other applicable federal law. To the extent that the provision of such information to the Board may be prohibited or impeded by law, Bank has committed to cooperate with the Board to obtain any necessary consents or waivers that might be required from third parties in connection with disclosure of such information. In addition, subject to certain conditions, the PBOC may share information on Bank's operations with other supervisors, including the Board. In light of the commitments provided by Bank and other facts of record, and subject to the condition described below, the Board concludes that Bank has provided adequate assurances of access to any necessary information the Board may request. On the basis of all the facts of record, and subject to the commitments made by Bank, as well as the terms and conditions set forth in this order, the Board has determined that Bank's application to establish a representative office should be, and hereby is, approved. Should any restrictions on access to information on the operations or activities of Bank or any of its affiliates subsequently interfere with the Board's ability to determine the compliance by Bank or its affiliates with applicable federal statutes, the Board may require termination of any of Bank's direct or indirect activities in the United States. Approval of the application is also specifically conditioned on compliance by Bank with the commitments made in connection with the application and with the conditions in this order. The commitments and conditions referred to above are conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its decision, and may be enforced in proceedings under 12 U.S.C. § 1818 against Bank and its affiliates. By order of the Board of Governors, effective May 14, 1997. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes See 58 Federal Register 6348, 6351 (1993). See Citizens National Bank , 79 Federal Reserve Bulletin 805 (1993). See Industrial and Commercial Bank of China , 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin 212 (1997). One comment was received from Delta Tanning Corporation, North Bergen, New Jersey. The Board has reviewed the information submitted, which involves a commercial dispute with Bank, and determined that the information does not warrant denial of the application. The Board's authority to approve the establishment of the proposed representative office parallels the continuing authority of the State of New York to license offices of a foreign bank. The Board's approval of this application does not supplant the authority of the State of New York and its agent, the New York State Banking Department (the "Department"), to license the proposed representative office of Bank in accordance with any terms or conditions that the Department may impose. Voting for this action: Vice Chair Rivlin and Governors Kelley, Meyer, and Phillips. Absent and not voting: Chairman Greenspan.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today issued proposed amendments to Regulation J to help ease the transition to interstate branching in the check collection area. Comment should be received by July 21 . Comment has already been requested on regulatory proposals to define the location of a depository institution for purposes of maintaining a single reserve account for a multi-district institution and for Federal Reserve membership. Under the proposed amendments, an institution could send checks to any Reserve Bank for collection, but all of its check collection transactions through the Federal Reserve would be reflected in a single account held at its "Administrative Reserve Bank" no matter where the institution has its branches. A copy of the proposed rule is attached. |
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of an Order to Cease and Desist against Kwai Por Au, a former assistant loan officer and institution-affiliated party of the Hang Seng Bank, U.S.A., Division of Marine Midland Bank, New York, New York. Mr. Au, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the order based on his alleged improper lending activities. A copy of the order is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of an Order of Prohibition against Francisco Moncaleano, a former vice president and institution-affiliated party of the Miami agency of Banco Ganadero, S.A., Bogota, Colombia. Mr. Moncaleano, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the order due to his alleged receipt of bribes in connection with certain Banco Ganadero trade financing transactions. A copy of the order is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the applications and notices by Allied Irish Banks, plc, Dublin, Ireland, and First Maryland Bancorp, Baltimore, Maryland, to acquire Dauphin Deposit Corporation, Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, and thereby acquire Dauphin's banking and nonbanking subsidiaries. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Allied Irish Banks, plc Dublin, Ireland First Maryland Bancorp Baltimore, Maryland Order Approving Acquisition of a Bank Holding Company Allied Irish Banks, plc, Dublin, Ireland ("Allied Irish"), and its subsidiary, First Maryland Bancorp, Baltimore, Maryland ("First Maryland") (collectively, "Applicants"), bank holding companies within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), have requested the Board's approval under section 3 of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1842) to acquire Dauphin Deposit Corporation ("Dauphin") and thereby indirectly acquire Dauphin's subsidiary bank, Dauphin Bank and Trust Company ("Dauphin Bank"), both of Harrisburg, Pennsylvania. Applicants also have requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8)) and section 225.24 of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.24) to acquire the nonbanking subsidiaries of Dauphin and thereby engage in the nonbanking activities listed in the Appendix. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (62 Federal Register 16,579 (1997)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the proposal and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in sections 3 and 4 of the BHC Act. Allied Irish, with total consolidated assets equivalent to approximately $43.9 billion, is the largest banking organization in Ireland, and it provides a full range of banking, financial, and related services primarily in Ireland, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Allied Irish operates a branch in New York; through First Maryland, controls three banking subsidiaries in Delaware, Maryland, and Pennsylvania; and engages through other subsidiaries in various nonbanking activities. First Maryland, with total consolidated assets of $10.8 billion, is the 57th largest commercial banking organization in the United States, controlling $7.5 billion in deposits. Allied Irish is the 18th largest commercial banking organization in Pennsylvania, controlling $872.6 million in deposits, representing less than 1 percent of all deposits in commercial banking institutions in the state. Dauphin is the seventh largest commercial banking organization in Pennsylvania, controlling $3.96 billion in deposits, representing approximately 2.9 percent of all deposits in commercial banking institutions in the state. On consummation of the proposal, Allied Irish would become the sixth largest commercial banking organization in Pennsylvania, controlling deposits of $4.8 billion, representing approximately 3.5 percent of all deposits in commercial banking institutions in the state. Interstate Banking Analysis Section 3(d) of the BHC Act, as amended by section 101 of the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act of 1994, allows the Board to approve an application by a bank holding company to acquire a bank located in a state other than the home state of such bank holding company if certain conditions are met. For purposes of the BHC Act, the home state of Allied Irish and First Maryland is Maryland, and Applicants propose to acquire a bank in Pennsylvania. The conditions for an interstate acquisition under section 3(d) are met in this case. In view of all the facts of record, the Board is permitted to approve the proposal under section 3(d) of the BHC Act. Competitive Considerations The BHC Act prohibits the Board from approving an application under section 3 of the BHC Act if the proposal would result in a monopoly or if the effect of the proposal may be substantially to lessen competition in any relevant market, unless the Board finds that the anticompetitive effects of the proposal are clearly outweighed in the public interest by the probable effect of the proposal in meeting the convenience and needs of the community to be served. Allied Irish and Dauphin compete directly in the Hagerstown, Maryland; Lancaster, Pennsylvania; and York, Pennsylvania, banking markets. On consummation of this proposal, those markets would remain moderately concentrated as measured by the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index ("HHI"). After considering the number of competitors that would remain in the market, the resulting market concentration as measured by the HHI, and all other facts of record, the Board has concluded that consummation of this proposal would not have a significantly adverse effect on competition or the concentration of banking resources in any relevant banking market. Certain Supervisory Considerations Under the Foreign Bank Supervision Enhancement Act of 1991, the Board may not approve an application under section 3 of the BHC Act involving a foreign bank unless the bank is "subject to comprehensive supervision or regulation on a consolidated basis by the appropriate authorities in the bank's home country." The Board previously has determined, in an application under the BHC Act, that the Bank of Ireland, Dublin, Ireland, was subject to comprehensive consolidated supervision by its home country authorities. In this case, the Board has determined that Allied Irish is supervised on substantially the same terms and conditions as the Bank of Ireland. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that Allied Irish is subject to comprehensive supervision and regulation on a consolidated basis by its home country supervisor. The BHC Act also requires the Board to determine that the applicant has provided adequate assurances that it will make available to the Board such information on its operations and activities and those of its affiliates that the Board deems appropriate to determine and enforce compliance with the BHC Act. The Board has reviewed the restrictions on disclosure in jurisdictions where Allied Irish has material operations and has communicated with relevant government authorities concerning access to information. Allied Irish has committed that, to the extent not prohibited by applicable law, it will make available to the Board such information on the operations of Allied Irish and any of its affiliates that the Board deems necessary to determine and enforce compliance with the BHC Act, the International Banking Act (12 U.S.C. § 3101 et seq .), and other applicable federal laws. Allied Irish also has committed to cooperate with the Board to obtain any waivers or exemptions that may be necessary in order to enable Allied Irish to make any such information available to the Board. In light of these commitments and other facts of record, the Board has concluded that Allied Irish has provided adequate assurances of access to any necessary information the Board may request. For these reasons, and based on all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that the supervisory factors the Board is required to consider under section 3(c)(3) of the BHC Act are consistent with approval. Financial, Managerial, and Convenience and Needs Considerations In considering the financial and managerial factors in this case, the Board notes that the Central Bank of Ireland has implemented the European Union's capital adequacy directive, which follows the Basle risk-based capital standards with minor variations that conform with local accounting practices. Thus, Allied Irish is subject to capital standards that conform to the Basle Capital Accord. Allied Irish's capital levels comply with those standards and are considered equivalent to the capital that would be required of a United States banking organization. The Board also has considered other aspects of Allied Irish's financial condition, as well as the capital position and other aspects of the financial condition of First Maryland and the other institutions involved in this transaction. The proposed transaction is not expected to have a significant adverse effect on the financial resources of Allied Irish, First Maryland, or the other institutions involved. Allied Irish and First Maryland, and their subsidiary depository institutions, are well-capitalized and expected to remain so on consummation of this proposal. The Board also has considered the size of this acquisition relative to the assets of Allied Irish and First Maryland, the financing for this proposal, and the effect of this proposal on the liquidity position of these institutions. The Board also has carefully considered the managerial resources of Allied Irish, First Maryland, and the other institutions involved in this proposal in light of all the facts of record, including assessments of their managerial resources by United States and Irish banking authorities. Based on the foregoing and all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that considerations relating to the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of Allied Irish, First Maryland, Dauphin, and their respective subsidiaries are consistent with approval of the proposal, as are the other supervisory factors the Board must consider under section 3 of the BHC Act. Convenience and needs considerations, including the records of performance of the banking subsidiaries of Allied Irish and Dauphin under the Community Reinvestment Act (12 U.S.C. § 2903 et seq .) ("CRA"), also are consistent with approval. Nonbanking Activities A. Activities Approved by Regulation The Board previously has determined by regulation that the proposed lending, financial and investment advisory, tax preparation, securities brokerage, riskless principal, private placement, data processing, and credit-related insurance activities, and underwriting and dealing in bank-eligible securities are closely related to banking within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Allied Irish proposes to conduct these activities in accordance with Regulation Y and relevant Board interpretations and orders. B. Underwriting and Dealing in Bank-Ineligible Securities Applicants also have proposed to acquire Dauphin's section 20 subsidiary, Hopper Soliday & Co., Inc., Lancaster, Pennsylvania ("Company"). The Board previously authorized Company to engage in underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities on a limited basis. This authorization was based upon the Board's prior determination that, subject to the prudential framework of limitations established in previous decisions to address the potential for conflicts of interests, unsound banking practices, or other adverse effects, the activities of underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities are so closely related to banking as to be a proper incident thereto within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Allied Irish has committed that Company will conduct the proposed underwriting and dealing activities subject to the framework, including the prudential limitations, established by the Board in the Section 20 Orders. In addition, the Board has determined that the conduct of these securities underwriting and dealing activities is consistent with section 20 of the Glass-Steagall Act (12 U.S.C. § 377), provided that the company engaged in the underwriting and dealing activities derives no more than 25 percent of its total gross revenues from underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities over any two-year period. Allied Irish has committed that Company will conduct its underwriting and dealing activities in bank-ineligible securities subject to the 25-percent revenue test. C. Other Nonbanking Considerations In order to approve this proposal, the Board also must determine that the proposed activities are a proper incident to banking, that is, that the proposed transaction "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public . . . that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices." As part of the Board's evaluation of these factors, the Board considers the financial and managerial resources of the notificant, its subsidiaries, and any company to be acquired, and the effect the transaction would have on such resources. As noted previously, Allied Irish's capital ratios satisfy applicable risk-based standards under the Basle Accord and are considered equivalent to the capital levels that would be required of a United States banking organization. The Board also has reviewed the capitalization of Allied Irish and Company in accordance with the standards set forth in the Section 20 Orders and finds the capitalization of each to be consistent with approval. The determination on the capitalization of Company is based on all the facts of record, including projections of the volume of Company's underwriting and dealing activities in bank-ineligible securities. The Board also has reviewed other aspects of the financial condition and resources of Allied Irish, Dauphin, and their respective subsidiaries, including the effect of this proposal on the financial condition and resources of these entities. On the basis of its supervisory experience with Applicants, Dauphin, and Company, the commitments provided in this case, and the proposed management of Company, the Board also has determined that Applicants and Company have established policies and procedures to ensure compliance with this order and the Section 20 Orders, including computer, audit, and accounting systems, internal risk management controls, and the necessary operational and managerial infrastructure. The Board also has reviewed other aspects of the managerial resources of the entities involved in this proposal, including the expected effect of this proposal on such resources. On the basis of the foregoing and all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that financial and managerial considerations are consistent with approval of this proposal. The Board expects that the proposed acquisition would provide added convenience to customers of Dauphin and Allied Irish. Allied Irish also has indicated that the proposed transaction would result in operational efficiencies that would allow it to be a more effective competitor and thereby provide improved services at a lower cost to its customers. The Board also has carefully considered the competitive effects of the proposed acquisition of Dauphin's nonbanking subsidiaries. Allied Irish operates nonbanking subsidiaries that compete with certain nonbanking subsidiaries of Dauphin. In each case, the markets for these nonbanking services are unconcentrated, and there are numerous providers of these services. As a result, consummation of this proposal would have a de minimis effect on competition for these services, and the Board has concluded that the proposal would not result in a significantly adverse effect on competition in any relevant market. Under the framework established in this and prior decisions, including the prudential limitations established by the Board in the Section 20 Orders, moreover, consummation of the proposal is not likely to result in any significant adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices that would outweigh the public benefits of this proposal. Accordingly, based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the balance of public benefits that it must consider under the proper incident to banking standard of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act is favorable and consistent with approval of the proposal. Conclusion Based on the foregoing and all the other facts of record, the Board has determined that the applications and notices should be, and hereby are, approved. The Board's approval is specifically conditioned on compliance by Allied Irish with all the commitments made in connection with this proposal and with the conditions stated or referred to in this order, and on receipt by Applicants of all necessary approvals from state and federal regulators and other authorities. The Board's determination on the nonbanking activities is also subject to all the terms and conditions set forth in Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.25(c) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.7 and 225.25(c)), and to the Board's authority to require such modification or termination of the activities of a bank holding company or any of its subsidiaries as the Board finds necessary to ensure compliance with, and to prevent evasion of, the provisions of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders issued thereunder. The commitments and conditions relied on by the Board in reaching this decision are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision, and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. If any restrictions on access to information on the operations or activities of Allied Irish and its affiliates subsequently interfere with the Board's ability to obtain information to determine the compliance by Allied Irish and its affiliates with applicable federal statutes, the Board may require termination of any of Allied Irish's direct or indirect activities in the United States. The acquisition of Dauphin shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day following the effective date of this order, and the proposal shall not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective May 19, 1997. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board APPENDIX Nonbanking Subsidiaries and Activities: (1) Dauphin Life Insurance Company, Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, which would engage in reinsuring life, health, and accident insurance directly related to extensions of credit made by Dauphin Bank or other subsidiaries of Allied Irish, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(11)(i) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(11)(i)); (2) Loans USA, Incorporated, Pasadena, Maryland ("Loans USA"), which would engage in: (a) making, acquiring, brokering, or servicing loans or other extensions of credit (including factoring, issuing letters of credit, and accepting drafts) for its own account or for the account of others, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(1) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(1)); (b) providing tax preparation services to any person, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(6)(vi) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(6)(vi)); (c) providing data processing and data transmission services, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(14) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(14)); (d) engaging in insurance agency and underwriting activities with respect to life, health, and accident insurance directly related to extensions of credit made by Loans USA or other subsidiaries of Allied Irish, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(11)(i) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(11)(i)); and (e) engaging in insurance agency activities with respect to collateral insurance directly related to extensions of credit made by Loans USA or other finance company subsidiaries of Allied Irish, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(11)(ii) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(11)(ii)); and (3) Hopper Soliday & Co., Inc., Lancaster, Pennsylvania, which would engage in: (a) providing investment and financial advisory services to any person, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(6) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(6)); (b) providing discount and full-service securities brokerage services, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(7)(i) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(7)(i)); (c) buying and selling all types of securities on the order of customers as a riskless principal, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(7)(ii) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(7)(ii)); (d) acting as agent in the private placement of securities, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(7)(iii) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(7)(iii)); (e) underwriting and dealing in obligations of the United States, general obligations of states and their political subdivisions, and other obligations that state member banks of the Federal Reserve System may be authorized to underwrite and deal in under 12 U.S.C. §§ 24 and 335 ("bank-eligible securities"), pursuant to section 225.28(b)(8)(i) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(8)(i)); and (f) underwriting and dealing, on a limited basis, in all types of debt and equity securities other than securities issued by open-end investment companies ("bank-ineligible securities"). See Dauphin Deposit Corporation , 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 672 (1991). Applicants also propose to acquire certain inactive nonbanking subsidiaries of Dauphin. Footnotes Applicants also have requested the Board's approval to exercise an option to purchase up to 19.9 percent of the voting shares of Dauphin. The option would terminate on consummation of this proposal. Asset and national deposit and ranking data are as of December 31, 1996. State deposit and ranking data are as of June 30, 1996. Pub. L. No. 103-328, 108 Stat. 2338 (1994). A bank holding company's home state is the state in which the operations of the bank holding company's banking subsidiaries were principally conducted on July 1, 1966, or the date on which the company became a bank holding company, whichever is later. See 12 U.S.C. §§ 1842(d)(1)(A) and (B) and 1842(d)(2)(A) and (B). Allied Irish and First Maryland are adequately capitalized and adequately managed. In addition, on consummation of the proposal, Allied Irish and First Maryland would control less than 10 percent of the total amount of deposits of insured depository institutions in the United States and less than 30 percent of the total amount of deposits of insured depository institutions in Pennsylvania. Pennsylvania does not have a minimum age requirement or a statewide concentration limit. All other requirements of section 3(d) of the BHC Act also would be met on consummation of the proposal. In evaluating the competitive effects of this proposal, the Board has carefully considered comments received from an individual ("Protestant") and a petition submitted by a number of individuals contending that the proposal would have adverse competitive effects in the area between Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, and Baltimore, Maryland, identified as the "Interstate 83 corridor," and adverse effects on small Pennsylvania banks. As indicated below, the Board has concluded that the relevant geographic banking markets for analyzing the competitive effects of this proposal are the Hagerstown, Lancaster, and York banking markets. In reaching this decision, the Board has, as in previous cases, considered the location of the relevant banks, worker commuter patterns (as indicated by census data), and other indicia of economic integration and the transmission of competitive forces among large and small depository institutions. See "Third District Banking Markets," Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia (August 1995). See also Chemical Banking Corporation , 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 239, 241 (1996). See United States v. Philadelphia National Bank , 374 U.S. 321, 357 (1963); United States v. Phillipsburg National Bank , 399 U.S. 350 (1969). The Hagerstown, Maryland, banking market is approximated by the Hagerstown Rand McNally Area ("RMA"), which includes portions of Maryland, Pennsylvania, West Virginia, and the portions of Washington County, Maryland, not in the Hagerstown RMA. The Lancaster, Pennsylvania, banking market is approximated by Lancaster County, Pennsylvania. The York, Pennsylvania, banking market is approximated by Adams and York Counties, both in Pennsylvania. Under the revised Department of Justice Merger Guidelines, 49 Federal Register 26,823 (June 29, 1984), a market in which the post-merger HHI is between 1000 and 1800 is considered moderately concentrated. The Justice Department has informed the Board that a bank merger or acquisition generally will not be challenged (in the absence of other factors indicating anticompetitive effects) unless the post-merger HHI is at least 1800 and the merger or acquisition increases the HHI by at least 200 points. The Justice Department has stated that the higher than normal threshold for an increase in the HHI when screening bank mergers and acquisitions for anticompetitive effects implicitly recognizes the competitive effect of limited-purpose lenders and other nondepository financial entities. On consummation of this transaction, the HHI in the relevant banking markets would increase as follows: Hagerstown (12 points to 1375), Lancaster (8 points to 1270), and York (633 points to 1654). Pub. L. No. 102-242, § 201 et seq. , 105 Stat. 2286 (1991). 12 U.S.C. § 1842(c)(3)(B). As provided in Regulation Y, the Board determines whether a foreign bank is subject to consolidated home country supervision under the standards set forth in Regulation K (International Banking Operations). 12 C.F.R. 225.13(a)(4). Regulation K provides that a foreign bank may be considered subject to consolidated supervision if the Board determines that the bank is supervised or regulated in such a manner that its home country supervisor receives sufficient information on the worldwide operations of the foreign bank, including the relationship of the bank to its affiliates, to assess the foreign bank's overall financial condition and compliance with law and regulation. 12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)(1)(ii). See Bank of Ireland , 81 Federal Reserve Bulletin 511 (1995). In previous cases, the Board has reviewed relevant provisions of confidentiality, secrecy, and other laws in jurisdictions in which Allied Irish has material operations. See Bank of Ireland , 81 Federal Reserve Bulletin 511 (1995); HSBC Holdings plc , 81 Federal Reserve Bulletin 1037 (1995). In considering the financial and managerial factors in this case, the Board has carefully weighed comments by Protestant, including comments that: (1) Dauphin has invested in technology, training programs, and other items to remain an independent financial institution; (2) officials and representatives of Dauphin and Allied Irish have made inconsistent statements about the competitive and other factors in this case; and (3) Protestant's company incurred substantial financial losses because Farmers Bank, FSB, Baltimore, Maryland, a thrift institution sold by Dauphin in 1994, violated state law by failing to record documentation of the thrift's loan to the company. The Board has considered these contentions in light of all the facts of record, including the alleged inconsistent statements themselves and supervisory reports of examination assessing the financial and managerial resources of Allied Irish, Dauphin, and their respective subsidiaries. These examination reports have reviewed, among other matters, the loan documentation policies and procedures of the relevant institutions. In considering the convenience and needs factor in this case, the Board has carefully weighed comments by Protestant that Dauphin Bank's customer service would become less personal after the acquisition. The Board has reviewed this contention in light of all the facts of record, including CRA performance examinations of the relevant institutions. The Board notes that Allied Irish's lead subsidiary bank, First National Bank of Maryland, Baltimore, Maryland, received an "outstanding" rating in its most recent examination for CRA performance from its primary federal supervisor, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, as of October 7, 1996. The Board also notes that Allied Irish has not proposed to change the management of Dauphin and intends to retain certain senior officers and directors. Allied Irish has indicated that the proposed transaction would improve the ability of the combined organization to meet the business credit needs of the communities it serves through higher aggregate credit limits and improved underwriting and asset syndication capabilities, among other things. See 12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(1), (6), (7), (8), (11), and (14). See Dauphin Deposit Corporation , 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 672 (1991). Company is registered as a broker-dealer with the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. § 78a et seq. ) and is a member of the National Association of Securities Dealers, Inc. ("NASD"). Accordingly, Company is subject to the recordkeeping and reporting obligations, fiduciary standards, and other requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the SEC, and the NASD. See Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, et al. , 76 Federal Reserve Bulletin 158 (1990); J.P. Morgan & Co. Incorporated, et al. , 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 192 (1989), aff'd sub nom. Securities Industries Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System , 900 F.2d 360 (D.C. Cir. 1990); Citicorp, et al. , 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 473 (1987), aff'd sub nom. Securities Industry Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System , 839 F.2d 47 (2d Cir. 1988), cert. denied , 486 U.S. 1059 (1988); as modified by Review of Restrictions on Director, Officer and Employee Interlocks, Cross-Marketing Activities, and the Purchase and Sale of Financial Assets Between a Section 20 Subsidiary and an Affiliated Bank or Thrift , 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 113 (1996) (collectively, "Section 20 Orders"). See Revenue Limit on Bank-Ineligible Activities of Subsidiaries of Bank Holding Companies Engaged in Underwriting and Dealing in Securities , 61 Federal Register 68,750 (1996). See also Section 20 Orders. Compliance with the 25-percent revenue limitation will be calculated in accordance with the method stated in the Section 20 Orders, as modified by the Order Approving Modifications to the Section 20 Orders , 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 751 (1989); and 10-Percent Revenue Limit on Bank-Ineligible Activities of Subsidiaries of Bank Holding Companies Engaged in Underwriting and Dealing in Securities , 61 Federal Register 48,953 (1996) (collectively, "Modification Orders"). The Board notes that Company has not adopted the Board's alternative indexed-revenue test to measure compliance with the revenue limitation on bank-ineligible securities activities, and, absent such election, will continue to employ the Board's standard 25-percent revenue test. Company also may engage in activities that are necessary incidents to the proposed underwriting and dealing activities. Unless Company receives specific approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act to conduct the activities independently, any revenues from the incidental activities must be counted as ineligible revenues subject to the Board's revenue limitation. See 12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8). See 12 C.F.R. 225.26; see also The Fuji Bank, Limited , 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 94 (1989); Bayerische Vereinsbank AG, 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 155 (1987). Protestant has requested that the Board hold a public hearing or meeting on all aspects of this proposal, particularly the effect of the transaction on small banks in Pennsylvania. A number of other individuals have signed a petition to join this request. Section 3(b) of the BHC Act does not require the Board to hold a public hearing on an application unless the appropriate supervisory authority for the bank to be acquired makes a timely written recommendation of denial of the application. In this case, the Board has not received such a recommendation from any state or federal supervisory authority. Under its rules, the Board also may, in its discretion, hold a public hearing or meeting on an application or notice to clarify factual issues related to the proposal and to provide an opportunity for testimony. See 12 C.F.R. 225.25(a)(2), 262.3(e), and 262.25(d). The Board has carefully considered Protestant's request for a hearing or meeting in light of all the facts of record. In the Board's view, Protestant has had ample opportunity to submit views, and has, in fact, provided written submissions that have been considered by the Board in acting on this proposal. Protestant's request fails to demonstrate why the written submissions do not adequately present his allegations. After a careful review of all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that Protestant's request fails to identify any genuine dispute about facts that are material to the Board's decision or any other basis on which a hearing or meeting would be warranted. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that a public hearing or meeting is not necessary to clarify the factual record in the proposal and is not otherwise warranted in this case. Accordingly, the request for a public hearing or meeting on the proposal is hereby denied. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Phillips, and Meyer. This entity is a joint venture in which Dauphin holds a 33.33 percent equity interest.
For immediate release |
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Marin National Bancorp, San Rafael, California, and the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. A copy of the written agreement is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of consent orders of Assessment of Civil Money Penalties against Michael L. Riddle, John Averett, Park Jones, and T. Stuart Ducote, former officers and directors of Provident Bancorp of Texas, Inc., Dallas, Texas, formerly a bank holding company. Messrs. Riddle, Averett, Jones, and Ducote, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Orders in settlement of charges brought by the Board in December 1995. Those charges alleged that Messrs. Riddle, Averett, Jones, and Ducote participated in violations of the Change in Bank Control Act in connection with the financing related to the acquisition of control of Provident Bancorp by other individuals between December 1990 and February 1991. The Board's Orders require that Mr. Riddle and Mr. Averett pay civil money penalties of $100,000 in the aggregate, that Mr. Jones pay a civil money penalty of $20,000, and that Mr. Ducote pay a civil money penalty of $1,500. Copies of the Board's orders are attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application of Banco Popular de Puerto Rico, Hato Rey, under section 18(c) of the Bank Merger Act and section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act to merge with Roig Commercial Bank, Humacao, both of Puerto Rico, and to establish branches at the current locations of the main office and branches of Roig Commercial Bank. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Banco Popular de Puerto Rico Hato Rey, Puerto Rico Order Approving the Merger of Banks and Establishment of Bank Branches Banco Popular de Puerto Rico, Hato Rey ("Banco Popular"), a state member bank, has requested the Board's approval under section 18(c) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1828(c)) (the "Bank Merger Act") to merge with Roig Commercial Bank, Humacao ("Roig"), both in Puerto Rico. Banco Popular also has requested the Board's approval under section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 321) to establish branches at the current locations of the main office and branches of Roig. Notice of the application, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been given in accordance with the Bank Merger Act and the Board's Rules of Procedure (12 C.F.R. 262.3(b)). As required by the Bank Merger Act, reports on the competitive effects of the merger were requested from the United States Attorney General, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the application and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in the Bank Merger Act and section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act. Banco Popular, with total assets of approximately $14 billion, is the largest commercial banking organization in Puerto Rico, controlling deposits of approximately $8.1 billion, representing 33.8 percent of total deposits in commercial banks in the commonwealth. Roig, with total assets of approximately $888 million, is the tenth largest commercial banking organization in Puerto Rico, controlling deposits of approximately $647 million, representing 2.7 percent of total deposits in commercial banks in the commonwealth. On consummation of the proposal, Banco Popular would remain the largest commercial banking organization in Puerto Rico, controlling deposits of approximately $8.8 billion, representing 36.5 percent of total deposits in commercial banks in the commonwealth. Competitive Considerations The Bank Merger Act prohibits the Board from approving an application if the proposal would result in a monopoly or if the effect of the proposal may be substantially to lessen competition in any relevant market, unless the Board finds that the anticompetitive effects of the proposal are clearly outweighed in the public interest by the probable effect of the proposal in meeting the convenience and needs of the community to be served. Banco Popular and Roig compete directly in the San Juan, Puerto Rico, banking market. Banco Popular is the largest depository institution in the market, controlling approximately $6.8 billion of deposits, representing 32.8 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in the market ("market deposits"). Roig is the eighth largest depository institution in the market, controlling approximately $647 million of deposits, representing 3.1 percent of market deposits. On consummation of the proposal, Banco Popular would remain the largest depository institution in the San Juan banking market, controlling approximately $7.5 billion of deposits, representing 35.9 percent of market deposits. The Board has carefully reviewed the competitive effects of the proposal in the market in light of all the facts of record, including the number of competitors that would remain in the market, the characteristics of the market, and the projected increase in the concentration of market deposits, as measured by the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index ("HHI") under the Department of Justice Merger Guidelines ("DOJ Guidelines"). The HHI in the San Juan banking market would increase by 203 points to 1,950. Fifteen commercial banks and two thrifts would remain in the market following consummation of the proposal. In addition, more than 71 savings and credit union cooperative societies ("cooperatives") compete in the San Juan banking market, of which 30 have more than $20 million of deposits. The Board has previously recognized that cooperatives are significant competitors of commercial banks in Puerto Rico. If cooperatives are factored into the calculation of the market indexes, the proposal does not exceed the thresholds in the DOJ Guidelines in the San Juan banking market. In addition, the Department of Justice has reviewed the proposal and advised the Board that consummation of the proposal would not be likely to have any significantly adverse competitive effect in the San Juan banking market or in any other relevant banking markets. The Puerto Rico banking commissioner and the other federal banking agencies also have not objected to the proposal. Based on all the facts of record, and for the reasons discussed in this order, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposal would not have a significantly adverse effect on competition or the concentration of banking resources in any relevant banking market. Other Factors The Bank Merger Act also requires the Board to consider the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the existing and proposed institutions and the convenience and needs of the community to be served. The Board has carefully considered these factors in light of all the facts of record. The facts of record include supervisory reports of examination assessing the financial and managerial resources of the organizations and their performance under the Community Reinvestment Act, and financial and other information provided by Banco Popular. Based on these and all other facts of record, the Board concludes that all the supervisory factors, and all considerations related to the convenience and needs of the community to be served, are consistent with approval under the Bank Merger Act. The Board also concludes that all the factors that must be considered under the Federal Reserve Act are consistent with approval. Conclusion Based on the foregoing and all the facts of record, the Board has determined that this application should be, and hereby is, approved. The Board's approval of the proposal is conditioned on compliance by Banco Popular with all the commitments made in connection with this application. The commitments and conditions referred to in this order shall be deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its finding and decision, and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The proposed merger shall not be consummated before the fifteenth day after the effective date of this order, or later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective May 27, 1997. (signed) William W. Wiles William W. Wiles Secretary of the Board Appendix Branches to be established by Banco Popular de Puerto Rico (1) Road 2, Km. 11.9 (Service Road), Bayamï¿½n (2) Road 1, Km. 32.9, Caguas (3) Sixty-fifth Infantry Avenue, Km. 10.2, Carolina (4) 10 Pedro Mï¿½rquez Street, Culebra (5) Garrido Morales and Victoria Streets, Fajardo (6) 55 Antonio Lï¿½pez, Humacao (7) Carreras & Georgetti Streets, Humacao (8) 55 Font Martelo Avenue, Centro Comercial, Humacao (9) Palmanova Condominium, Palmas del Mar, Humacao (10) Road 3, Km. 81.6, Vista del Rio Plaza, Humacao (11) Almodovar & Delfaus Streets, Juncos (12) 63 J.C. Barbosa Street, Las Piedras (13) 64 San Patricio, Loï¿½za (14) Road 3, Km. 36.2, Plaza del Oriente, Luquillo (15) 1 Santiago Iglesias, Maunabo (16) 19 Juan R. Garzot, Naguabo (17) Road 3, Km. 22.2, Plaza del Yunque, Rio Grande (18) Arzuaga & First Streets, San Juan (19) 1472 Ashford Avenue, San Juan (20) 355 De Diego Avenue, Stop 22, San Juan (21) 1500 F.D. Roosevelt Avenue, San Juan (22) 269 Ponce de Leï¿½n Avenue, San Juan (23) 1600 Ponce de Leï¿½n Avenue, Stop 23, San Juan (24) Tetuï¿½n & Cruz Streets, San Juan (25) 1 Degetau Street, Yabucoa Footnotes The locations of the branches that Banco Popular proposes to establish are listed in the Appendix. Asset and deposit data are as of December 31, 1996. 12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1828(c)(5)(b). Banco Popular contends that the relevant banking market is the entire island of Puerto Rico. The Board recently considered the proper delineation of banking markets in Puerto Rico, including the San Juan banking market. See Statement by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Regarding the Application of Banco Santander, S.A. , 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 833 (1996) (" Statement "). For the reasons discussed in the Statement , which are incorporated herein, the Board concludes that the relevant banking market to assess the competitive effects of the proposal is the San Juan banking market. The San Juan banking market consists of the San Juan-Caguas-Arecibo Consolidated Metropolitan Statistical Area and the municipalities of Aibonito, Barranquitas, Ciales, Jayuya, Lares, Maunabo, Orocovis, Quebradillas, Utuado, and Vieques. In this context, market deposits include deposits at commercial banks and savings and loan institutions. Market share data are based on calculations in which the deposits of thrift institutions are included at 50 percent. The Board previously has indicated that thrift institutions have become, or have the potential to become, significant competitors of commercial banks. See Midwest Financial Group , 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 386 (1989); National City Corporation , 70 Federal Reserve Bulletin 743 (1984). Thus, the Board has regularly included thrift deposits in the calculation of market share on a 50-percent weighted basis. See, e.g., First Hawaiian, Inc. , 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 52 (1991). Under the revised DOJ Guidelines, 49 Federal Register 26,823 (June 29, 1984), a market in which the post-merger HHI is more than 1800 is considered highly concentrated. The Department of Justice has informed the Board that a bank merger or acquisition generally will not be challenged (in the absence of other factors indicating anticompetitive effects) unless the post-merger HHI is at least 1800 and the merger increases the HHI by more than 200 points. The Department of Justice has stated that the higher than normal HHI thresholds for screening bank mergers for anticompetitive effects implicitly recognizes the competitive effect of limited-purpose lenders and other non-depository financial entities. Deposit data for cooperatives are as of December 31, 1996. Cooperatives with less than $1 million of deposits have not been included in this analysis. For a detailed discussion of the activities of cooperatives, incorporated herein by reference, see BanPonce Corporation , 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 43, 45 (1991); Statement at 834-835. Based on the asset composition of cooperatives, the Board believes that cooperatives are at least as significant as thrift institutions as competitors of commercial banks, and should be weighted at 50 percent in the San Juan banking market. See Statement at 835 n.13. If deposits of cooperatives are weighted at 50 percent, the HHI for the San Juan banking market would increase by 188 points to 1,613. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors, Kelley, Phillips, and Meyer.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the applications of Westamerica Bank, San Rafael, California, to merge with ValliWide Bank, Fresno, California, and to establish branches at the former branch locations of ValliWide Bank. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Westamerica Bank San Rafael, California Order Approving the Merger of Banks and Establishment of Bank Branches Westamerica Bank, San Rafael, California, a state member bank, has requested the Board's approval under section 18(c) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. § 1828(c)) (the "Bank Merger Act") to merge with ValliWide Bank, Fresno, California. Westamerica Bank also has requested the Board's approval under section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. § 321) to establish branches at the former branch locations of ValliWide Bank. Notice of this proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been given in accordance with the Bank Merger Act and the Board's Rules of Procedure (12 C.F.R. 262.3(b)). As required by the Bank Merger Act, reports on the competitive effects of the merger were requested from the United States Attorney General and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the applications and all the facts of record in light of the factors set forth in the Bank Merger Act and section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act. Westamerica Bank and ValliWide Bank are wholly owned subsidiaries of Westamerica Bancorporation, San Rafael, California ("Westamerica"), and the proposal represents a reorganization of two affiliated banks. Westamerica, with total assets of $2.5 billion, is the tenth largest commercial banking organization in California, controlling deposits of approximately $3.2 billion, representing 1.4 percent of the total deposits in commercial banking organizations in California. Convenience and Needs Factor The Board has carefully considered the effect of the proposal on the convenience and needs of the community to be served in light of all the facts of record. In particular, the Board has considered the performance record of Westamerica Bank and ValliWide Bank and the programs for helping serve the banking needs of the community as explained in the Board's order approving the acquisition of ValliCorp Holding, Inc., Fresno, California, by Westamerica, and the fact that the transaction under review in this case represents a reorganization of affiliated institutions. The Board also has considered that Westamerica Bank received an "outstanding" rating at the most recent examination of its CRA performance by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco ("Reserve Bank"), as of May 13, 1996 ("Westamerica Examination"). ValliWide Bank also received an "outstanding" rating for CRA performance at its most recent examination by the Reserve Bank, as of January 22, 1996 ("ValliWide Examination"). Westamerica has indicated that it plans to introduce many of its Community Access Loan ("CAL") products in the communities currently served by ValliWide Bank. Several of those programs are designed for low-income borrowers and include the CAL Program, which provides home equity loans, automobile loans, and home improvement loans with lower monthly payment terms. Westamerica plans that the merged bank would offer the CAL PAL Loan program, which provides residential mortgage loans with flexible underwriting criteria, lower down payments, and no private mortgage insurance, and the CAL Business Loan Program, which offers "microenterprise" or "incubator" business loans to minorities and women through local agencies that also provide technical support to the borrowers. As explained more fully in the Westamerica Order , Westamerica has implemented several programs that help serve the banking needs of the community, including low- and moderate-income neighborhoods. After the proposed merger, Westamerica would operate approximately 85 branches throughout California. As part of its review of the applications, the Board also has considered submissions by commenters ("Commenters") stating that the proposed closing of certain branches of ValliWide Bank would reduce access to banking facilities in several communities and adversely affect the local businesses and residents that currently rely on these branches. As noted in the Westamerica Order , examiners have reviewed Westamerica's branch closing policy, and found the policy to be effective. The California Superintendent of Banks ("Superintendent") has reviewed the proposed branch closings and has approved the closure of these branches after reviewing the potential effect on the public convenience in the areas served by the branches in light of substantially similar comments submitted to the Superintendent. The Board notes that Federal banking law addresses branch closing by specifically requiring an insured depository to provide notice to the appropriate regulatory agency prior to closing a branch. The statute, however, does not authorize the federal regulators to prevent the closing of any branch. Similarly, the Bank Merger Act does not make approval of a proposal contingent on an applicant maintaining open all branch offices of the resulting institution. The availability of bank services and offices after a merger must be reviewed in the context of the effect of the merger on the convenience and needs of communities served by the institution and is one of several factors the Board must consider in assessing the effect of the acquisition on the convenience and needs of the communities to be served. Four of the branches to be closed, which serve the communities of Caruthers, Coalinga, Hanford and Lemoore, are located in middle income census tracts, and each affected community would continue to be served by at least one insured depository institution in the community. The four other branches that are proposed to be closed are located in moderate-income census tracts in the communities of Lamont, Dos Palos, Firebaugh, and Mendota. Lamont would continue to be served by a savings association in that community, and several insured depository institutions that are a short distance from Lamont. Dos Palos and Firebaugh would also have an insured depository institution in each community. The Board also notes that a California state-chartered bank has provided notice to the Superintendent of its intention to open a branch in Firebaugh. Although no other depository institution would remain in Mendota, an on-site inspection conducted by the Reserve Bank indicates a substantial degree of economic integration between the communities of Mendota and Firebaugh, which are located within eight miles of each other in a rural area in which residents travel to obtain necessary services. As noted, Firebaugh is currently served by one insured depository institution located in the community, and another insured depository institution has filed with the Superintendent its intent to establish a branch in that community. The Board also has considered confidential financial information provided by Westamerica regarding the profitability of the branches proposed to be closed. These data show that these ValliWide Bank branches have been unprofitable for several years. The Board has carefully considered the proposed closing of each of these branches in light of these and all the other facts of record including concerns that residents will, in some cases, have to travel a greater distance for banking services if certain ValliWide Bank branches are closed. The Board believes that the CRA performance record of Westamerica Bank and ValliWide Bank, the programs Westamerica proposes to offer through the merged institution, the availability of banking services from other insured depository institutions, the unprofitability of the branches, other benefits offered by the merger, and the other facts indicate that, on the whole, the convenience and needs of the community weigh in favor of approval of this proposal. Other Factors The Bank Merger Act provides that the Board may not approve an application if the effect of the acquisition of another bank is to substantially lessen competition in any section of the country unless the Board finds that the anticompetitive effects of the proposal are clearly outweighed in the public interest by the probable effect of the proposal in meeting the convenience and needs of the community. The proposal represents a reorganization of Westamerica's existing banking operations. Based on all the facts of record, consummation of the proposal would not have any significantly adverse effects on competition or concentration of banking resources in any relevant banking market. The Bank Merger Act also requires the Board to consider the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the existing and proposed institutions. The Board notes that the proposal represents a corporate reorganization for Westamerica and its subsidiaries, which would result in a more efficient organization and does not involve an expenditure of additional resources. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that all supervisory factors under the Bank Merger Act are consistent with approval. The Board also concludes that all factors required to be considered under the Federal Reserve Act are consistent with approval. Conclusion Based on the foregoing and all the facts of record, the Board has determined that these applications should be, and hereby are, approved. The Board's approval of this proposal is conditioned on compliance by Westamerica Bank with the commitments made in connection with this proposal. For purposes of this action, the commitments and conditions relied on in reaching this decision are both conditions imposed in writing by the Board and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The merger of Westamerica Bank and ValliWide Bank may not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day following the effective date of this order, and the proposal may not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective May 27, 1997. (signed) William W. Wiles William W. Wiles Secretary of the Board Appendix Branch Offices of Valliwide Bank to be established by Westamerica Bank : 1255 Grand Avenue, Arroyo Grande, California 93420 540 Wall Street, Auburn, California 95603 1810 Chester Avenue, Bakersfield, California 93302 101 Main Street, Buttonwillow, California 93026 1835 Shaw Avenue, Clovis, California 93612 1172 E. Shaw Avenue, Fresno, California 93755 790 W. Shaw Avenue, Fresno, California 93755 1315 Van Ness Avenue, Fresno, California 93721 3006 W. Bullard Avenue, Fresno, California 93711 10375 Brunswick Boulevard, Grass Valley, California 95645 400 N. Irwin Street, Hanford, California 93230 36582 Dinero Way, Huron, California 93234 215 S. Madera Road, Kerman, California 93630 27 Big Blue Road, Kernville, California 93283 1400 Draper Street, Kingsburg, California 92631 6100 Lake Isabella Road, Lake Isabella, California 93240 401 W. Yosemite Avenue, Madera, California 93637 1666 'N' Street, Merced, California 95341 310 Morro Bay Boulevard, Morro Bay, California 93442 126 W. F Street, Oakdale, California 95361 1204 Spring Street, Paso Robles, California 93446 2893 Sunrise Boulevard, Rancho Cordova, California 95742 545 Higuera Street, San Luis Obispo, California 93401 1601 Seventh Street, Sanger, California 93657 3700 McCall Avenue, Selma, California 93662 600 James Street, Shafter, California 93263 172 W. Stockton Rd., Sonora, California 95370 14729 Mono Way, Sonora, California 95370 811 Center Street, Taft, California 93283 255 E. King Avenue, Tulare, California 93274 701 W. Main Street, Visalia, California 93291 100 W. Court Street, Woodland, California 95695
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application of Southern National Corporation, Winston-Salem, North Carolina, to merge with United Carolina Bancshares Corporation, Whiteville, North Carolina, and thereby acquire United Carolina Bank, Whiteville, North Carolina, and United Carolina Bank of South Carolina, Greer, South Carolina. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action together with the Dissenting Statement of Vice Chair Rivlin and Governor Meyer. Southern National Corporation Winston-Salem, North Carolina Order Approving the Merger of Bank Holding Companies Southern National Corporation, Winston-Salem, North Carolina ("Southern"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 3 of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1842) to merge with United Carolina Bancshares Corporation, Whiteville, North Carolina ("United Carolina"), and thereby acquire United Carolina Bank, Whiteville, North Carolina, and United Carolina Bank of South Carolina, Greer, South Carolina. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (62 Federal Register 10,271 (1997)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the application and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 3 of the BHC Act. Southern is the third largest depository institution in North Carolina, controlling deposits of $11.1 billion, representing 14.5 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in that state, and is the third largest depository institution in South Carolina, controlling deposits of $2.89 billion, representing 9.4 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in the state. United Carolina is the eighth largest depository institution in North Carolina, controlling deposits of $3.4 billion, representing 4.4 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in that state, and is the fourteenth largest depository institution in South Carolina, controlling deposits of $332 million, representing 1.1 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in that state. On consummation of this proposal and all proposed divestitures, totalling $529.5 million, Southern would become the largest depository institution in North Carolina, controlling 18.2 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in that state, and would remain the third largest depository institution in South Carolina, controlling 10.5 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in that state. Interstate Analysis Section 3(d) of the BHC Act, as amended by Section 101 of the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act of 1994, allows the Board to approve an application by a bank holding company to acquire control of a bank located in a state other than the home state of such bank holding company, if certain conditions are met. For purposes of the BHC Act, the home state of Southern is North Carolina, and Southern proposes to acquire a bank in South Carolina. The conditions for an interstate acquisition enumerated in section 3(d) are met in this case, and the Board is permitted to approve this proposal under section 3(d) of the BHC Act. Competitive Considerations The BHC Act prohibits the Board from approving an application under section 3 of the BHC Act if the proposal would result in a monopoly, or would substantially lessen competition in any relevant banking market, unless the Board finds that the anticompetitive effects of the proposal are clearly outweighed in the public interest by the probable effect of the proposal in meeting the convenience and needs of the community to be served. Southern and United Carolina compete directly in 22 banking markets in North Carolina and 3 banking markets in South Carolina. The Board has carefully reviewed the competitive effects of the proposal in these banking markets in light of all the facts of record, including the number of competitors that would remain in the markets, the characteristics of the markets, the projected increase in the concentration of total deposits in depository institutions in the markets ("market deposits") as measured by the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index ("HHI") under the Department of Justice Merger Guidelines ("DOJ Guidelines"), and commitments made by Southern to divest certain branches. Consummation of the proposal, without divestitures, would be consistent with the DOJ Guidelines in seven banking markets in North Carolina and all three of the banking markets in South Carolina. In order to mitigate the potential anticompetitive effects of the proposal in other markets, Southern has committed to make a number of divestitures. With the proposed divestitures, the concentration levels in eight additional North Carolina banking markets would be consistent with the DOJ Guidelines following consummation of the proposal. The divested branches hold deposits of approximately $521.9 million, which represents 14 percent of the total deposits held by United Carolina. In the seven remaining North Carolina banking markets, consummation of the proposal, adjusted to take account of proposed divestitures in these markets, would exceed the DOJ Guidelines, as measured by the HHI. The Board has previously indicated that HHI levels are only guidelines that are used by the Board, the Department of Justice, and other banking agencies to help identify cases in which a more detailed competitive analysis is appropriate to assure that the proposal would not have a significantly adverse effect on competition in any relevant market. A proposal that fails to pass the HHI market screen may, nonetheless, be approved because other information may indicate that the proposal would not have a significantly adverse effect on competition. The Board believes that a number of additional factors in these seven banking markets indicate that the increase in concentration levels, as measured by the HHI, tends to overstate the competitive effects of this proposal. The mitigating factors in two of these markets are discussed in Appendix C. The remaining five North Carolina banking markets, which include banking markets with significant increases in the HHI or in the resulting post-merger HHIs, are discussed below. Columbus County Banking Market United Carolina is the largest of the five depository institutions in the Columbus County banking market, and controls deposits of $336.2 million, representing 60.7 percent of market deposits. Southern is the second largest depository institution in the market, and controls deposits of $105.8 million, representing 19 percent of market deposits. In order to mitigate the competitive effects in this market, Southern has committed to divest three branches, representing approximately 16 percent of market deposits, to an out-of-market competitor. After consummation of the proposal and the proposed divestiture, Southern would become the largest depository institution in the market, controlling 63.8 percent of market deposits, and the HHI would increase 277 points to 4493. The high level of concentration in the Columbus County banking market after consummation of the proposal, as measured by the HHI, raises a significant competitive issue. The Board is particularly concerned when the dominant position of a banking organization is increased in a market with high levels of concentration, as in this case. The Board believes, on balance in this particular case, that a number of factors indicate that the effect of the transaction on competition in this market is not likely to be significantly adverse. The increase in market share controlled by the largest competitor in the market is small, as measured by the percentage of market deposits. Southern has proposed significant divestitures in this market to an out-of-market competitor with substantial resources. This purchaser ranks among the ten largest commercial banking organizations in North Carolina, with banking assets greater than $6 billion. The magnitude of the proposed divestiture and the acquiror's size and resources help ensure that the out-of-market competitor would effectively replace Southern as the second largest competitor in the market. In addition, five competitors would remain in the market, including the out-of-market competitor that would purchase three branches divested by Southern. Although population, deposit, and other economic data traditionally relied on by the Board do not indicate that the market is attractive for entry in comparison to other markets in the state, two new depository institutions have already indicated their intent to enter the market in 1997. One competitor is a newly chartered commercial bank with three offices that was formed by local residents concerned about the elimination of the largest community based banking organization in their market. The other competitor is a South Carolina commercial bank from a neighboring county that already obtains a substantial volume of its lending business from the Columbus County market and is extending its market presence into Columbus County. If the two new banks succeed in obtaining a total of $5 million of the deposits currently held by Southern, which is less than 1 percent of the total market deposits, the effect of the proposal on the HHI for the Columbus County market would be within the DOJ Guidelines. The Board has carefully weighed the competitive effects of the proposal in the Columbus County banking market in light of these and all the facts of record. Although the proposal presents a close case, the Board concludes that entry by an out-of-market competitor with a significant share of market deposits through the proposed divestiture, and by two additional new competitors, indicates that competition continues to develop in the Columbus County banking market and that, on balance, consummation of the proposal would not substantially lessen competition in that market. Statesville Banking Market Southern is the third largest of ten depository institutions that compete in the Statesville banking market, and controls deposits of $139.3 million, representing 19.5 percent of market deposits. United Carolina is the fourth largest depository institution in the market, and controls deposits of $73.4 million, representing 10.3 percent of market deposits. On consummation of the proposal, Southern would become the second largest depository institution in the market, controlling 29.8 percent of market deposits. The HHI would increase 400 points to 2265. Nine competitors would remain in the Statesville banking market after consummation of the proposal, including North Carolina's five largest commercial banking organizations, all with significant market shares. In addition, a number of factors indicate that the Statesville market is attractive for entry and expansion. The rate of increase in deposits and population, for example, and the banking market's average per capita income and total deposits per banking office, were greater in the Statesville banking market, which is primarily composed of a non-MSA area, than in the state's other non-MSA counties. Two commercial banks entered the market by acquisition, one in 1994 and another in 1996, and a newly chartered commercial bank is expected to commence operations in 1997. Goldsboro Banking Market Southern is the largest of nine depository institutions that compete in the Goldsboro banking market, and controls deposits of $270 million, representing 31.8 percent of market deposits. United Carolina is the fourth largest depository institution in the market, and controls deposits of $79.6 million, representing 9.4 percent of market deposits. Southern proposes to divest three branches, with deposits of $47.5 million, to two smaller competitors in the banking market. After consummation of the proposal and the proposed divestiture, Southern would control 35.6 percent of the market deposits, and the HHI would increase 248 points to 2295. The divestitures would allow each of the two smaller competitors to increase their share of market deposits by approximately 3 percentage points. In addition, eight commercial banking organizations, including the six largest commercial banking organizations in North Carolina, would remain in the banking market after consummation of the proposal. The Goldsboro banking market is attractive for entry, and a savings bank established a presence in the market within the past two years. Sanford Banking Market Southern is the largest of seven depository institutions that compete in the Sanford banking market, and controls deposits of $153.6 million, representing 29.2 percent of market deposits. United Carolina is the fifth largest depository institution in the market, and controls deposits of $42.3 million, representing 8.1 percent of market deposits. Southern proposes to divest one branch to an out-of-market competitor. After consummation of the proposal and the proposed divestiture, Southern would control 34.8 percent of the market deposits. The HHI would increase 296 points to 2195. Seven competitors would remain in the market after Southern's divestiture to an out-of-market competitor, and the market is attractive for entry. During the past three years, the average rate of growth in population, the level of per capita income, and the amount of deposits per banking office in the Sanford market exceeded the rate of growth in other non-MSA counties of the state. Two competitors in the market opened new branches in 1996, and a commercial bank entered the market de novo in May 1997. In addition, a newly chartered commercial bank plans to enter the market in 1997. It is anticipated that the attractiveness of the market will increase when a four-lane highway between Sanford and Raleigh is completed within the next two years. Fayetteville Banking Market Southern is the largest of 11 depository institutions that compete in the Fayetteville banking market, controlling deposits of $358.4 million, representing 26.0 percent of market deposits. United Carolina is the fifth largest depository institution in the market, controlling deposits of $132.9 million, representing 9.6 percent of market deposits. On consummation of the proposal, Southern would control 35.6 percent of the market deposits. The HHI would increase 500 points to 2019. Ten competitors would remain in the market after consummation of the merger, including North Carolina's five largest commercial banking organizations, all with significant market shares. The market also has characteristics, including its size, that make it attractive for entry and expansion. The Fayetteville banking market, for example, contains an MSA and the state's fourth largest population center. The Board sought comments from the United States Attorney General ("Attorney General"), the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency ("OCC"), and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ("FDIC") on the competitive effects of the proposal. The Attorney General has advised the Board that, subject to the proposed divestitures, consummation of the proposal would not likely have any significantly adverse effects on competition in any relevant market. The OCC and the FDIC also have not objected to consummation of the proposal. Based on all the facts of record, including the proposed divestitures and for the reasons discussed above and explained in the appendixes, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposal would not have a significantly adverse effect on competition or the concentration of banking resources in any relevant banking market. Other Considerations The Board has carefully considered the financial and managerial resources of Southern, United Carolina, and their respective subsidiaries, and the effect of the proposed acquisition on the future prospects of these organizations, and other supervisory factors in light of the facts of record. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of Southern and United Carolina, and their respective subsidiaries, are consistent with approval of the proposal, as are the other supervisory factors the Board must consider under section 3 of the BHC Act. Considerations relating to the convenience and needs of the communities to be served are also consistent with approval. Based on the foregoing, including the commitments made to the Board by Southern in connection with the application, and in light of all the facts of record, the Board has determined that this application should be, and hereby is, approved. The Board's approval is specifically conditioned on compliance by Southern with all the commitments made in connection with this application, including the divestiture commitments discussed in the order. The commitments and conditions relied on by the Board in reaching this decision are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision, and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The acquisition shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day following the effective date of this order, or later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board, or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective May 29, 1997. (signed) William W. Wiles William W. Wiles Deputy Secretary of the Board Appendix A Banking markets in which consummation of the proposal would not exceed DOJ Guidelines without divestitures: North Carolina banking markets Charlotte-Rock Hill : Approximated by the Charlotte, North Carolina, and Rock Hill, South Carolina, RMA. After consummation of the proposal, Southern would control 9.3 percent of the market deposits and would become the third largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase 43 points to 2481. Durham-Chapel Hill : Approximated by the Durham-Chapel Hill, North Carolina, RMA, including the remainder of Durham and Orange Counties, and Chatham County excluding the Burlington RMA. After consummation of the proposal, Southern would control 11.7 percent of the market deposits and would remain the fourth largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase 16 points to 1702. Greensboro-High Point : Approximated by the Greensboro-High Point, North Carolina, RMA, including the remainder of the counties of Davidson and Randolph, excluding the Winston-Salem RMA. After consummation of the proposal, Southern would control 21 percent of the market deposits and would remain the largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase 98 points to 1239. New Bern : Approximated by New Bern, North Carolina, the counties of Carteret, Craven, and Pamlico, and the eastern half of Jones County. After consummation of the proposal, Southern would control 24.7 percent of the market deposits, and would remain the third largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase 136 points to 2201. Raleigh : Approximated by the Raleigh, North Carolina, RMA, including the remainder of Franklin, Harnett, Johnston, and Wake Counties. After consummation of the proposal, Southern would control 17.2 percent of the market deposits and would become the second largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase 139 points to 1391. Wilmington : Approximated by the Wilmington, North Carolina, RMA, including the remainder of Brunswick County and Pender County. After consummation of the proposal, Southern would control 29.9 percent of the market deposits, and would become the largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase 396 points to 1695. Winston-Salem : Approximated by the Winston-Salem, North Carolina, RMA, including the remainder of Davie and Stokes Counties. After consummation of the proposal, Southern would control 32.1 percent of the market deposits and would remain the second largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase 19 points to 2975. South Carolina banking markets Greenville : Approximated by the Greenville, South Carolina, RMA, including the remainder of Greenville and Pickens Counties. After consummation of the proposal, Southern would control 23.7 percent of the market deposits and would remain the largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase 186 points to 1331. Myrtle Beach-Conway Area : Approximated by the Myrtle Beach-Conway, South Carolina, RMA, including the remainder of Horry County. After consummation of the proposal, Southern would control 9.2 percent of the market deposits and would become the fifth largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase 37 points to 1131. Spartanburg : Approximated by the Spartanburg, South Carolina, RMA, including the remainder of Spartanburg County, excluding the Greenville RMA portion. After consummation of the proposal, Southern would control 10.2 percent of the market deposits and would become the third largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase 29 points to 1230. Appendix B North Carolina banking markets in which consummation of the proposal would not exceed DOJ Guidelines with divestitures: Duplin County : Approximated by Duplin County, North Carolina. After consummation of the merger and the proposed divestitures to an out-of-market competitor, Southern would control 46.1 percent of the market deposits and would become the largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase 36 points to 2761. Hoke County : Approximated by Hoke County, North Carolina. After consummation of the merger and the proposed divestiture to an out-of-market competitor, Southern would control 56.5 percent of the market deposits and would replace United Carolina as the largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would not increase. Martin County : Approximated by Martin County, North Carolina. After consummation of the merger and the proposed divestiture to an out-of-market competitor, Southern would control 27 percent of the market deposits and would remain the second largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would not increase. Monroe : Approximated by Anson and Union Counties, North Carolina, excluding the portion of Union County included in the Charlotte-Rock Hill RMA. After consummation of the merger and the proposed divestitures to an out-of-market competitor, Southern would control 40.8 percent of the market deposits and would remain the largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase 156 points to 2188. Richmond County : Approximated by Richmond County, North Carolina. After consummation of the merger and the proposed divestitures to an out-of-market competitor and an in-market firm, Southern would control 38.3 percent of the market deposits and would replace United Carolina as the largest depository institution in the market. Following the proposed divestitures, the HHI would increase 179 points to 2272. Robeson County : Approximated by Robeson County, North Carolina, except for the portion of the county included in the Fayetteville RMA. After consummation of the merger and the proposed divestitures to an out-of-market competitor, Southern would control 37.2 percent of the market deposits and would become the largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase 183 points to 2205. Sampson County : Approximated by Sampson County, North Carolina. After consummation of the merger and the proposed divestitures to an out-of-market competitor, Southern would control 29.8 percent of the market deposits and would remain the second largest depository institution in the market. Following the proposed divestitures, the HHI would increase 99 points to 3207. Washington County : Approximated by Washington County, North Carolina. After consummation of the merger and the proposed divestitures to an out-of-market competitor, Southern would control 29.7 percent of the market deposits and would remain the largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would not increase. Appendix C North Carolina banking markets in which consummation of the proposal would exceed DOJ Guidelines. However, other factors substantially mitigate the competitive effect of the increases in market concentration as measured by the HHI: Moore County : Approximated by Moore County, North Carolina. After consummation of the merger, Southern would control 37.7 percent of the market deposits and would remain the largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase 330 points to 1988. Ten competitors would remain in this market following consummation, including North Carolina's five largest commercial banking organizations. One of the thrifts in the market is the second largest competitor for deposits. In addition, the market has features that make it attractive for entry and expansion. The rate of growth in population and market deposits, and the level of per capita income exceed, on average, that of other non-MSA counties in the state. Pitt County : Approximated by Pitt County, North Carolina. After consummation of the merger, Southern would control 27.3 percent of the market deposits and would become the largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase 325 points to 1886. Following consummation, ten competitors would remain in the market, including North Carolina's six largest commercial banking organizations. In addition, the market has features that make it attractive for entry and expansion. Pitt County is the second largest non-MSA county in the state with respect to total deposits. The rate of growth in deposits and the level of per capita income exceed, on average, that of other non-MSA counties. The record indicates that one thrift in the market fully competes with commercial banks in making commercial and retail loans. If this thrift's deposits are given 100 percent weight, consistent with the Board's precedent, the HHI would increase 319 points to 1850. Dissenting Statement of Vice Chair Rivlin and Governor Meyer We believe the proposed transaction would have a significantly adverse effect on competition in at least three local banking markets: Columbus County, Statesville and Goldsboro. Without additional divestitures to reduce the prospect of significantly adverse competitive effects in these markets, we believe the application should be denied. Our concern is greatest about the Columbus County market. This is a case of a market that is initially very highly concentrated and, in our view, extreme caution should be exercised in connection with any merger that further increases market concentration. The failure to reject the merger or to make the merger conditional on further divestitures in this market, in our view, sets an undesirable precedent and allows a level of concentration and market share that is too high to warrant Board approval. Consummation of the transaction in the Columbus County banking market would increase the HHI from over 4200 to nearly 4500. Southern would become the dominant banking organization in the market and would increase its share of market deposits to approximately 64 percent. In addition to enhancing the dominant position of the largest competitor, the proposal would increase the gap between the share of market deposits controlled by the two largest competitors. After consummation of the proposal, the second largest competitor would control only 16 percent of market deposits, a market share less than Southern currently controls as the market's second largest competitor. None of the remaining three competitors would control as much as a 10 percent share of the market deposits. We believe that strong mitigating factors would be required to justify an acquisition resulting in further concentration of such a highly concentrated market. In this case, while two firms propose to enter the market, this new entry is not sufficient to mitigate the increased concentration that would result from this transaction. Relevant data do not indicate that the market is likely to attract sufficient new entry to check the competitive influence of Southern as the dominant firm after this acquisition. We do not find any other factors that would mitigate the potentially significant adverse effect that this acquisition is likely to have on competition in the Columbus County banking market. Accordingly, we conclude that additional divestitures are necessary in the Columbus County banking market before the proposal warrants approval. The Statesville and Goldsboro markets are much less highly concentrated than the Columbus County market. Nevertheless, the proposed transaction would still, in our view, result in significantly adverse effects on competition in each of these markets. The increase in concentration in the Statesville market is the largest of any of the three markets in question. This transaction would move this market from one with a reasonable degree of competitiveness to one that is highly concentrated. The Goldsboro market involves combining the largest and fourth largest banks in the market and results in a post-merger market share of 35.6 percent without any mitigating factor. Although the threat of adverse competitive effects in the Statesville and Goldsboro cases appears less dramatic than in the case of the Columbus County market, the competitive effects in the Statesville and Goldsboro push the outer limits of what the Board has approved in the past and in our judgement exceed the limits of what the Board should approve. May 29, 1997 Footnotes Southern and United Carolina have granted each other an option to purchase, under certain circumstances, outstanding common stock of the other company. These options would terminate on consummation of the proposal. United Carolina would be required to obtain the Board's approval under section 3 of the BHC Act before exercising its option. State and market data are as of June 30, 1996. In this context, depository institutions include commercial banks, savings banks, and savings associations. Pub. L. No. 103-328, 108 Stat. 2338 (1994). A bank holding company's home state is that state in which the operations of the bank holding company's banking subsidiaries were principally conducted on July 1, 1966, or the date on which the company became a bank holding company, whichever is later. 12 U.S.C. §§ 1842(d)(1)(A) and (B) and 1842(d)(2)(A) and (B). Southern is adequately capitalized and adequately managed. On consummation of this proposal, Southern and its affiliates would control less than 10 percent of the total amount of deposits of insured depository institutions in the United States and less than 30 percent of the total amount of deposits in South Carolina. In addition, United Carolina Bank of South Carolina has been in existence and in continuous operation for at least five years as required by South Carolina law. All other requirements of section 3(d) of the BHC Act also would be met on consummation of the proposal. Market concentration calculations include deposits of thrift institutions at 50 percent. The Board previously has indicated that thrift institutions have become, or have the potential to become, significant competitors of commercial banks. See Midwest Financial Group , 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 386 (1989); National City Corporation , 70 Federal Reserve Bulletin 743 (1984). Thus, the Board has regularly included thrift deposits in the calculation of market share on a 50-percent weighted basis. See, e.g., First Hawaiian Inc ., 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 52 (1991). Under the revised DOJ Guidelines, 49 Federal Register 26,823 (June 29, 1984), a market in which the post-merger HHI is less than 1000 is considered unconcentrated, and a market in which the post-merger HHI is between 1000 and 1800 is considered moderately concentrated. The Justice Department has informed the Board that a bank merger or acquisition generally will not be challenged (in the absence of other factors indicating anticompetitive effects) unless the post-merger HHI is at least 1800 and the merger increases the HHI by more than 200 points. The Justice Department has stated that the higher than normal HHI thresholds for screening bank mergers for anticompetitive effects implicitly recognize the competitive effect of limited-purpose lenders and other non-depository financial institutions With respect to each market in which Southern has committed to divest offices to mitigate the anticompetitive effects of the proposal, Southern has committed to execute sales agreements prior to consummation of the acquisition of United Carolina and to complete the divestitures within 180 days of consummation of the acquisition. Southern also has committed that, in the event it is unsuccessful in completing any divestiture within 180 days of consummation of the proposal, Southern will transfer the unsold branch(es) to an independent trustee that is acceptable to the Board and that will be instructed to sell the branches promptly. BankAmerica Corporation , 78 Federal Reserve Bulletin 338 (1992); United New Mexico Financial Corporation , 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 484 (1991). Southern has also committed to submit to the Board, no later than 60 days prior to the expiration of the 180-day divestiture period, an executed trust agreement acceptable to the Board stating the terms of the divestitures. These banking markets are discussed in Appendix A. Southern has committed to divest a total of 23 branches in 11 North Carolina banking markets. In these markets, Southern has committed to make divestitures to an out-of-market competitor or to a competitively suitable purchaser. These banking markets are described in Appendix B. Southern contends that the relevant banking market for Anson County, North Carolina, should be either (1) the Charlotte-Rock Hill banking market, or (2) the area within a 30-mile radius surrounding Wadesboro, the largest community in Anson County. The Board and the courts have concluded that the relevant banking market for analyzing the competitive effects of a proposal must reflect commercial and banking realities and should consist of the local area where the banks involved offer their services and where local customers can practicably turn for alternatives. See St. Joseph Valley Bank , 68 Federal Reserve Bulletin 673, 674 (1982). The key question to be considered in making this decision "is not where the parties to the merger do business or even where they compete, but where, within the area of competitive overlap, the effect of the merger on competition will be direct and immediate." United States v. Philadelphia National Bank , 374 U.S. 321, 357 (1963); United States v. Phillipsburg National Bank , 399 U.S. 350, 364-65 (1969). The Board has considered Southern's contentions in light of all the facts of record, and concludes that the appropriate market for analyzing the competitive effects of the proposal is an area that is approximated by Anson County and those portions of Union County not included in the Charlotte-Rock Hill Ranally Metro Area ("RMA"). This market has been defined by the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond ("Reserve Bank") as the Monroe, North Carolina, banking market. The Board bases this conclusion on an analysis of employment commuting data, traffic patterns, and interviews with local bankers and other officials that were conducted in March 1997 as part of an investigation of the area by the staff of the Reserve Bank, as well as other facts of record that indicate that commuting, travel and competition between Anson County and the Charlotte-Rock Hill banking market is limited. Southern has also committed to divest $8 million of deposits and associated lending relationships in the Goldsboro, North Carolina, banking market that are not currently allocated to any of the branches to be divested. The Columbus County banking market is approximated by Columbus County, North Carolina. The HHI would potentially increase 163 points to 4379. The Statesville banking market is approximated by Statesville, North Carolina, including the portion of Iredell County not included within the Charlotte-Rock Hill RMA. Depository institutions in Iredell County have the largest amount of total deposits held by depository institutions in all non-metropolitan statistical area ("non-MSA") counties in North Carolina. In 1996, The New Observer , a large Charlotte newspaper, awarded Iredell County the highest rating in its review of the North Carolina business climate. The rating was based on several economic factors, including job growth, change in employment, the level and change in per capita income, the level and change in unemployment, and the level and change in per capita retail sales. In addition, Statesville, which is the economic center of the market, is located at the intersection of two interstate highways (U.S. Interstates 77 and 40), a fact that contributes to the attractiveness of the market for commercial enterprises and access to major population centers, including Charlotte and Winston-Salem. Between 1993 and 1996, deposits increased on average in Iredell County by 2.9 percent as compared to 1.4 percent for other non-MSA counties in North Carolina. The average population increase for the same period was 2.5 percent in Iredell County as compared to 1.5 percent for other non-MSA counties. In 1994, per capita income in Iredell County was $14,005 compared to $12,007 in other non-MSA counties. Total deposits per banking office in 1996 were $29,862 compared to $25,854 in the other non-MSA counties. In interviews with the Reserve Bank, bankers in the Statesville banking market indicated their belief that the market would remain competitive after consummation of the proposal. Data also indicate that concentration in the market, as measured by the HHI, has decreased in the past five years. The Goldsboro banking market is approximated by the Goldsboro, North Carolina, RMA, including the remainder of Wayne County. The Sanford banking market is approximated by Lee County, North Carolina. Between 1993 and 1996, the population of Lee County increased at a rate of 2.7 percent as compared to 1.5 percent for other non-MSA counties in North Carolina. Per capita income in the county was $14,304 in 1995 compared to $12,007 in other non-MSA counties. The rate of growth of deposits in the market was 1.8 percent between 1993 and 1996, compared to a rate of growth of 1.4 percent in other non-MSA counties. The Fayetteville banking market is approximated by the Fayetteville, North Carolina, RMA, including the remainder of Cumberland County. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan and Governors Kelley and Phillips. Voting against this action: Vice Chair Rivlin and Governor Meyer.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of an Order of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty against Toshihiko Araki, an officer and institution-affiliated party of the New York branch of The Bank of Yokohama, Ltd., Yokohama, Japan. Mr. Araki, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the order in connection with his alleged misstatement to a Reserve Bank supervisory official regarding his wire transfer authority. Mr. Araki paid a civil money penalty of $5,000. A copy of the order is attached.