For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of an Order of Prohibition against Damian Cope, a former trader and institution-affiliated party of the New York branch of The Midland Bank, plc, London, England. Mr. Cope, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the order due to his alleged falsification of books and records relating to his interest rate derivatives trading activities. A copy of the order is attached.
Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan Bias in the consumer price index Before the Committee on the Budget, U.S. House of Representatives March 4, 1997 Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee, I appreciate the opportunity to appear before you today. As you know, my colleagues and I who serve on the Federal Reserve Board just recently submitted to Congress our semiannual report on monetary policy and the economy. In brief, the performance of the U.S. economy over the past year has been quite favorable, with few signs of the imbalances that might typically have been expected by the sixth year of a cyclical expansion. Indeed, we believe that the most likely prospect is for continued sustainable economic growth accompanied by low and stable inflation, and our objective will be to foster the conditions most likely to produce that outcome. In that regard, continued low levels of inflation and inflation expectations have been a key support for the healthy economic performance of the past year. They have helped to create a financial and economic environment conducive to strong capital spending and longer-range planning generally, and so to sustained economic expansion. Consequently, it is crucial to keep inflation contained in the near term and ultimately to move toward price stability. If we are successful, a stable macroeconomic environment will contribute to your efforts to place the fiscal health of the nation on a firmer footing. But achieving your fiscal objectives will require this Committee to confront additional issues of extraordinary complexity and importance. I would like to devote the remainder of my prepared remarks to one of these issues, namely the bias in the consumer price index. I want to begin by commending this Committee for your continuing interest in this subject. Indeed, our conversation about potential bias in the CPI goes back some two years, when I testified before a joint meeting of this Committee and your counterparts from the Senate. The topic remains just as important now as it was then. A useful starting point for discussion of this issue is to be clear that any index that endeavors to measure the cost of living should aim to be unbiased . That is, a serious examination of all available evidence should yield the conclusion that there is just as great a chance that the index under states the rate of growth of the true cost of living as there is that it over states it. The present-day consumer price index does not meet this standard. In fact, the best available evidence suggests that there is almost a 100 percent probability that we are overcompensating the average social security recipient for increases in the cost of living, and almost a 100ï¿½percent probability that we are causing the inflation-adjusted burden of the income tax system to decline more rapidly than I presume the Congress intends. A major reason for this is that consumers respond to changes in relative prices by changing the composition of their actual marketbasket. At present, however, the marketbasket used in constructing the CPI changes only once every decade or so. Moreover, new goods and services deliver value to consumers even at the relatively elevated prices that often prevail early in their life cycles; currently, that value is not reflected in the CPI. For these and other reasons outlined in the Boskin Commission report and other studies, we know with near certainty that the current CPI is off. Although we do not know precisely by how much, there is a very high probability that the upward bias ranges between 1/2 percentage point per year and 1-1/2ï¿½percentage points per year. In thinking about how to remedy this situation, we must recognize that there is no sharp dividing line between a pristine estimate of a price and one that is not. Although the concept of price is clear enough in theory, it is often extremely difficult to implement in practice. In order to construct a fully satisfactory measure of the price of a given item, one would first have to specify all the characteristics of that item that deliver value to consumers. Then one would have to reprice the identical bundle of characteristics month in and month out. In practice, both of these steps are difficult because we are often not precisely certain about what consumers value, and because the items that are available to consumers are constantly changing, often in subtle ways. As a result, virtually all of the components that make up the CPI are approximations, in some cases very rough approximations. But the essential fact remains that even combinations of very rough approximations can give us a far better judgment of the overall cost of living than would holding to a false precision of accuracy and thereby delimiting the range of goods and services evaluated. We would be far better served following the wise admonition of Johnï¿½Maynardï¿½Keynes that "it is better to be roughly right than precisely wrong." Estimates of the magnitude of the bias in our price measures are available from a number of sources. Most have been developed from detailed examinations of the microstatistical evidence. However, recent work by staff economists at the Federal Reserve Board has added strong corroborating evidence of price mismeasurement using a macroeconomic approach that is essentially independent of the exercises performed by other researchers, including those on the Boskin Commission. In particular, employing the statistical system from which the Commerce Department estimates the national income and product accounts, this research finds that the measured growth of real output and productivity in the service sector are implausibly weak, given that the return to owners of businesses in that sector apparently has been well-maintained. Taken at face value, the published data indicate that the level of output per hour in a number of service-producing industries has been falling for more than two decades. In other words, the data imply that firms in these industries have been becoming less and less efficient for more than twenty years. These circumstances simply are not credible. On the reasonable assumption that nominal output and hours worked and paid of the various industries are accurately measured, faulty price statistics are by far the most likely cause of the implausible productivity trends. The source of a very large segment of these prices is the CPI. Some observers who are skeptical that the bias in the CPI could be very large have noted that the evidence on the magnitude of unmeasured quality change and the importance of new items bias is incomplete and inconclusive. Without a doubt, quality change and new items are among the most difficult of the problems currently confronting the BLS. But since I raised this issue two years ago, the accumulating evidence continues to support the view that the current treatment of quality change and new items in the CPI results in an overstatement of the rate of growth of the cost of living. An even more difficult quality-related issue is whether changes in broad environmental and social conditions should be reflected in price measures that are used for indexing various components of federal outlays and receipts. That is, should the CPI reflect the influence of factors such as the level of crime, air and water quality, and the emergence of new diseases, which are not specifically related to products that consumers purchase? There is little in the record to suggest that, when it enacted the indexation of social security benefits in 1972, the Congress meant to insure the beneficiaries of that program against changes in such environmental and social factors. Nor do these issues appear to have been raised when Congress debated the indexation of various tax parameters during the 1980s. Taking account of such conditions, particularly those that lie outside of the markets for goods and services, would be an interesting exercise in its own right, but would appear to extend well beyond the original intent of the Congress. A considerable professional consensus already exists for at least two actions that would almost surely bring the CPI into closer alignment with a true cost-of-living index. First, we should move away from the concept of a fixed marketbasket at the upper level of aggregation, and move toward an aggregation formula that takes into account the tendency of consumers to alter the composition of their purchases in response to changes in relative prices. Second, we should selectively move away from the current aggregation formula at the lower level of aggregation. Beyond these rather limited steps, most of the needed developments will require time, effort, and quite possibly additional resources. It is important that the Congress provide the Bureau with sufficient resources to pursue the agenda vigorously. Where will this longer-term effort be required? One of the key areas, by all accounts, is quality adjustment. As the Bureau has rightly noted, they do indeed already employ a variety of methods to control for quality change, but available evidence suggests that these are not sufficient to the task. Unfortunately, making improvements on this front will be difficult: Each item will have to be considered on its own, and there may well be limited transfer of knowledge from one item to the next. The longer-term agenda should also include concentrated attention to the methods for introducing new items into the index; the development of new sources of data such as the information collected by bar-code scanners; and the analysis of time use, the latter being important in understanding the value of time-saving and convenience-enhancing innovations. Even if the BLS moves aggressively, some upward bias will almost surely remain in the CPI, at least for the next several years. Two years ago, I suggested that a workable structure for dealing with this situation might involve a two-track approach. That suggestion still seems to me to make sense. The first track would involve action by the BLS to address those aspects of the bias that can be dealt with in relatively short order, say within the next year. The second track would involve the establishment of an independent national commission to set annual cost-of-living adjustment factors for federal receipt and outlay programs. The Commission would examine available evidence on a periodic basis, and estimate the bias in the CPI taking into account both the latest research on the sources and magnitudes of the bias, and any corrective actions that had been taken by the BLS. This type of approach would have the benefit of being objective, nonpartisan, and sufficiently flexible to take full account of the latest information. Moreover, there is no reason why the two tracks could not proceed in parallel. Without the second track, we are implicitly assuming, contrary to overwhelming evidence, that the most accurate estimate of the bias due to quality adjustment problems and introduction of new items is zero. There has been considerable objection that such a second track procedure would be a political fix. To the contrary, assuming zero for the remaining bias is the political fix. On this issue, we should let evidence, not politics, drive policy. We have an overarching national interest in building a better measure of consumer prices and in implementing more rational indexation procedures. These efforts are essential if we are to ensure that the original intent of the relevant pieces of legislation will be fulfilled in insulating taxpayers and benefit recipients from the effects of ongoing changes in the cost of living. At present this objective is not being met.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today requested comment on proposed amendments to Regulation D and Regulation I to define the location of a depository institution to facilitate interstate branching. Comment is requested by April 18, 1997. The proposed amendments would clarify the Federal Reserve District where a depository institution is eligible for Federal Reserve membership and the location of a depository institution's reserve account. The Board's notice is attached. FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM 12 CFR Part 204 [Regulation D] Reserve Requirements of Depository Institutions FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM 12 CFR Part 209 [Regulation I; Docket No. R-0963] Issue and Cancellation of Capital Stock of Federal Reserve Banks AGENCY : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. ACTION : Proposed rule. SUMMARY : The Board is proposing amendments to Regulations D and I to define the location of a depository institution. The proposed amendments would clarify the Federal Reserve District where a depository institution is eligible for Federal Reserve membership and the location of a depository institution's reserve account. The Board is proposing these changes to facilitate interstate banking. DATES : Comments must be submitted on or before April 18, 1997 . ADDRESSES : Comments, which should refer to Docket No. R-0963, may be mailed to Mr. William W. Wiles, Secretary, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 20th Street and Constitution Avenue, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20551. Comments addressed to Mr. Wiles also may be delivered to the Board's mail room between 8:45 a.m. and 5:15 p.m. and to the security control room outside of those hours. Both the mail room and the security control room are accessible from the courtyard entrance on 20th Street between Constitution Avenue and C Street, N.W. Comments may be inspected in Room MP-500 between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT : Oliver Ireland, Associate General Counsel, (202/452-3625) or Stephanie Martin, Senior Attorney (202/452-3198), Legal Division. For the hearing impaired only , contact Dorothea Thompson, Telecommunications Device for the Deaf (TDD) (202/452-3544), Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 20th and C Streets, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20551. SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION : Recent statutory changes have eliminated many barriers to interstate banking. The advent of interstate banking raises questions as to how certain provisions of the Federal Reserve Act (FRA) will apply to banks with interstate branches. Many of these questions are related to a bank's "location." To date, the Board and the Federal Reserve Banks generally have interpreted the term "location," as used in the FRA, to mean the geographic location of a bank, heavily influenced by the location specified in the bank's charter, or if no charter location is specified, the location of the bank's head office. This interpretation, however, may not always make sense in an interstate branching environment, where a bank may have offices in multiple Federal Reserve districts and do most of its business in places other than its charter or head office location. The Board, therefore, is proposing to amend its Regulation D (12 CFR part 204, Reserve Requirements of Depository Institutions) and Regulation I (12 CFR part 209, Issue and Cancellation of Capital Stock of Federal Reserve Banks) to define "location" for purposes of the Federal Reserve membership and reserve accounts. A member bank with interstate branches must be a member of a particular Federal Reserve Bank. The membership question is closely related to other location issues such as where reserve accounts are located and where account entries are posted. Every national bank is required to become a member and stockholder of the Federal Reserve Bank of its district (FRA section 2(1)). State banks may apply to the Board to subscribe to the stock of the Federal Reserve Bank organized within the district in which the applying bank is located (FRA section 9(1)). These provisions suggest that membership is limited to one Federal Reserve Bank and that membership is to be determined by the geographical location of the bank. A bank must hold reserves at the Federal Reserve Bank of which it is a member or where it maintains an account (FRA section 19(c)(1)). Therefore, a nonmember bank would hold its reserve account at the Reserve Bank where it maintains an account for purposes of check collection and other payments services. FRA section 13(1) provides that the nonmember bank may maintain this clearing account with the Federal Reserve Bank of its district. Charter or head office location is the status quo under the FRA as to where a bank is located for membership purposes and nonmember reserve account purposes. The National Bank Act requires a national bank's organization certificate to state the place where its operations of discount and deposit are to be carried on, designating the state, territory, or district, and the particular county and city, town, or village (12 U.S.C. 22). State laws may be less specific, and the determination of the bank's location may not be ascertainable from the bank's charter. Under a strict interpretation of the charter/head office rule, a bank could be a member only of the Reserve Bank whose district encompasses the location specified in its charter or, in the case of a state bank with no specific charter location, the location of its head office. For a bank with interstate branches, however, this location may not be the appropriate means of determining where the bank is located for membership or reserve account purposes. An interstate bank may have its main office or do the bulk of its business somewhere other than its charter location and may wish to establish a Federal Reserve Bank relationship closer to its business headquarters. Similarly, a bank holding company with subsidiary banks in multiple Federal Reserve districts that manages those banks as a combined business may wish to centralize operations in a single district. In addition, the Board and the Federal Reserve Banks may find it more efficient to administer a bank's account and perform other functions in a district other than the district encompassing the charter or head office location. Section 9(1) of the FRA provides that state banks may apply to the Board, under such rules and regulations as it may prescribe, for the right to subscribe to the stock of the Federal Reserve Bank organized within the district in which the applying bank is located. Section 2(1) of the FRA requires national banks to become member banks in accordance with the provisions of the FRA, and section 11(i) gives the Board general authority to write rules necessary to perform its duties, functions, and services under the FRA. Accordingly, the Board is proposing to amend Regulation I (Issue and Cancellation of Capital Stock of Federal Reserve Banks) to set forth a definition of "location" for the purpose of acquiring Federal Reserve Bank stock. This proposed amendment on the location of a bank for membership purposes also would help answer other member bank location questions related to reserve account maintenance, supervision, and other issues. The proposed new section to Regulation I would state a general rule that, for membership purposes, a bank is considered to be located in the Federal Reserve district specified in the bank's charter or, if no charter location is specified, the location of its head office. The Board could make exceptions to the general rule for a particular bank after considering certain criteria. Thus, if the bank's location were uncertain or its location based on its charter or head office differed from the location where it conducted most of its business, the Board, after consultation with the relevant Reserve Banks, could designate the appropriate location for membership purposes. (The relevant Reserve Banks would be the Reserve Bank whose district contains the bank's charter or head office location and the Reserve Bank in whose district the bank is proposed to be located.) One consideration in making this determination would be whether any other laws that would require the bank to have a relationship with a particular Reserve Bank. For example, Massachusetts and Nebraska laws provide that state banks may become members of the Boston and Kansas City Reserve Banks, respectively. The Board could also consider other criteria, such as the business needs of the bank, where the head office of the bank is located, where the bank does the bulk of its business, and the location that would allow the bank, the Board, and the Reserve Banks to perform their functions most efficiently and effectively. For example, the Board might consider the efficiency of bank supervisory functions, account management, and Federal Reserve monetary policy. Generally, these amendments would not affect current relationships between banks and Federal Reserve Banks. A bank that already owns stock in or has an account at a Federal Reserve Bank may, but need not, seek a Board determination to change its location. The Board anticipates that the "location" issue will arise principally from mergers of existing banks or other changes in the organization or management of bank holding companies. Ordinarily, the Board expects that "location" decisions would be worked out between the Reserve Banks and the bank. Although the proposed Regulation I amendment would likely be sufficient to determine where a member bank's reserve account would be located, the Board is also proposing to amend Regulation D (Reserve Requirements of Depository Institutions) to clarify the location of nonmember bank reserve accounts. Section 19(c)(1) of the FRA provides that depository institutions must hold reserves subject to such rules and regulations that the Board may prescribe. Under this authority, the Board proposes to amend Regulation D to define where banks are considered located for reserve account purposes. The proposed Regulation D amendment is similar to the proposed Regulation I language and would, in effect, assure that nonmember banks are treated comparably to member banks for account location purposes. Regulation D also applies to Edge and agreement corporations and branches and agencies of foreign banks. Section 25A of the FRA requires Edge corporations to carry reserves in the same amounts as the Board prescribes for member banks and authorizes the Board to write rules governing the operations of such corporations. Section 25 of the FRA also authorizes the Board to require agreement corporations to maintain reserves. Section 7 of the International Banking Act provides that Federal branches and agencies of foreign banks are subject to the FRA's reserve requirement provisions (including section 19(c)) as if they were member banks. That Act also provides that the Board may impose the same requirements on state branches and agencies of foreign banks after consultation and in cooperation with the state bank supervisory authorities. The Board's proposed amendments do not address the location of reserve accounts for these institutions. The Board requests comment on whether it should apply the same or similar criteria for determining the location of reserve accounts for U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks and Edge and agreement corporations as it does for depository institutions. Initial Regulatory Flexibility Analysis The Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 601-612) requires an agency to publish an initial regulatory flexibility analysis with any notice of proposed rulemaking. Two of the requirements of an initial regulatory flexibility analysis (5 U.S.C. 603(b)), a description of the reasons why action by the agency is being considered and a statement of the objectives of, and legal basis for, the proposed rule, are contained in the supplementary material above. The proposed rules require no additional reporting or recordkeeping requirements and do not overlap with other federal rules. Another requirement for the initial regulatory flexibility analysis is a description of and, where feasible, an estimate of the number of small entities to which the proposed rule will apply. The proposal will apply to all institutions subject to the regulations, regardless of size, but would not impose any significant burden on any institution. Paperwork Reduction Act In accordance with the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 (44 U.S.C. 3506; 5 CFR 1320 Appendix A.1), the Board reviewed the proposed rule under the authority delegated to the Board by the Office of Management and Budget. Comments on the collections of information should be sent to the Office of Management and Budget, Paperwork Reduction Project (7100-0042, 7100-0087, 7100-0088, and 7100-0175), Washington, D.C. 20503, with copies of such comments to be sent to Mary M. McLaughlin, Chief, Financial Reports Section, Division of Research and Statistics, Mail Stop 97, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, D.C. 20551. The collection of information requirements in this proposed regulation are found in 12 CFR Parts 204 and 209. This information is required to evidence compliance with the requirements of the Federal Reserve Act. The respondents are for-profit financial institutions, including small businesses. The Federal Reserve may not conduct or sponsor, and an organization is not required to respond to, these information collections unless they display a currently valid OMB control number. The OMB control numbers are 7100-0042, 7100-0087, 7100-0088, and 7100-0175. The proposed amendments are not expected to change the ongoing annual burden. The estimated burden per response varies among the reports from 15 minutes (for tranche allocation reports) to 3.5 hours (for reports of deposits). It is estimated that there are 21,983 respondents with frequency of response per respondent varying from daily to annually. Therefore the total amount of annual burden is estimated to be 1,501,479 hours. Based on an hourly cost of $20, the annual cost to the public is estimated to be $30,029,580. There is not estimated to be any annual cost burden over the annual hour burden. Individual responses to all of these data collections except those under OMB control number 7100-0042, which are available to the public, are considered confidential under Section 225(b)(4) of the Freedom of Information Act. Comments are invited on: a. whether the proposed revised collections of information are necessary for the proper performance of the Federal Reserve's functions; including whether the information has practical utility; b. the accuracy of the Federal Reserve's estimate of the burden of the proposed revised information collection, including the cost of compliance; c. ways to enhance the quality, utility, and clarity of the information to be collected; and d. ways to minimize the burden of information collection on respondents, including through the use of automated collection techniques or other forms of information technology. List of Subjects in 12 CFR Part 204 Banks, banking, Federal Reserve System, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements. List of Subjects in 12 CFR Part 209 Banks, banking, Federal Reserve System, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements. For the reasons set out in the preamble, 12 CFR parts 204 and 209 are proposed to be amended as set forth below. PART 204 -- RESERVE REQUIREMENTS OF DEPOSITORY INSTITUTIONS (REGULATION D) 1. The authority citation for part 204 continues to read as follows: Authority : 12 U.S.C. 248(a), 248(c), 371a, 461, 601, 611, and 3105. 2. In § 204.3, paragraph (b) is revised to read as follows: § 204.3 Computation and maintenance . (b) Form and location of reserves . (1) A depository institution, a U.S. branch or agency of a foreign bank, and an Edge or agreement corporation shall hold reserves in the form of vault cash, a balance maintained directly with the Federal Reserve Bank in the Federal Reserve district in which it is located, or a pass-through account. Reserves held in the form of a pass-through account shall be considered to be a balance maintained with a Federal Reserve Bank. (2) (i) For purposes of this section, a depository institution (other than a U.S. branch or agency of a foreign bank) is located in the Federal Reserve district that contains the location specified in the institution's charter or organizing certificate or, if no such location is specified, the location of its head office, unless otherwise determined by the Board under paragraph (b)(2)(ii) of this section. (ii) If the location specified in paragraph (b)(2)(i) of this section is, in the Board's judgment, ambiguous or would impede the ability of the Board or the Federal Reserve Banks to perform their functions under the Federal Reserve Act, the Board will, after consultation with the relevant Federal Reserve Banks, determine the Federal Reserve district in which the depository institution is located. The relevant Federal Reserve Banks are the Federal Reserve Bank whose district contains the location specified in paragraph (b)(2)(i) of this section and the Federal Reserve Bank in whose district the institution is proposed to be located. In making this determination, the Board will consider any applicable laws, the business needs of the institution, the location of the institution's head office, the locations where the institution performs its business, and the locations that would allow the institution, the Board, and the Federal Reserve Banks to perform their functions efficiently and effectively. PART 209 -- ISSUE AND CANCELLATION OF CAPITAL STOCK OF FEDERAL RESERVE BANKS (REGULATION I) 3. The authority citation for part 209 continues to read as follows: Authority : 12 U.S.C. 248, 321-338, 486, 1814, 1816. 4. A new § 209.15 is added to read as follows: § 209.15 Location of bank . (a) General rule . For purposes of this part, a national bank or a state bank is located in the Federal Reserve district that contains the location specified in the bank's charter or organizing certificate, or if no such location is specified, the location of its head office, unless otherwise determined by the Board under paragraph (b) of this section. (b) Board determination . If the location of a bank as specified in paragraph (a) of this section is, in the Board's judgment, ambiguous or would impede the ability of the Board or the Federal Reserve Banks to perform their functions under the Federal Reserve Act, the Board, after consultation with the relevant Federal Reserve Banks, will determine the Federal Reserve district in which the bank is located. The relevant Federal Reserve Banks are the Federal Reserve Bank whose district contains the location specified in the paragraph (a) of this section and the Federal Reserve Bank in whose district the institution is. proposed to be located. In making this determination, the Board will consider any applicable laws, the business needs of the bank, the location of the bank's head office, the locations where the bank performs its business, and the locations that would allow the bank, the Board, and the Federal Reserve Banks to perform their functions efficiently and effectively. By order of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March 5, 1997. (signed) William W. Wiles William W. Wiles Secretary of the Board Footnotes See , the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act, Pub. L. 103-328, 108 Stat. 2338 (1994). 12 U.S.C. 221 et seq . Mass. Gen. L. ch. 167F, § 8 (1995) and Neb. Rev. Stat. § 8-130 (1995).
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of a combined Order to Cease and Desist, Order of Restitution, and Order of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty against John Gillogly, a former officer and institution-affiliated party of The Bank of Corning, Corning, Ohio. Mr. Gillogly, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the order due to his alleged participation in unsafe and unsound practices, breaches of fiduciary duty, and violations of the Board of Governors' Regulation O relating to the management and disposition of a parcel of property previously owned by the bank. Mr. Gillogly paid a fine of $2,000 in addition to his restitution to the bank in the amount of $4,965. A copy of the order is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Luis A. Ortega, an officer and director of Interbank Holding Company, Miami, Florida, a bank holding company, the former chairman of the board of directors, and a current director of the Pan American Bank, Miami, Florida; Interbank Holding Company; the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta; and the Department of Banking and Finance, Division of Banking, State of Florida. The Federal Reserve Board also announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Glenn M. Goldhagen, a former officer of Interbank Holding Company, and the former chief executive officer and former director of the Pan American Bank; the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta; and the Department of Banking and Finance, Division of Banking, State of Florida. Copies of the written agreements are attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of a combined Order to Cease and Desist and Order of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty against Oliver Lu, a former employee of BT Co., Tokyo, Japan, a subsidiary of Bankers Trust New York Corporation, New York. Mr. Lu, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the order in connection with his alleged involvement in the structuring of leveraged derivative transactions marketed and sold to customers of Bankers Trust New York Corporation and its subsidiaries. Mr. Lu paid a civil money penalty of $50,000. A copy of the order is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board, along with the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, today requested comment on a proposal to adopt uniform regulations to implement section 109 of the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act of 1994 (Interstate Act). Comment is requested by May 2, 1997 . As required by section 109, the proposed rule would prohibit any bank from establishing or acquiring a branch or branches outside of its home state under the Interstate Act primarily for the purpose of deposit production, and would provide guidelines for determining whether such bank is reasonably helping to meet credit needs of the communities served by the interstate branches. The interagency notice is attached. |
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced adoption of final standard practice rules regarding transactions in government securities by depository institutions. The final rule is effective July 1, 1997 . Similar rules are being adopted by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. The agencies are adopting the final rules to provide consistent treatment for customers of both bank and nonbank dealers and brokers in government securities. The rules are substantively identical to the National Association of Securities Dealers (NASD) Business Conduct and Suitability Rules and the NASD Suitability Interpretation that apply to nonbank brokers and dealers in government securities. The interagency notice is attached. |
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the termination of the following enforcement actions: Perry County Bancorp, Inc. and DuQuoin State Bank, DuQuoin, Illinois Written Agreement dated April 12, 1993 Terminated February 7, 1997 First Independence Bank of Florida, Ft. Myers, Florida Written Agreement dated May 1, 1992 Terminated February 25, 1997 Garfield Bank, Montebello, California Written Agreement dated April 26, 1994 Terminated March 5, 1997 Bank of New York, New York Order dated January 16, 1992 Terminated March 5, 1997 Crestar Bank, Richmond, Virginia Order dated January 16, 1992 Terminated March 3, 1997 Trust Company Bank, Atlanta, Georgia Order dated January 16, 1992 Terminated March 14, 1997 Central Bank of the South, Birmingham, Alabama Order dated January 16, 1992 Terminated March 5, 1997 American Bank and Trust of Polk County, Lake Wales, Florida Written Agreement dated June 10, 1992 Terminated March 7, 1997
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application filed by AMCORE Financial, Inc., Rockford, Illinois, to acquire all the voting shares of First National Bancorp, Inc., and thereby indirectly acquire First National Bank & Trust, both of Monroe, Wisconsin. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. AMCORE Financial, Inc. Rockford, Illinois Order Approving the Acquisition of a Bank Holding Company AMCORE Financial, Inc., Rockford, Illinois ("AMCORE"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 3 of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1842) to acquire all the voting shares of First National Bancorp, Inc. ("Bancorp"), and thereby indirectly acquire its subsidiary bank, First National Bank & Trust ("First National"), both of Monroe, Wisconsin. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (61 Federal Register 68,756 (1996)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the proposal and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 3 of the BHC Act. AMCORE, with total consolidated assets of approximately $2.8 billion, operates five banks in Illinois and engages in certain permissible nonbanking activities. AMCORE is the 12th largest commercial banking organization in Illinois, controlling approximately $1.8 billion in deposits, representing approximately 1percent of total deposits in commercial banks in the state. Bancorp is the 23d largest commercial banking organization in Wisconsin, controlling approximately $187.7 million in deposits. Bancorp's deposits represent less than 1percent of total deposits in commercial banking organizations in the state. Interstate Analysis Section 3(d) of the BHC Act, as amended by section 101 of the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act of 1994, allows the Board to approve an application by a bank holding company to acquire control of a bank located in a state other than the home state of such bank holding company, if certain conditions are met. For purposes of the BHC Act, AMCORE's home state is Illinois, and AMCORE would acquire a bank in Wisconsin. The conditions for an interstate acquisition under section 3(d) are met in this case. In view of all the facts of record, the Board is permitted to approve the proposal under section 3(d) of the BHC Act. Competitive Considerations AMCORE and Bancorp do not compete with each other in any relevant banking market. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that the proposal would not have a significantly adverse effect on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in any relevant banking market. Accordingly, the Board concludes that competitive considerations are consistent with approval. Other Factors Under the BHC Act The BHC Act also requires the Board, in acting on an application, to consider the financial and managerial resources of the companies and banks involved, the convenience and needs of the communities to be served, and certain other supervisory factors. A. Financial, Managerial, and other Supervisory Factors The Board has carefully considered the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of AMCORE, Bancorp and their respective subsidiary banks and other supervisory factors in light of all the facts of record. The facts include supervisory reports of examination assessing the financial and managerial resources of the organizations and confidential financial information provided by AMCORE. Based on these and all other facts of record, the Board concludes that all the supervisory factors under the BHC Act, including financial and managerial resources, weigh in favor of approval of the proposal. B. Convenience and Needs Factor The Board also has carefully considered the effect of the proposal on the convenience and needs of the communities to be served in light of all the facts of record. As part of the review of this factor, the Board has considered comments from the Wisconsin Rural Development Center, Inc. ("Protestant"), alleging that AMCORE has not taken adequate steps to assess the banking needs of low- and moderate-income ("LMI") rural or farm borrowers and rural community credit needs in Illinois where it currently operates, and has not demonstrated how it plans to serve the credit needs of the residents in rural and farm areas in Wisconsin after consummation of the proposal. In reviewing the convenience and needs considerations in the proposal, the Board notes that AMCORE provides a full range of financial services through its banking subsidiaries, including a broad range of mortgage, consumer, agricultural, and small business loan products. AMCORE has stated that after consummation of the proposal, it would offer these services, some of which are not available through First National, in communities currently served by First National. In addition, AMCORE has stated that it would review First National's products and retain those that are unique to the local market. Products offered by AMCORE would include development and expansion of programs that serve rural and farm areas. The Board has long held that consideration of the convenience and needs factor includes a review of the records of the relevant depository institutions under the Community Reinvestment Act ("CRA"). The CRA requires the federal banking agencies to encourage depository institutions to help meet the credit needs of local communities, including LMI communities, but does not establish a statutory preference for any specific type of credit. Accordingly, in reviewing the proposal, the Board has focused on AMCORE's performance record in helping to meet the credit needs of all its communities through the products offered by AMCORE's subsidiary banks. As provided in the CRA, the Board evaluates this factor in light of examinations of the CRA performance records of the relevant institutions by the primary federal supervisor. An institution's most recent CRA performance evaluation is a particularly important consideration in the applications process because it represents a detailed on-site evaluation of an institution's overall record of performance under the CRA by its primary federal supervisor. Examiners also noted that AMCORE Bank, Aledo, Illinois ("Aledo Bank"), participated in government subsidized loan programs such as the FmHA and the Illinois Farm Development Association. Examiners found in Aledo Bank's most recent CRA evaluation that the bank had made approximately $7 million in operating loans at below prime interest rates to 65 farmers through the Illinois State Treasurer's Agriculture Loan Linked Deposit Program, and that the bank's agricultural-related lending comprised approximately 42 percent of its loan portfolio. AMCORE proposes to implement similar programs in Wisconsin through First National. As noted above, AMCORE recognizes that First National offers some products that are uniquely suited to its local community, and also proposes to expand products to include others offered currently through AMCORE subsidiary banks. AMCORE's record indicates that it has successfully helped serve the credit needs of a variety of communities, including rural and agricultural communities. Conclusion on the Convenience and Needs Factor The Board has carefully considered the entire record in its review of the convenience and needs factor under the BHC Act, including all the information provided by the commenters. Based on all the facts of record, and for the reasons discussed above, the Board concludes that considerations relating to the convenience and needs factor, including the CRA performance records of the relevant institutions, are consistent with approval of the application. Conclusion Based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that this application should be, and hereby is, approved. The Board's approval is specifically conditioned on compliance by AMCORE with all the commitments made in connection with this application. The commitments and conditions relied on by the Board in reaching its decision are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The proposed acquisitions shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day following the effective date of this order, and not later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective March 17, 1997. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes Asset data are as of December 31, 1996. Deposit data are as of June 30, 1996. Pub. L. No. 103-328, 108 Stat. 2338 (1994). A bank holding company's home state is the state in which the operations of the bank holding company's banking subsidiaries were principally conducted on July 1, 1966, or the date on which the company became a bank holding company, whichever is later. See 12 U.S.C. §§ 1842(d)(1)(A) and (B) and 1842(d)(2)(A) and (B). AMCORE is adequately capitalized and adequately managed. In addition, on consummation of the proposal, AMCORE and its affiliates would control less than 10 percent of the total amount of deposits of insured depository institutions in the United States and less than 30 percent of the total amount of deposits of insured depository institutions in Wisconsin. First National also has been in existence and continuously operated for at least the minimum period required under Wisconsin law. Protestant also contends that AMCORE's subsidiary banks in rural Illinois invest a significant proportion of their assets in securities, thereby reducing funding for loans, and criticizes AMCORE for not providing assurances in the proposal that First National's ratio of securities investments to total assets would remain consistent with the average ratio for Wisconsin institutions serving similar communities. The loan-to-deposit ratios of AMCORE's banks serving rural and farm areas indicate that the banks engage in significant levels of lending, and the examinations indicated that the level of lending at AMCORE's subsidiary banks is adequate. The Statement of the Federal Financial Supervisory Agencies Regarding the Community Reinvestment Act (54 Federal Register 13,742, 13,745 (1989)) provides that a CRA examination is an important and often controlling factor in consideration of an institution's CRA record and that reports of these examinations will be given great weight in the applications process. Protestant contends that AMCORE has been unwilling to seek advice on services, products, and credit needs of the local community served by First National. AMCORE denies this assertion, and states that it has met with members of the community served by First National, including Protestant. The Board notes that AMCORE's subsidiary banks' efforts to ascertain the credit needs of their communities were found to be satisfactory in their most recent CRA evaluations. Examiners found no evidence of prohibited discrimination or other illegal credit practices at any of AMCORE's subsidiary banks or First National, and concluded that the banks were in satisfactory compliance with the substantive provisions of the fair lending laws. Examiners also found no evidence of any practices by the banks that were intended to discourage applications for the types of credit listed in the institutions' CRA statements. Protestant asserts that because AMCORE has agreed in principle to acquire another Wisconsin bank holding company, Country Bank Shares Corporation, Mt. Horeb, Wisconsin ("Country"), AMCORE will close some Wisconsin branch offices. The First National proposal represents the initial entry by AMCORE into Wisconsin and therefore creates no institutional overlap. In addition, AMCORE has represented that it will serve the convenience and needs of the community through an expanded branch network in the areas in which First National currently has branches. If AMCORE proposed to acquire Country, that proposal, including the effect of the proposal on the convenience and needs of the community, would be subject to review under the federal banking laws. The bank formed an Agriculture Advisory Committee composed of members of the agricultural community to better ascertain the credit needs of farm areas within the community served by the bank. A small farm loan is defined as a loan of $500,000 or less. In addition, AMCORE Bank N.A., Rock River Valley, Dixon, and AMCORE Bank N.A., Northwest, Woodstock, both in Illinois, participate in government-guaranteed loan programs such as those sponsored by the FmHA. Two individual commenters objected to the loss of local control of Bancorp that would result from its acquisition by AMCORE. The Board believes that an institution's performance should be assessed on the basis of the institution's actual record of assisting to meet the credit needs of its entire community and, accordingly, in reviewing the proposal the Board has focused on AMCORE's record as discussed above. Protestant and individual commenters have requested that the Board hold a public hearing or public meeting on the application. Section 3(b) of the BHC Act does not require the Board to hold a public hearing or meeting on an application unless the appropriate supervisory authority for the bank to be acquired makes a timely written recommendation of denial. In this case, the Board has not received such a recommendation from any state or federal supervisory authority. Under its rules, the Board may also, in its discretion, hold a public hearing or meeting on an application to clarify factual issues related to the application and to provide an opportunity for testimony, if appropriate. 12 C.F.R. 262.3(e) and 262.25(d). The Board has carefully considered these requests in light of all the facts of record. In the Board's view, the requestors have had ample opportunity to submit their views, and have, in fact, provided substantive written submissions that have been considered by the Board in acting on the proposal. The requests fail to demonstrate why the written submissions do not adequately present their views. After a careful review of all the facts of record, the Board concludes that the requests dispute the weight that should be accorded to, and the conclusions that may be drawn from, the existing facts of record, but do not identify any genuine dispute about facts that are material to the Board's decision. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that a public hearing or meeting is not necessary to clarify the factual record, and is not otherwise warranted in this case. Accordingly, the requests for a public hearing or meeting on the proposal are denied. Protestant requests that the Board withhold approval of the proposal until AMCORE addresses the issues Protestant has raised, the OCC conducts another CRA performance evaluation of First National, and the public has had an opportunity to provide additional comments. The Board is required under applicable law and its regulations to act on applications under the BHC Act within specified time periods. The Board notes, moreover, that Protestant has had a reasonable opportunity to submit information as provided under the Board's application processing procedures and has, in fact, submitted substantive comments that have been carefully considered by the Board. Based on all the facts of record, and for the reasons discussed above, the Board concludes that the record is sufficient to act on the proposal at this time, and that delay or denial of the proposal on the grounds of informational insufficiency is not warranted. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Phillips, and Meyer.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced approval of clarifying and technical amendments to Regulation CC, which governs the availability of funds and the collection of checks. Among other things, the amendments, effective April 28 , reduce compliance burden for depository institutions in some cases and permit institutions to satisfy the requirements to provide notice and disclosure by electronic means, if certain conditions are met. A review of the regulation was made under Section 303 of the Riegle Community Development and Regulatory Improvement Act of 1994. That Section directs the federal banking agencies to review their rules in order to improve efficiency, reduce unnecessary costs, and remove inconsistencies and outmoded and duplicative requirements. |
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice of Stichting Prioriteit ABN AMRO Holding, Stichting Administratiekantoor ABN AMRO Holding, ABN AMRO Holding N.V., and ABN AMRO Bank N.V., all of Amsterdam, The Netherlands, to acquire indirectly certain parts of the futures-related businesses of Citicorp, New York, New York, and thereby engage in a variety of futures-related activities. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Stichting Prioriteit ABN AMRO Holding Stichting Administratiekantoor ABN AMRO Holding ABN AMRO Holding N.V. ABN AMRO Bank N.V. all of Amsterdam, The Netherlands Order Approving Notice to Engage in Certain Nonbanking Activities Stichting Prioriteit ABN AMRO Holding, Stichting Administratiekantoor ABN AMRO Holding, ABN AMRO Holding N.V., and ABN AMRO Bank N.V., all of Amsterdam, The Netherlands (collectively, "Notificants"), bank holding companies within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), have requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8)) and section 225.23 of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.23) to acquire indirectly rights, interests, and obligations in clearing contracts held by Citicorp Futures Corporation, New York, New York ("CitiFutures"), and CitiFutures Limited, London, England ("CFL London"), and to acquire indirectly all the outstanding common shares of Citicorp Futures Limited, Singapore ("CFL Singapore"). Notificants would thereby indirectly engage in the following activities: (1) acting as a futures commission merchant ("FCM") for nonaffiliated persons in the execution and clearing on major commodities exchanges of financial futures and options on futures contracts, and providing investment advice on these contracts as an FCM or as a commodity trading advisor ("CTA"), pursuant to sections 225.25(b)(18) and (19) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.25(b)(17) and (b)(18)); (2) acting as an FCM for nonaffiliated persons in the execution and clearing on major commodity exchanges of futures and options on futures contracts based on bonds or other debt instruments, certain commodities, and stock, bond, or commodity indices, and providing investment advice, including discretionary management services, with respect to such contracts; and (3) providing execution-only, clearing-only and omnibus account services with respect to futures and options on futures based on certain financial and nonfinancial commodities. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (62 Federal Register 9432 (1997)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the notice and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Stichting Prioriteit ABN AMRO Holding, with total consolidated assets of $339.4 billion, is the largest commercial banking organization in the Netherlands. Notificants control seven depository institutions in Illinois and one commercial bank in New York. ABN AMRO Bank N.V. also operates branches in Boston, Massachusetts; Chicago, Illinois; New York, New York; Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; and Seattle, Washington; and agencies in Atlanta, Georgia; Miami, Florida; Houston, Texas; and Los Angeles and San Francisco, California. CitiFutures, CFL London, and CFL Singapore are wholly owned indirect subsidiaries of Citicorp, New York, New York, and engage in a variety of futures-related activities pursuant to specific Board orders, including providing execution and clearing, execution-only and clearing-only services with respect to futures and options on futures on financial and nonfinancial commodities. Notificants propose that ABN AMRO Chicago Corporation, Chicago, Illinois, Notificants' existing section 20 subsidiary, succeed to certain clearing businesses currently conducted by CitiFutures and acquire CFL Singapore. Notificants also propose that ABN AMRO Chicago Corporation (UK) Limited, London, England, succeed to the clearing businesses of CFL London. Activities Previously Approved by the Board The Board previously has determined by regulation and order that Notificants' proposed futures-related execution, clearing and advisory activities are so closely related to banking as to be proper incidents thereto, provided that the activities are conducted in conformity with certain limitations and conditions designed to, inter alia , ensure that the activities are consistent with safe and sound banking practices and mitigate potential conflicts of interests. Notificants have committed to conduct the activities in accordance with the limitations set forth in Regulation Y, the Board's orders, and interpretations relating to each of the activities, including the limitations noted in the ABN AMRO Order . Notificants also have specifically committed to apply the risk management policies, procedures and internal control systems that were subject to the Board's scrutiny in connection with the ABN AMRO Order . Proper Incident to Banking Standard In order to approve this notice, the Board must determine that the activities are a proper incident to banking, that is, that performance of the proposed activities "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public . . . that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices." As part of its review of these factors, the Board considers the financial and managerial resources of the notificant and its subsidiaries and the effect the transaction would have on such resources. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that financial and managerial considerations are consistent with approval of the proposal. The Board expects that the proposed transaction can reasonably be expected to provide added convenience and services to Notificants' customers by offering them an expanded range of futures-related products and services. There are numerous providers of the proposed futures-related services and, therefore, consummation of the proposal would not significantly decrease competition in any relevant market. The Board also believes that the conduct of the proposed activities within the framework established in this order, prior orders, and Regulation Y is not likely to result in significantly adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, or unsound banking practices. In addition, to address any potential adverse impact from the performance of the proposed activities, Notificants have committed to conduct the activities pursuant to conditions the Board previously has found satisfactory to mitigate potential adverse effects. Accordingly, the Board has concluded that the performance of the proposed activities by Notificants can reasonably be expected to produce public benefits that outweigh possible adverse effects under the proper incident to banking standard of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Based on the foregoing and all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the notice should be, and hereby is, approved. Approval of this notice is specifically conditioned on compliance by Notificants with the commitments made in connection with this notice. The Board's determination also is subject to all the terms and conditions set forth in Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.23(b) (12 C.F.R. 225.27 and 225.23(b)), and to the Board's authority to require such modification or termination of the activities of a bank holding company or any of its subsidiaries as the Board finds necessary to ensure compliance with, and to prevent evasion of, the provisions of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders thereunder. For purposes of this transaction, the commitments and conditions agreed to by Notificants shall be deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision, and as such may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. This transaction shall not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective March 19, 1997. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes Asset and ranking data are as of December 31, 1995, and use exchange rates then in effect. See, e.g., Citicorp, 81 Federal Reserve Bulletin 164 (1995). See 12 C.F.R. 225.25(b)(18), (b)(19); Stichting Prioriteit ABN AMRO Holding , 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin 138 (1997) (" ABN AMRO Order "). 12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8). See 12 C.F.R. 225.24; see also The Fuji Bank, Limited , 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 94 (1989); Bayerische Vereinsbank AG , 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 155 (1987). Voting for this action: Vice Chair Rivlin and Governors Kelley, Phillips, and Meyer. Absent and not voting: Chairman Greenspan.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application of Westamerica Bancorporation, San Rafael, California, to acquire Vallicorp Holdings, Inc., and indirectly acquire Vallicorp's wholly owned subsidiary bank, Valliwide Bank, both of Fresno, California. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Westamerica Bancorporation San Rafael, California Order Approving the Acquisition of a Bank Holding Company Westamerica Bancorporation, San Rafael, California ("Westamerica"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 3 of the BHC Act (12ï¿½U.S.C. §ï¿½1842) to acquire Vallicorp Holdings, Inc. ("Vallicorp"), and indirectly acquire Vallicorp's wholly owned subsidiary bank, Valliwide Bank ("Valliwide Bank"), both of Fresno, California. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (61 Federal Register 67,833 (1996)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the proposal and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in sectionï¿½3ï¿½of the BHC Act. Westamerica, with total consolidated assets of $2.5 billion, operates two subsidiary banks in California, Westamerica Bank, in San Rafael ("Westamerica Bank"), and Bank of Lake County, in Lakeport ("Lake County Bank"). Westamerica is the 12th largest commercial banking organization in California, controlling $2 billion in deposits, representing less than 1 percent of the total deposits in commercial banking organizations in the state. Vallicorp is the 17th largest commercial banking organization in the state, controlling deposits of $1.2 billion, representing less than 1 percent of the total deposits in commercial banking organizations in the state. On consummation of the proposal, Westamerica would become the 10th largest commercial banking organization in California, controlling deposits of $3.2ï¿½billion, representing 1.4 percent of total deposits in commercial banking organizations in the state. The Board has long held that consideration of the convenience and needs factor includes a review of the records of the relevant depository institutions under the Community Reinvestment Act (12 U.S.C. § 2901 et seq. ) ("CRA"). As provided in the CRA, the Board evaluates this factor in light of examinations by the primary federal supervisor of the CRA performance records of the relevant institutions. An institution's most recent CRA performance evaluation is a particularly important consideration in the applications process because it represents a detailed on-site evaluation of the institution's overall record of performance under the CRA by its primary federal supervisor. Westamerica Bank, Westamerica's lead subsidiary bank, received an "outstanding" rating at the most recent examination of its CRA performance by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco ("Reserve Bank"), as of May 13, 1996 ("Westamerica Examination"). The other bank controlled by Westamerica, Lake County Bank, received a "satisfactory" rating at the most recent examination of its CRA performance by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, as of January 12, 1994. Valliwide Bank received an "outstanding" rating for CRA performance at its most recent examination by the Reserve Bank, as of January 22, 1996 ("Valliwide Examination"). Branches Vallicorp provided notice to the California State Banking Department from September 1996 to Januaryï¿½1997, before this merger proposal, that it might close or divest a number of branches. The California Superintendent of Banks ("Superintendent") approved those possible closures after reviewing the potential effect on the public convenience in the areas served by the branches. The Superintendent specifically approved Vallicorp's proposal to close five branches identified by commenters. After receipt of the comments, however, Vallicorp entered into agreements to sell four of the five branches to another depository institution. Bank branches would, therefore, continue to be operated at these locations. If Vallicorp closed the fifth branch, in Twain Harte, alternative banking services would remain available nearby because two other depository institutions maintain branches within two miles of that Vallicorp branch. In addition, Vallicorp has represented that prior to determining to close that branch, it would consider whether closing the branch would have an adverse impact on the community served and the actions that should be taken to minimize any adverse impact. In the Valliwide Examination, examiners noted that in the past Vallicorp had assessed the potential impact of branch closings on its continued ability to offer services throughout the communities served. The Board also has reviewed Westamerica's branch closing policy. Under this policy, before making a decision to close a branch, Westamerica considers whether the closing would have an adverse impact on the community served and the alternatives for banking services in the area affected by closing the branch. Examiners reviewed this policy and found it to be effective. In addition, any proposed closings also would be reviewed by the Superintendent and subject to prior notice under section 42 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act. The Westamerica Examination noted that Westamerica branches were accessible to all segments of the community and that the bank had a strong record of offering services that helped meet the banking needs of its delineated community, including low- to moderate-income ("LMI") neighborhoods. Lending Performance Westamerica Bank and Valliwide Bank are primarily small business lenders with a secondary focus on mortgage lending. According to the Westamerica Examination, as of March 31, 1996, commercial lending represented 48 percent and residential lending represented 19.3 percent of Westamerica Bank's loan portfolio. In 1996, Westamerica Bank originated 1,386 small business loans for a total of approximately $196 million. According to the Valliwide Examination, 46 percent of Valliwide Bank's loan portfolio consists of commercial loans and 40 percent consists of real estate loans. In 1996, Valliwide Bank originated 5,044 small business loans for a total of approximately $509 million. Lending Activities Commenters maintain that the lending levels exhibited in the 1995 HMDA data of Westamerica Bank and Valliwide Bank raise concerns about the lending, marketing and outreach efforts to minorities by those banks. The Board notes, however, that the CRA does not require a bank to extend any particular type of credit, such as loans secured by residential housing that are reported under HMDA. Westamerica asserts that the proposal would improve the variety of affordable housing, business development and community development loans that would be available, because Westamerica plans to introduce many of its Community Access Loan ("CAL") products in the communities currently served by Valliwide. Those programs are designed for low-income borrowers and include the Community Access Loan Program, ("CAL Program") which provides home equity loans, automobile loans, and home improvement loans with lower monthly payments; the CAL PAL Loan program, which provides residential mortgage loans with flexible underwriting criteria, lower down payments, and no private mortgage insurance; and the CAL Business Loan Program, which offers "microenterprise" or "incubator" business loans to minorities and women through local agencies, that also provide technical support to the borrowers. In 1996, Westamerica Bank originated 33ï¿½CAL PAL loans for a total of approximately $4.2 million, and 60 CAL Business Loans for nearly $1 million. Westamerica also plans to offer community development loans within Valliwide Bank's delineated community and to continue offering Small Business Administration ("SBA") loans in the community served by Valliwide Bank. Valliwide Bank is a preferred SBA lender. Westamerica Bank currently finances several affordable housing and community development projects within its community. From October 31, 1994, through May 13, 1996, Westamerica Bank extended a $6 million commitment to finance the construction of 80 units of low-income housing for senior citizens and low-income families; approximately $1 million to localities to finance the construction of a fire and police station; approximately $1.2 million to local school districts for the purchase of equipment, construction of permanent and portable classrooms, and school buses; and a total of approximately $1.5 million to one organization that provides food, shelter, clothing, and literacy classes for the homeless and another that provides services to the disabled. The record in the Valliwide Examination demonstrates that Valliwide Bank provides funding for affordable housing projects, community development projects, and the credit needs of low- to moderate-income individuals in its community. According to the Valliwide Examination, in 1995, Valliwide Bank committed $26 million for the construction of 17 affordable housing projects and, between November 28, 1994, and January 22, 1996, the bank extended 2,644 community development loans for a total of approximately $84 million for the purposes of start-up business and business expansion financing. In addition, Valliwide Bank's Community Loan Program originated 335 consumer loans to low- to moderate-income individuals or in low- to moderate-income areas for a total of approximately $1.2 million in 1995. Other aspects of CRA performance The Board has reviewed HMDA data for 1994 and 1995, and preliminary data for 1996, filed by Westamerica and Vallicorp in light of the comments received on the proposal. In reviewing HMDA data, the Board considered that Westamerica is primarily a small business lender and that Valliwide Bank did not offer home mortgage-related loans before 1994. In the Westamerica Examination, examiners found that in 1995, 353 people applied for HMDA loans and 251 HMDA loans were originated for an origination rate of 71 percent. Fifty-four of these applications were from individuals in LMI census tracts. The 1995 HMDA origination rates of Westamerica for LMI census tracts was 70 percent, which exceeded the average origination rate for other lenders in the market in LMI tracts in 1995, which was 54.3 percent. The Board has reviewed carefully other information, particularly examination reports that provide an on-site evaluation of compliance by Westamerica and Vallicorp with fair lending laws. The examinations of Westamerica Bank and Valliwide Bank found no evidence of prohibitive discrimination or other illegal credit practices at the institutions. Examiners also found no evidence at either of the institutions of any practices to discourage applications for the types of credit listed in the CRA statements of the banks. In addition, the Westamerica and Valliwide Examinations noted that both banks solicited credit from all segments of their community, including LMI neighborhoods. The Westamerica Examination noted the bank's strong performance in ascertaining community credit needs. Westamerica Bank primarily relied on a call program to contact an extensive network of governmental, business, and community-based organizations throughout its community. Credit needs were documented in Community Needs Assessment Reports that were reviewed by senior managers. Those efforts resulted in more funding for small businesses, affordable housing, and neighborhood improvement projects. Westamerica also engaged in a print media advertising campaign in local newspapers, newsletters, and minority papers and directories. Westamerica has stated that it would continue to assist in meeting the credit needs of communities in the San Joaquin and Sacramento Valleys after consummation of the proposal. Westamerica has indicated, for example, that it would continue the community development activities of Vallicorp in these areas, and expand outreach efforts throughout the San Joaquin Valley. In addition, Westamerica would continue its representation on the Greater Sacramento Community Lending Consortium, which provides affordable housing loans in Sacramento County. Westamerica also participates with the Valley Sierra Small Business Development Center and the Greater Sacramento Certified Development Corporation, which provide technical support to applicants under Westamerica's Women and Minority Microenterprise Loan Program. Conclusion on Convenience and Needs Factor In considering the convenience and needs factor, the Board has carefully reviewed all the facts of record including information provided by commenters on the proposal, responses by Westamerica and Vallicorp, and the results of the relevant CRA performance evaluations. Based on this review, and for the reasons discussed above, the Board concludes that considerations relating to the convenience and needs of the communities served, including the CRA performance records of the institutions involved, are consistent with approval. Conclusion Based on the foregoing and all other facts of record, including all the commitments made in connection with this proposal, the Board has determined that the application should be, and hereby is, approved. The Board's approval is expressly conditioned on compliance by Westamerica and Vallicorp with all the commitments made in connection with this proposal and with the conditions referred to in this order. For purposes of this action, the commitments and conditions relied on by the Board in reaching this decision are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. This proposal shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day following the effective date of this order or later than three months following the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Reserve Bank, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective March 19, 1997. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes Westamerica also has requested the Board's approval for an option to purchase up to 19.9 percent of the voting shares of Vallicorp if certain events occur. The option would expire on consummation of the proposal. Asset data are as of September 30, 1996. Deposit data are as of June 30, 1996, and incorporate structural changes through January 1997. The Grass Valley banking market includes the cities of Glenbrook, Grass Valley, Nevada City, and Penn Valley; the Modesto banking market includes the Modesto RMA, and the following cities, Escalon, Hughson, Oakdale, and Ripon, and the Sacramento banking market includes the Sacramento RMA and Lincoln City. The HHI would increase by 113 points to 1643 in the Grass Valley banking market, 10 points to 1183 in the Modesto banking market, and 1 point to 1419 in the Sacramento banking market. Under the DOJ Guidelines, 49ï¿½ Federal Register 26,823 (June 29, 1984), a market in which the post-merger HHI is between 1000 and 1800 is considered moderately concentrated. The Justice Department has informed the Board that a bank merger or acquisition generally will not be challenged (in the absence of other factors indicating anticompetitive effects) unless the post-merger HHI is at least 1800 and the merger increases the HHI by more than 200 points. The Justice Department has stated that the higher than normal threshold for an increase in the HHI when screening bank mergers and acquisitions for anticompetitive effects implicitly recognizes the competitive effects of limited-purpose lenders and other non-depository financial entities. Commenters included a California state senator, the California Reinvestment Committee, Amador-Tuolumne Community Action Agency, and six small businesses in areas where Vallicorp would close branches. See Statement of the Federal Financial Supervisory Agencies Regarding the Community Reinvestment Act. 54 Federal Register 13,742, 13,745 (1989). Vallicorp also provided notice of the branch closures to the public and to the Reserve Bank pursuant to section 42 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Act ("section 42"), as implemented by the Joint Policy Statement Regarding Branch Closings. See 12 U.S.C. § 1831r-1; 58 Federal Register 49,083 (1993). Section 42 requires that a bank provide the public with at least 30 days notice and the primary federal supervisor with at least 90 days notice before the date of the proposed branch closing. The bank is also required to provide reasons and other supporting data for the closure, consistent with the institution's written policy for branch closings. Those towns are Altaville, Arnold, Columbia, Groveland, and Twain Harte in Tuolumne and Calaveras Counties, California. Voting for this action: Vice Chair Rivlin and Governors Kelley, Phillips and Meyer. Absent and not voting: Chairman Greenspan.
Testimony of Governor Susan M. Phillips Restrictions on securities underwriting and dealing Before the Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Regulatory Relief of the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, United States Senate March 20, 1997
Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan Performance of the U.S. economy Joint Economic Committee, United States Congress March 20, 1997 Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee, I am pleased to appear here today. Last month, the Federal Reserve Board submitted its semiannual report on monetary policy to the Congress. That report and my accompanying testimony covered in detail our assessment of the outlook for the U.S. economy. This morning, I would like to highlight some of the key aspects of the current economic situation. As I told the Congress last month, the performance of the U.S. economy remains quite favorable. Real GDP growth picked up to more than 3 percent over the four quarters of 1996. Moreover, recently released data suggest that activity has retained a great deal of vigor in early 1997. In addition, nominal hourly wages and salaries have risen faster than prices over the past several quarters, meaning that workers have reaped some of the benefits of rising productivity and thus gained ground in real terms. Outside the food and energy sectors, increases in consumer prices have actually continued to edge lower, with core CPI inflation of only 2-1/2 percent over the past twelve months. The low inflation of the past year is both a symptom and a cause of the good economy. It is symptomatic of the balance and solidity of the expansion and the evident absence of major strains on resources. At the same time, continued low levels of inflation and inflation expectations have been a key support for healthy economic performance. They have helped to create a financial and economic environment conducive to strong capital spending and longer-range planning generally, and so to sustained economic expansion. These types of results are why we stressed in our monetary policy testimony the importance of acting promptly--ideally pre-emptively--to keep inflation low over the intermediate term and to promote price stability over time. For some, the benign inflation outcome of the past year might be considered surprising, as resource utilization rates--particularly of labor--have been in the neighborhood of those that historically have been associated with building inflation pressures. To be sure, nominal hourly labor compensation, especially its wage component, accelerated in 1996. But the rate of pay increase still was markedly less than historical relationships with labor market conditions would have predicted. Atypical restraint on compensation increases has been evident for a few years now. Almost certainly, it reflects a number of factors, including the sharp deceleration in health care costs and the heightened pressure on firms and workers in industries that compete internationally. Domestic deregulation has also intensified the competitive forces in some industries. But, as I outlined in some detail in testimony last month, I believe that job insecurity has played the dominant role. For example, in 1991, at the bottom of the recession, a survey of workers at large firms by International Survey Research Corporation indicated that 25 percent feared being laid off. In 1996, despite the sharply lower unemployment rate and the tighter labor market, the same survey organization found that 46 percent were fearful of a job layoff. Whatever the reasons for its persistence, job insecurity cannot suppress wage growth indefinitely. Clearly, there is a limit to how long workers will remain willing to accept smaller increases in living standards in exchange for additional job security. Even if real wages were to remain permanently on a lower upward track than otherwise as a result of the greater sense of insecurity, the rate of change of wages would revert at some point to a normal relationship with price inflation. The unknown is when a more normal pattern will resume. Indeed, the labor markets bear especially careful watching for signs that such a process is under way. So far this year, the demand for labor has stayed strong. Payroll employment grew briskly in January and February, and the unemployment rate remained around 5-1/4 percent--roughly matching the low of the last cyclical upswing, in the late 1980s. Also, initial claims for unemployment insurance remained low into March. In addition, the percentage of households telling the Conference Board that jobs are plentiful has risen sharply of late, which suggests that workers may be growing more confident about the job situation. Finally, wages rose faster in 1996 than in 1995 by most measures--in fact, the acceleration was quite sizable by some measures. This, too, raises questions about whether the transitional period of unusually slow wage gains may be drawing to a close. In any event, further increases in labor utilization rates would heighten the risk of additional upward pressure on wage costs, and ultimately prices. To be sure, the pickup in wage gains to date has not shown through to underlying price inflation. Increases in the core CPI, as well as in several other broad measures of prices, have stayed subdued or even edged off further of late. As best I can judge, faster productivity growth last year offset the pressure from rising compensation gains on labor costs per unit of output. And non-labor costs, which are roughly a quarter of total consolidated costs of the nonfinancial corporate sector, were little changed in 1996. Owing in part to this subdued behavior of unit costs, profits and rates of return on capital have risen to high levels. As a consequence, a substantial number of businesses apparently believe that, were they to raise prices to boost profits further, competitors with already ample profit margins would not follow suit; instead, they would use the occasion to capture a greater market share. This interplay is doubtless a significant factor in the evident loss of pricing power in American business. Intensifying global competition may also be limiting the ability of domestic firms to hike prices as well as wages. Competitive pressures here and abroad should continue to act as a restraint on inflation in the months ahead. In addition, crude oil prices have largely retraced last year's run-up, and, with the worldwide supply of oil having moved up relative to demand, futures markets project stable prices over the near term. Food prices should also rise less rapidly than they did in 1996 as some of last year's supply limitations ease. Nonetheless, the trends in the core CPI and in broader price measures are likely to come under pressure from a continued tight labor market, whose influence on costs will be augmented by the scheduled increase in the minimum wage later in the year. And, with considerable health-care savings already having been realized, larger increases in fringe benefits could put upward pressure on overall compensation. Moreover, although non-oil import prices should remain subdued in 1997 as the sharp rise in the dollar over the past year-and-a-half continues to feed through to domestic prices, their damping effects on U.S. inflation probably will not be as great as in 1996. The lagged effects of the increase in the exchange value of the dollar will also likely restrain real U.S. net exports this year. In addition, declines in real federal government purchases should exert a modest degree of restraint on overall demand, and residential construction will probably not repeat the gains of 1996. On the other hand, financial conditions overall remain supportive to the real economy, and creditworthy borrowers are finding funding to be readily available from intermediaries and in the securities markets. Moreover, we do not see evidence of widespread imbalances either in business inventories or in stocks of capital equipment and consumer durables that would lead to a substantial cutback in spending. The trends in consumer spending on items other than durables also look solid. Retail sales posted robust gains in January and February, and, according to various surveys, sentiment is decidedly upbeat. Moreover, consumers have enjoyed healthy increases in their real incomes over the past couple of years, along with the extraordinary stock-market driven rise in their financial wealth. Should the higher wealth be sustained, it could provide important support to consumption in 1997. But, looking at the data through 1996, the surging stock market does not seem to have imparted as big a boost to spending as past relationships would have predicted. The lack of a more substantial wealth effect is especially surprising because we have also seen a noticeable widening in the ownership of stocks over the past several years. Indeed, the Federal Reserve's recently released Survey of Consumer Finances suggests that of the total value of all families' holdings of publicly traded stocks and mutual funds, the share held by those with incomes below $100,000 (in 1995 dollars) rose from 32 percent in 1989 to 46 percent in 1995. It is possible, however, that the wealth effect is being offset by other factors. In particular, families may be reluctant to spend their added wealth because they see a greater need to keep it to support spending in retirement. Many have expressed heightened concern about their financial security in old age, in part because of growing skepticism about the viability of the Social Security system. This concern has reportedly led to stepped-up saving for retirement. The sharp increase in debt burdens in recent years may also be constraining spending by some families. Indeed, although our consumer survey showed that debt usage rose between 1992 and 1995 for almost all income groups, changes in financial conditions were not uniform across families. Notably, the median ratio of debt payments to income for families with debt--a useful measure of the typical debt burden--held steady or declined for families with incomes of at least $50,000, but it rose for those with incomes below $50,000. We don't know whether these latter families took on the additional debt because they perceived brighter future income prospects, or simply to accelerate purchases they would have made later. Nonetheless, these families are probably the most vulnerable to disruptions in income, and the rise in their debt burdens is likely to make both borrowers and lenders a bit more cautious as we move forward. Both household and business balance sheets have expanded at a pace considerably faster than income and product flows over the past decade. Accordingly, any percentage change in assets or liabilities has a greater effect on economic growth than it used to. However, identifying such influences in the aggregate data is not always easy. At present, the difficulty is compounded by concern that the currently published national statistics may not provide an accurate reading of the trends in recent years, especially for productivity. In any event, other data suggest that wealth and debt effects may be exerting a measurable influence on the consumption and saving decisions of different segments of the population. According to the Consumer Expenditure Survey conducted by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, saving out of current income by families in the upper-income quintile evidently has declined in recent years. At the same time, Federal Reserve estimates suggest that the use of credit for purchases has leveled off after a sharp run-up from 1993 to 1996, perhaps because some families are becoming debt constrained and, as a result, are curtailing their spending. The Federal Reserve, of course, will be weighing these and other influences as it makes future policy decisions. Demand has been growing quite strongly in recent months, and the FOMC, at its meeting next week, will have to judge whether that pace of expansion will be maintained, and, if so, whether it will continue to be met by solid productivity growth, as it apparently has been--official figures to the contrary notwithstanding. Alternatively, if strong demand is expected to persist, and does not seem likely to be matched by productivity improvement, the FOMC will have to decide whether increased pressures on supply will eventually produce the types of inflationary imbalances that, if not addressed early, will undermine the long expansion. Should we choose to alter monetary policy, we know from past experience that, although the financial markets may respond immediately, the main effects on inflationary pressures may not be felt until late this year and in 1998. Because forecasts that far out are highly uncertain, we rarely think in terms of a single outlook. Rather, we endeavor to assess the likely consequences of our decisions in terms of a reasonable range of possible outcomes. Part of our evaluation is to judge not only the benefits that are likely to result from appropriate policy, but also the costs should we be wrong. In any action--including leaving policy unchanged--we seek to assure ourselves that the expected benefits are large enough to risk the cost of a mistake. In closing, I would like to note that the current economic expansion is now entering its seventh year. That makes it already a long upswing by historical standards. And yet, looking ahead, the prospects for sustaining the expansion are quite favorable. The flexibility of our market system and the vibrancy of our private sector remain examples for the whole world to emulate. We will endeavor to do our part by continuing to foster a monetary framework under which our citizens can prosper to the fullest possible extent.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced further reductions in the Reserve Banks' automated clearing house (ACH) fees. The new ACH fee schedule is effective May 1, 1997 . The Federal Reserve has reduced its ACH fees three times within the past twelve months. These price reductions reflect the efficiencies of the Federal Reserve's centralized Fed ACH processing environment. Under the new ACH volume-based fee schedule, the cost to originate ACH transactions will decline by an average of 17 percent. Customers that deposit files of less than 2,500 items will be assessed a file fee of $1.75 and a per-item fee of $0.009. Customers that deposit files of more than 2,500 items will be assessed a file fee of $6.75 and a per-item fee of $0.007. The cost to receive ACH transactions will decline by 10 percent to $0.009 for all customers. The Federal Reserve Board also adopted guidelines for the use of volume-based fee structures for Reserve Bank payment services effective March 25, 1997. Volume-based fees are an extension of multipart fees currently used by Reserve Banks. The use of volume-based fees has the potential to improve payment system efficiency. The Board's notice is attached. |
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today requested comment on proposed amendments to Regulations H and P. Comment is requested by May 27, 1997 . The amendments to Regulation H would remove outdated material, update and reorganize the remaining material and incorporate provisions designed to reduce burden on State member banks. In addition, the provisions of Regulation P, regarding State member security procedures, have been incorporated into Regulation H. These changes should make it easier for banks to understand the wide variety of provisions that they must comply with and to make it easier for them to locate provisions. The Board's notices are attached. Regulation H: | Regulation P:
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application of First Alamogordo Bancorp of Nevada, Inc., Alamogordo, to merge with First Alamogordo Bancorp, Inc., Alamogordo ("First New Mexico"), and thereby acquire First New Mexico's subsidiary banks, First National Bank of Alamogordo, Alamogordo, and First National Bank of Ruidoso, Ruidoso, all in New Mexico. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. First Alamogordo Bancorp of Nevada, Inc. Alamogordo, New Mexico Order Approving the Formation of a Bank Holding Company First Alamogordo Bancorp of Nevada, Inc., Alamogordo ("First Nevada" or "Applicant"), has requested the Board's approval under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act") (12 U.S.C. § 1842) to become a bank holding company by merging with First Alamogordo Bancorp, Inc., Alamogordo ("First New Mexico"), and thereby acquiring its subsidiary banks, First National Bank of Alamogordo, Alamogordo, and First National Bank of Ruidoso, Ruidoso, all in New Mexico. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (61 Federal Register 67,833 (1996)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the proposal and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in sectionï¿½3 of the BHC Act. First Nevada is a nonoperating company formed to acquire First New Mexico in a corporate reorganization, whereby First New Mexico would be reincorporated in the state of Nevada. First New Mexico is the 14th largest commercial banking organization in New Mexico, controlling $147 million in deposits, representing approximately 1ï¿½percent of total deposits in commercial banking organizations in the state. The proposal would not result in the acquisition of any additional banking assets. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that the proposal would not have any significantly adverse effects on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in any relevant banking market. The BHC Act also requires the Board to consider the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the companies and banks involved in a proposal, and certain other supervisory factors. The Board has carefully considered these factors in light of all the facts of record, including comments from certain minority shareholders of First New Mexico ("Protestants") objecting to the proposal. Under the proposal, all minority shareholders' interests in First New Mexico, including Protestants' 24.4ï¿½percent shareholding interest, would be redeemed for cash. Protestants contend that management of First New Mexico has underestimated the cost of "cashing out" the minority shareholders and that the proposal would have a negative impact on the financial resources of the institutions involved. The Board has carefully reviewed all the financial information provided by Applicant and Protestants regarding the proposal, including formal appraisals, evidence of prior sales, the affidavit of a banking consultant, and the assessment of the financial resources of the institutions made in confidential reports of examination by their primary federal supervisors. Under the proposal submitted by Applicant, the projected financial condition of First Nevada and its subsidiary banks and the projected debt-service obligation of First Nevada are reasonable and consistent with the Board's guidelines. Based on all the facts of record, and subject to the condition that First Nevada not exceed certain limitations that are designed to ensure that the bank holding company and its subsidiary banks continue to be strongly capitalized after the shares of the minority shareholders are redeemed, the Board concludes that financial considerations are consistent with approval. Protestants allege that First New Mexico's directors have refused to pay dividends to shareholders since its formation in 1982, despite the profitable performance of the bank holding company's subsidiary banks. In addition, Protestants assert that First New Mexico's directors, who also serve as directors of First New Mexico's subsidiary banks, are paid fees that are significantly higher than fees paid at institutions with comparable operations. Applicant responds that New Mexico corporate law gives directors broad discretion to decide whether to declare dividends, that retained earnings have been used to improve and expand facilities and pay existing debts, and that the fees paid do not violate any federal banking law. Applicant also contends that the directors of First New Mexico's subsidiary banks meet frequently and perform the functions as a committee that are normally performed by a chief executive officer. Protestants also maintain that actions by management in connection with the preparation of the proposal and its presentation to shareholders and the Board raise adverse managerial considerations. For example, Protestants allege that proxy materials relating to the proposal are insufficient and misleading and do not disclose Protestants' pending action in state court challenging the actions of management. The Board has provided a copy of Protestants' comments to New Mexico state securities regulators for their review and consideration. The Board also notes that Protestants intend to pursue their pending legal action against management, and that the court in their case has the authority to provide Protestants with an adequate remedy if their allegations can be substantiated. Finally, Protestants contend that the proposed merger serves no legitimate business purpose and is only designed to eliminate the minority shareholders. Protestants maintain that the management of First New Mexico has a special responsibility to deal fairly with minority shareholders, and that the elimination of minority shareholders under the circumstances in this case violates this responsibility. As noted above, Protestants also consider the offering price for their shares to be inadequate. Applicant responds that the proposal would enable the company to operate more efficiently and with greater certainty under Nevada law and thereby increase its profitability. Applicant also notes that New Mexico law permits dissenting shareholders the opportunity to have a state court establish the fair value of their shares. The BHC Act requires the Board to consider the affect of a proposed transaction on the institutions involved by taking into account specific considerations. The Board has carefully considered Protestants' comments and all other facts of record, including the responses by Applicant and the reports of examination by the institutions' primary federal supervisors. The facts of record indicate that First New Mexico and its subsidiary banks have long records of being operated by current management in a safe and sound manner and support a finding that managerial resources are satisfactory. Many of Protestants' specific allegations do not relate to the operations of the banking organizations but rather to Protestants' contention that they have been denied a fair return on their investment in the past and would not receive the fair value of their investment under the proposal. Disputes between shareholders and management regarding the value of shares, the adequacy of dividends paid to shareholders, and the sufficiency of disclosures to shareholders are matters of state and federal securities law and state corporate law. Many of these issues already have been raised in a pending legal action by Protestants before a court with the authority to provide them with adequate relief. As previously noted, moreover, the supervisory record of First New Mexico and its subsidiary banks indicates that managerial operations have been and are satisfactory. In this light, and based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that the managerial resources and future prospects of the institutions involved, and other supervisory factors, are consistent with approval. The Board also concludes that considerations relating to the convenience and needs of the community are consistent with approval. Based on the foregoing and all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the application should be, and hereby is, approved. The Board's approval is expressly conditioned on compliance with all the commitments made by First Nevada in connection with this application and the conditions referenced in this order. The commitments and conditions relied on by the Board in reaching this decision are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision, and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. This transaction shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day following the effective date of this order or later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective March 24, 1997. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes Deposit data are as of June 30, 1996, and have been adjusted to reflect mergers and acquisitions since that date. The directors and senior officers of First New Mexico currently hold their shares in a voting trust that controls approximately 70ï¿½percent of First New Mexico's voting shares and would own all the voting shares of First Nevada on consummation of the proposal. The remaining shareholders of First New Mexico, including Protestants, currently control approximately 30 percent of the shares as minority shareholders. Protestants assert that if Applicant is required to pay the minority shareholders a higher-than-offered value for their shares, which Protestants contend is substantially higher than the price used in Applicant's projections, the proposal could adversely affect the financial condition of First Nevada and its subsidiary banks. The Board has reviewed the application in light of all the share pricing information provided by Protestants and Applicant. Protestants have filed an action in New Mexico state court to recover these fees and have them redistributed to all shareholders as constructive dividends. This action is in its preliminary stages. The court proceedings and Protestants' dispute with management were disclosed in the record of the application. Protestants also allege that the appraisals referred to in the proxy materials did not exist at the time the materials were distributed and have been improperly withheld from shareholders. Applicant denies the allegations, and has disclosed the appraisals in the record of the application. Applicant also contends it was not required to provide shareholders with a copy of the appraisals. Securities of First New Mexico are not registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC"), and the SEC has informally indicated to the Board that it will not address Protestants' allegations. A request by Protestants for a temporary restraining order to postpone the shareholder meeting of First New Mexico was denied by a state court. Protestants indicate that they intend to file an amended complaint contesting the legality of the proxy solicitation and the merger under state law. See N.M. Stat. Ann. §§ ï¿½53-15-3 and 53-15-4. Western Bancshares, Inc. v. Board of Governors , 480 F.2d 749 (10thï¿½Cir. 1973). Protestants argue that the Board has adopted a requirement that the management of a bank holding company deal fairly with its shareholders. Benson Bancshares, Inc. , 63 Federal Reserve Bulletin 1009 (1977) (" Benson "). In Benson , the Board did not find that the BHC Act imposed any duties on the management in its relations with shareholders. In that case, the Board considered the manner is which the management priced the shares of minority shareholders, and, although the stock purchases by management were for significantly less than the book value of the stock, the Board found managerial resources to be satisfactory and approved the application. Unlike the minority shareholders in Benson , who appeared to have no means of protecting their interests, Protestants in this case have obtained their own professional valuation for their shares and have the right and the ability under state law to adjudicate the fair value of their shares. In addition, the offering price in this case is supported by two independent appraisals and a prior transaction. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Phillips, and Meyer.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application of Banc One Corporation to engage de novo through its indirect subsidiary, Banc One Capital Corporation, both of Columbus, Ohio, in underwriting and dealing in, to a limited extent, all types of debt and equity securities, other than ownership interests in open-end investment companies. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Banc One Corporation Columbus, Ohio Order Approving a Notice to Engage in Underwriting and Dealing in All Types of Debt and Equity Securities on a Limited Basis Banc One Corporation, Columbus, Ohio ("Applicant"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8)) and section 225.23 of the Board's Regulation Y (12ï¿½C.F.R. 225.23) to engage de novo in underwriting and dealing in, to a limited extent, all types of debt and equity securities (other than ownership interests in open-end investment companies) through its subsidiary, Banc One Capital Corporation, Columbus, Ohio ("Company"). Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (62 Federal Register 5008 (1997)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the notice and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in sectionï¿½4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Applicant, with total consolidated assets of approximately $98.6ï¿½billion, is the 10th largest banking organization in the United States. Applicant operates subsidiary banks in Ohio, Arizona, Colorado, Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, Louisiana, Oklahoma, Texas, Utah, West Virginia, and Wisconsin. Company currently is engaged in limited underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities as permitted under section 20 of the Glass-Steagall Act (12 U.S.C. § 377). Company is, and will continue to be, a broker-dealer registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. § 78a et seq. ) and a member of the National Association of Securities Dealers, Inc. ("NASD"). Accordingly, Company is, and will continue to be, subject to the record-keeping and reporting obligations, fiduciary standards, and other requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the SEC, and the NASD. The Board previously has determined that, subject to the prudential framework of limitations established in previous decisions to address the potential for conflicts of interests, unsound banking practices, or other adverse effects ("section 20 firewalls"), the proposed activities of underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities are so closely related to banking as to be proper incidents thereto within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Applicant has committed that Company will conduct the proposed underwriting and dealing activities using the same methods and procedures, and subject to the same prudential limitations that were established by the Board in the Sectionï¿½20 Orders. The Board also has determined that the conduct of these securities underwriting and dealing activities is consistent with section 20 of the Glass-Steagall Act (12 U.S.C. § 377), provided that the company engaged in the underwriting and dealing activities derives no more than 25 percent of its total gross revenue from underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities over any two-year period. Applicant has committed that Company will conduct its underwriting and dealing activities in bank-ineligible securities subject to the Board's revenue test. In order to approve this notice, the Board also must determine that the proposed activities "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public, such as greater convenience, increased competition, or gains in efficiency, that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices." As part of its review of these factors, the Board considers the financial and managerial resources of the notificant and its subsidiaries and the effect the transaction would have on such resources. The Board has reviewed the capitalization of Applicant and Company in accordance with the standards set forth in the Section 20 Orders and finds the capitalization of each to be consistent with approval. With respect to Company, this determination is based on all the facts of record, including Applicant's projections of the volume of Company's underwriting and dealing activities in bank-ineligible securities. In connection with the proposal, the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland ("Reserve Bank") has reviewed the operational and managerial infrastructure of Company, including its computer, audit, and accounting systems and internal risk management procedures and controls, with respect to the proposed underwriting and dealing in debt securities. Based on the Reserve Bank's review and all other facts of record, the Board has determined that Company has established an adequate operational and managerial infrastructure with respect to debt securities to ensure compliance with the requirements of the Section 20 Orders. On the basis of all the facts of record, and subject to the completion of a satisfactory infrastructure review with respect to Company's proposed underwriting and dealing in all types of equity securities, the Board has concluded that financial and managerial considerations are consistent with approval of the notice. In order to approve the proposal, the Board also must find that the performance of the proposed activities by Applicant can reasonably be expected to produce benefits that would outweigh possible adverse effects under the proper incident to bank standard of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Under the framework established in this and prior decisions, consummation of the proposal is not likely to result in any significantly adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices. The Board expects that consummation of the proposal would provide added convenience to the customers of Applicant and would increase competition among providers of these services. Accordingly, the Board has determined that the performance of the proposed activities by Applicant can reasonably be expected to produce public benefits that outweigh possible adverse effects under the proper incident to banking standard of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. On the basis of all the facts of record, the Board has determined to, and hereby does, approve this notice subject to all the terms and conditions discussed in this order and in the Section 20 Orders, as modified by the Modification Orders. The Board's approval of the proposal extends only to activities conducted within the limitations of those orders and this order, including the Board's reservation of authority to establish additional limitations to ensure that Company's activities are consistent with safety and soundness, avoidance of conflicts of interests, and other relevant considerations under the BHC Act. Underwriting and dealing in any manner other than as approved in this order and the Section 20 Orders (as modified by the Modification Orders) is not authorized for Company. The Board's approval of the proposed underwriting and dealing activities with respect to equity securities is conditioned on a future determination by the Board that Applicant and Company have established policies and procedures to ensure compliance with the conditions and restrictions previously relied on by the Board in approving these activities and the other requirements of this order and the Section 20 Orders, including computer, audit and accounting systems, internal risk management controls and the necessary operational and managerial infrastructure. On notification by the Board that this condition has been satisfied, Company may commence the proposed underwriting and dealing activities in equity securities, subject to the other conditions discussed in this order and the Section 20 Orders. The Board's determination also is subject to all the terms and conditions set forth in Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.23(g) (12 C.F.R. 225.7 and 225.23(g)), and to the Board's authority to require modification or termination of the activities of a bank holding company or any of its subsidiaries as the Board finds necessary to ensure compliance with, or to prevent evasion of, the provisions and purposes of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders issued thereunder. The Board's decision is specifically conditioned on compliance with all the commitments made in connection with this notice, including the commitments discussed in this order and the conditions set forth in the Board regulations and orders noted above. The commitments and conditions shall be deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision, and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. This proposal shall not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or the Reserve Bank, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective March 24, 1997. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes Asset and ranking data are as of September 30, 1996. As used in this order, "bank-ineligible securities" refers to all types of debt and equity securities that a bank may not underwrite or deal in directly under section 16 of the Glass-Steagall Act (12 U.S.C. § 24(7)). Company has authority to underwrite and deal in, to a limited extent, certain municipal revenue bonds, 1-4 family mortgage-related securities, commercial paper, and consumer-receivable-related securities. See Banc One Corporation, 76 Federal Reserve Bulletin 756 (1990). Company also is authorized to engage in a variety of other nonbanking activities. See id .; Banc One Corporation , 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 61 (1991). See Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce , 76 Federal Reserve Bulletin 158 (1990); J.P. Morgan & Co. Incorporated, et al. , 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 192 (1989), aff'd sub nom. Securities Industries Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 900 F.2d 360 (D.C. Cir. 1990); Citicorp, et al. , 73ï¿½Federal Reserve Bulletin 473 (1987), aff'd sub nom. Securities Industry Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System , 839 F.2d 47 (2d Cir.), cert. denied , 486 U.S. 1059 (1988); as modified by Review of Restrictions on Director, Officer and Employee Interlocks, Cross-Marketing Activities, and the Purchase and Sale of Financial Assets Between a Section 20 Subsidiary and an Affiliated Bank or Thrift , 82ï¿½Federal Reserve Bulletin 1113 (1996) (collectively, "Section 20 Orders"). See Section 20 Orders. Effective March 6, 1997, the Board increased from 10ï¿½percent to 25 percent the amount of total revenue that a section 20 subsidiary may derive from underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities. See Revenue Limit on Bank-Ineligible Activities of Subsidiaries of Bank Holding Companies Engaged in Underwriting and Dealing in Securities , 61ï¿½ Federal Register 68,750 (1996). Compliance with the revenue limitation shall be calculated in accordance with the method stated in the Section 20 Orders, as modified by the Order Approving Modifications to the Section 20 Orders , 75ï¿½Federal Reserve Bulletin 751 (1989); and 10 Percent Revenue Limit on Bank-Ineligible Activities of Subsidiaries of Bank Holding Companies Engaged in Underwriting and Dealing in Securities , 61 Federal Register 48,953 (1996) (collectively, "Modification Orders"). Company also may engage in activities that are necessary incidents to the proposed underwriting and dealing activities. Unless Company receives specific approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act to conduct the activities independently, any revenues from the incidental activities must be counted as ineligible revenues subject to the Board's revenue limitation. 12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8). See 12 C.F.R. 225.24. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Phillips, and Meyer.
For immediate release The Federal Open Market Committee decided today to tighten money market conditions slightly, expecting the federal funds rate to rise 1/4 percentage point to around 5-1/2 percent. This action was taken in light of persisting strength in demand, which is progressively increasing the risk of inflationary imbalances developing in the economy that would eventually undermine the long expansion. In these circumstances, the slight firming of monetary conditions is viewed as a prudent step that affords greater assurance of prolonging the current economic expansion by sustaining the existing low inflation environment through the rest of this year and next. The experience of the last several years has reinforced the conviction that low inflation is essential to realizing the economy's fullest growth potential. No change was made in the Federal Reserve discount rate, which remains at 5 percent.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced revisions to Regulation M to implement amendments to the Consumer Leasing Act. The act requires lessors to provide uniform cost and other disclosures for car leasing and other types of consumer lease transactions. The revisions are effective April 1, 1997 , but compliance is optional until October 1, 1997 . The revisions primarily implement amendments to the act contained in the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act of 1996, which streamline the advertising disclosures for lease transactions. The revisions make the disclosure of upfront costs in connection with a specific lease agreement parallel to statutory changes to the advertising rules. In addition, the revisions contain several technical amendments to the regulation. The Board's notice is attached. | |
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of a combined Order to Cease and Desist and Order of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty against Mark E. Schindler, a former officer of BT Securities Corporation, New York, a subsidiary of Bankers Trust New York Corporation, New York. Mr. Schindler, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the order in connection with his alleged involvement in the marketing of leveraged derivative transactions to customers of Bankers Trust New York Corporation and its subsidiaries. Mr. Schindler paid a civil money penalty of $25,000. A copy of the order is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of an Order against The International Commercial Bank of China, Taipei, Taiwan. The International Commercial Bank of China, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the order in connection with allegations that it failed to file a complete application when it acquired the Chinese American Bank, New York, New York, and that it failed to fully and correctly file accurate reports with the Federal Reserve. The order requires The International Commercial Bank of China to submit a plan to sell its interests in the Chinese American Bank. The order also requires The International Commercial Bank of China to pay a civil money penalty in the amount of $5 million and its profit of $17,320,000 from its acquisition and control of the Chinese American Bank. The issuance of the order by the Board does not relate in any manner to the condition or activities of the Chinese American Bank, and the divestiture of the bank by The International Commercial Bank of China should not affect the bank's operations. A copy of the order is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of a combined Order to Cease and Desist and Order of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty against Grace Koo, a former employee of BT Securities Corporation, New York, a subsidiary of Bankers Trust New York Corporation, New York. Ms. Koo, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the order in connection with her alleged involvement in the provision of documentation for leveraged derivative transactions to customers of Bankers Trust New York Corporation and its subsidiaries. Ms. Koo paid a civil money penalty of $9,000. A copy of the order is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today that the Consumer Advisory Council will hold its next meeting on Thursday, April 17. The meeting will be held in Terrace Room E of the Martin Building. The session will begin at 9 a.m. and is open to the public. The Council's function is to advise the Board on the exercise of the Board's responsibilities under the Consumer Credit Protection Act and on other matters on which the Board seeks its advice. Time permitting, the Council will discuss the following topics: Bank Regulatory Issues Electronic Banking and Electronic Disclosures Consumer Identifying Information Mortgage Lending Disclosures under the Truth in Lending and Real Estate Settlement Procedures Acts. Committee reports and other matters previously considered by the Council or initiated by the Council members may also be discussed. The Board invites comment from the public on any of these matters. The Board's notice is attached. FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM Consumer Advisory Council Notice of Meeting of Consumer Advisory Council
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today issued a revised version of the official staff commentary to Regulation M, which implements the Consumer Leasing Act. The act requires lessors to provide uniform cost and other disclosures about consumer lease transactions. The revised commentary is effective April 1, 1997 , but compliance is optional until October 1, 1997 . Regulation M was revised in September 1996 under the Board's Regulatory Planning and Review Program, which calls for the periodic review of Board regulations. The commentary applies and interprets the requirements of Regulation M, as amended March 1997. The Board's notice is attached. |