For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of an Order of Prohibition against Donald G. Austin, a former employee and institution-affiliated party of The Bank of New York, New York. Mr. Austin, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the order due to his alleged making of unauthorized loans. A copy of the order is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of an order to Cease and Desist against Robert L. McCook, a former registered representative and institution-affiliated party of Crestar Securities, Inc., Richmond, Virginia, a broker-dealer subsidiary of Crestar Financial Corporation, Richmond, Virginia. Mr. McCook, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order due to his alleged participation in violations of the rules of the National Association of Securities Dealers in connection with his alleged unauthorized trading activities at Crestar Securities that caused losses to Crestar Securities. A copy of the order is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of an Order to Cease and Desist against Michael Quinn, a former employee of the New York branch of Swiss Bank Corporation. Mr. Quinn, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the order in connection with his actions, as an employee of the New York branch, in preparing allegedly incorrect account records of Swiss Bank Corporation's Cayman Islands branch. A copy of the order is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today its approval of the applications by Bank SinoPac, Taipei, Taiwan, and SinoPac Bancorp, Los Angeles, California, to become bank holding companies by acquiring all the voting shares of Far East National Bank, Los Angeles, California. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Bank SinoPac Taipei, Taiwan SinoPac Bancorp Los Angeles, California Order Approving the Formation of Bank Holding Companies Bank SinoPac, Taipei, Taiwan ("SinoPac"), and its wholly owned subsidiary, SinoPac Bancorp, Los Angeles, California ("Bancorp"), have requested the Board's approval under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1842(a)) ("BHC Act") to become bank holding companies by acquiring all the voting shares of Far East National Bank, Los Angeles, California ("Far East Bank"). Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (61 Federal Register 69,096 (1996)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the notice and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 3 of the BHC Act. SinoPac, with total assets equivalent to approximately $4.4 billion, is the 26th largest banking organization in Taiwan. SinoPac does not currently operate in the United States. Far East Bank is the 71st largest depository institution in California, controlling approximately $447 million in deposits, representing less than 1 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in the state. Competitive Considerations The BHC Act prohibits the Board from approving an application under section 3 of the BHC Act if the proposal would result in a monopoly or if the effect of the proposal may be substantially to lessen competition in any relevant market, unless the Board finds that the anticompetitive effects of the proposal are clearly outweighed in the public interest by the probable effect of the proposal in meeting the convenience and needs of the community to be served. SinoPac and Far East Bank do not compete directly in any banking market. Accordingly, the Board has determined that consummation of the proposal would not have a significantly adverse effect on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in any relevant banking market. Certain Supervisory Considerations Under section 3 of the BHC Act, as amended by the Foreign Bank Supervision Enhancement Act of 1991, the Board may not approve an application involving a foreign bank unless the bank is "subject to comprehensive supervision or regulation on a consolidated basis by the appropriate authorities in the bank's home country." The Board previously has determined, in applications under the International Banking Act (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 3101 et seq .) ("IBA"), that certain Taiwan commercial banks were subject to comprehensive consolidated supervision by their home country authorities. In this case, the Board has determined that SinoPac is supervised on substantially the same terms and conditions as other Taiwan commercial banks. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that SinoPac is subject to comprehensive supervision and regulation on a consolidated basis by its home country supervisor. The BHC Act also requires the Board to determine that the applicant has provided adequate assurances that it will make available to the Board such information on its operations and activities and those of its affiliates that the Board deems appropriate to determine and enforce compliance with the BHC Act. The Board has reviewed the restrictions on disclosure in jurisdictions where SinoPac has material operations and has communicated with the relevant authorities concerning access to information. SinoPac has committed that, to the extent not prohibited by applicable law, it will make available to the Board such information on the operations of SinoPac and any of its affiliates that the Board deems necessary to determine and enforce compliance with the BHC Act, the IBA, and other applicable federal law. SinoPac also has committed to cooperate with the Board to obtain any waivers or exemptions that may be necessary in order to enable SinoPac to make any such information available to the Board. In light of these commitments and other facts of record, the Board has concluded that SinoPac has provided adequate assurances of access to any appropriate information the Board may request. For these reasons, and based on all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that the supervisory factors the Board is required to consider under section 3(a)(3) of the BHC Act are consistent with approval. Financial, Managerial, and Convenience and Needs Considerations In considering the financial and managerial factors in this case, the Board notes that SinoPac's capital exceeds the minimum levels that would be required under the Basle Capital Accord, and is considered equivalent to the capital that would be required of a U.S. banking organization. The Board also has considered other aspects of SinoPac's financial condition, as well as the capital position and other aspects of the financial condition of Far East Bank and the other institutions involved in the transaction. The proposed transaction is not expected to have a significantly adverse effect on the financial resources of the institutions involved. Far East Bank is well-capitalized and all the institutions involved are expected to remain so after consummation of this proposal. The Board also has considered the size of the acquisition relative to the assets of SinoPac, and the effect of this proposal on the liquidity positions of the institutions. The Board also has considered the managerial resources of the institutions involved in the proposal in light of all the facts of record, including assessments of their managerial resources by United States and Taiwan banking authorities. Based on the foregoing and all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that considerations relating to the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of SinoPac, Bancorp and Far East Bank are consistent with approval of the proposal, as are the other supervisory factors the Board must consider under section 3 of the BHC Act. The Board also has concluded that considerations relating to the convenience and needs of the community to be served are consistent with approval of this proposal. Based on the foregoing and all the other facts of record, the Board has determined that these applications should be, and hereby are, approved. Should any restrictions on access to information on the operations or activities of SinoPac or any affiliates of SinoPac subsequently interfere with the Board's ability to determine the compliance by SinoPac or any affiliates of SinoPac with applicable federal statutes, the Board may require termination by SinoPac or by any affiliates of SinoPac of their direct or indirect activities in the United States. The Board's approval of this proposal is expressly conditioned on SinoPac's compliance with all the commitments made in connection with these applications and with the conditions in this order. For purposes of this action, these commitments and conditions are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. This transaction shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day following the effective date of this order or later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective June 11, 1997. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes Far East Bank would become a wholly owned subsidiary of Bancorp. In connection with the proposal, Bancorp would establish an interim national bank subsidiary that would be merged with and into Far East Bank. Approval of this proposal is conditioned on SinoPac receiving all required regulatory approvals. Asset data are as of December 31, 1996, and use exchange rates then in effect. Deposit data are as of June 30, 1996. In this context, depository institutions include banks, savings and loan associations, and savings banks. Pub. L. No. 102-242, ï¿½ 201 et seq. , 105 Stat. 2286 (1991). 12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1842(c)(3)(B). As provided in Regulation Y, the Board determines whether a foreign bank is subject to consolidated home country supervision under the standards set forth in Regulation K (International Banking Operations). 12 C.F.R. 225.13(a)(4). Regulation K provides that a foreign bank may be considered subject to consolidated supervision if the Board determines that the bank is supervised or regulated in such a manner that its home country supervisor receives sufficient information on the worldwide operations of the foreign bank, including the relationship of the bank to its affiliates, to assess the foreign bank's overall financial condition and compliance with law and regulation. 12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)(1)(ii). See, e.g., First Commercial Bank , 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin 315 (1997); Taiwan Business Bank , 81 Federal Reserve Bulletin 746 (1995); Bank of Taiwan , 79 Federal Reserve Bulletin 541 (1993). Several shareholders of Far East Bank have submitted comments objecting to the transaction fee paid to an officer of the bank in connection with the proposal, past compensation and benefits paid to the bank's officers, and the amount paid for their shares in bank. The Board notes that the transaction fee discussed in these comments was disclosed in the shareholder proxy materials, and that shareholders owning more than 80 percent of Far East Bank's stock voted in favor of the proposal. In addition, there is no indication in the supervisory information from the bank's primary federal supervisor, the OCC, that the compensation paid to bank's management was excessive. Commenters also present no facts to substantiate that the compensation to be paid for their shares is inadequate, and Commenters may exercise dissenting shareholder rights under the National Bank Act if they believe the consideration they have been offered is unreasonable. 12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 215 and 215a. The Board notes, moreover, that the limited jurisdiction to review applications under the specific statutory factors in the BHC Act does not authorize the Board to consider matters relating to stock pricing, exchange ratios, and similar matters. See Western Bancshares, Inc. v. Board of Governors , 480 F.2d 749 (10th Cir. 1973). Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin and Governors Kelley, Phillips, and Meyer.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application of National Canton Bancshares, Inc., Canton, Illinois, to acquire Sturm Investment, Inc., Denver, Colorado, and thereby indirectly acquire 99.4 percent of the voting shares of The Union National Bank of Macomb, Macomb, Illinois. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. National Canton Bancshares, Inc. Canton, Illinois Order Approving the Acquisition of a Bank Holding Company National Canton Bancshares, Inc., Canton, Illinois ("National Canton"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 3 of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1842) to acquire Sturm Investment, Inc., Denver, Colorado ("Sturm"), and thereby indirectly acquire 99.4 percent of the voting shares of The Union National Bank of Macomb, Macomb, Illinois ("Macomb Bank"). Notice of this proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (62 Federal Register 14,145 (1997)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the proposal and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 3 of the BHC Act. National Canton is the 212th largest depository organization in Illinois, controlling deposits of $125.2 million, representing less than 1 percent of the total deposits in depository institutions in that state ("state deposits"). Sturm is the 302d largest depository organization in Illinois, controlling deposits of $85.5 million, representing less than 1 percent of state deposits. On consummation of this proposal, National Canton would become the 125th largest depository organization in Illinois, controlling deposits of $210.7 million, representing less than 1 percent of state deposits. Competitive Considerations The BHC Act prohibits the Board from approving an application under section 3 of the BHC Act if the proposal would result in a monopoly, or if the proposal would substantially lessen competition in any relevant market, unless such anticompetitive effects are clearly outweighed in the public interest by the probable effect of the transaction in meeting the convenience and needs of the community to be served. National Canton and Sturm compete directly in the Canton, Illinois, banking market. National Canton is the largest depository organization in the market, controlling deposits of $125.2 million, representing 35.6 percent of the total deposits in depository institutions in the market ("market deposits"). Sturm is the smallest depository organization in the market, controlling deposits of approximately $9.6 million, representing 2.7 percent of market deposits. On consummation of the proposal, National Canton would remain the largest depository organization in the Canton banking market, controlling deposits of approximately $134.8 million, representing 38.3 percent of market deposits. Market concentration, as measured by the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index ("HHI"), would increase by 194 points to 2265 and would not exceed the Department of Justice Merger Guidelines ("DOJ Guidelines"). Seven depository institutions would remain in the market after consummation of the proposal. Four of the remaining competitors, not including National Canton, each control 11 percent or more of market deposits. As it has previously, the Board also has considered the competitive effect of the presence in the market of one of the state's largest credit unions. The Board has sought comments from the United States Department of Justice ("Justice Department"), the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency ("OCC"), and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ("FDIC") on the competitive effects of this proposal. The Justice Department has advised the Board that consummation of the proposal would not be likely to have any significantly adverse effect on competition in any relevant market. The OCC and the FDIC have not objected to consummation of the proposal or indicated it would have any significantly adverse competitive effects in the Canton banking market or any relevant banking market. Based on the foregoing and all the other facts of record, including the increase in market concentration as measured by the HHI and the number of competitors that would remain in the market, the Board has concluded that consummation of the proposal would not have a significantly adverse effect on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in any relevant banking market. Other Considerations The BHC Act also requires the Board to consider the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the companies and banks involved in a proposal, the convenience and needs of the community to be served, and certain other supervisory factors. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of National Canton, Sturm, and their respective subsidiaries, are consistent with approval of the proposal, as are the other supervisory factors the Board must consider under section 3 of the BHC Act. Considerations relating to the convenience and needs of the communities to be served also are consistent with approval. Based on the foregoing, and in light of all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the application should be, and hereby is, approved. The Board's approval is specifically conditioned on compliance by National Canton with all the commitments made in connection with this application. For purposes of this action, the commitments and conditions relied on by the Board in reaching its decision are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision, and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The acquisition shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day following the effective date of this order, or later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board, or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective June 11, 1997. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes State deposit data are as of June 30, 1996. In this context, depository institutions include commercial banks, savings banks, and savings associations. The Canton, Illinois, banking market is approximated by the northeastern portion of Fulton County, Illinois, including the townships of Fairview, Farmington, Joshua, Canton, Orion, Putman, Buckheart, Banner, Lewistown, Liverpool, and Waterford. Market data are as of June 30, 1996. Market concentration calculations include deposits of thrift institutions at 50 percent. The Board previously has indicated that thrift institutions have become, or have the potential to become, major competitors of commercial banks. See Midwest Financial Group , 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 386 (1989); National City Corporation , 70 Federal Reserve Bulletin 743 (1984). Thus, the Board has regularly included thrift deposits in the calculation of market share on a 50-percent weighted basis. See, e.g., First Hawaiian Inc. , 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 52 (1991). Under the revised DOJ Guidelines, 49 Federal Register 26,823 (June 29, 1984), a market in which the post-merger HHI is over 1800 is considered highly concentrated. The Justice Department has informed the Board that a bank merger or acquisition generally will not be challenged (in the absence of other factors indicating anticompetitive effects) unless the post-merger HHI is at least 1800 and the merger increases the HHI by more than 200 points. The Justice Department has stated that the higher than normal threshold for an increase in the HHI when screening bank mergers and acquisitions for anticompetitive effects implicitly recognizes the competitive effects of limited-purpose lenders and other non-depository financial entities. See Norwest Corporation , 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 156 (1996). Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Phillips, and Meyer.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced that it is seeking nominations for thirteen appointments to its Consumer Advisory Council. The Council, which consists of thirty members, advises the Board on the exercise of its responsibilities under the Consumer Credit Protection Act and on other matters on which the Board seeks advice. The group meets in Washington, D.C., three times a year. The thirteen new members will be appointed to serve three-year terms beginning in January 1998. Nominations should include the following information about nominees: past and present positions held; knowledge, interests, or experience related to community reinvestment, consumer credit, or other consumer financial services; and complete address with telephone and fax numbers. Letters of nominations must be received by August 15, 1997, and should be mailed (not faxed) to Dolores S. Smith, Associate Director, Division of Consumer and Community Affairs, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, D.C. 20551. The Board's notice is attached. FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM Consumer Advisory Council Solicitation of Nominations for Membership AGENCY: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. ACTION: Notice SUMMARY: The Board is inviting the public to nominate qualified individuals for appointment to its Consumer Advisory Council, whose membership represents consumer and community interests and the financial services industry. Thirteen new members will be selected for three-year terms that will begin in January 1998. The Board expects to announce the selection of new members by year-end 1997. DATE: Nominations should be received by August 15, 1997 . ADDRESS: Nominations should be submitted in writing and mailed (not by facsimile) to Dolores S. Smith, Associate Director, Division of Consumer and Community Affairs, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, D.C. 20551. FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Deanna Aday-Keller, Secretary to the Council, Division of Consumer and Community Affairs, (202) 452-6470. For Telecommunications Device for the Deaf (TDD) users only: Diane Jenkins, (202) 452-3544, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, D.C. 20551. SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: The Consumer Advisory Council was established in 1976 at the direction of the Congress to advise the Federal Reserve Board on the exercise of its duties under the Consumer Credit Protection Act and on other consumer-related matters. The Council by law represents the interests both of consumers and of the financial services industry (15 USC 1691(b)). Under the Rules of Organization and Procedure of the Consumer Advisory Council (12 CFR 267.3), members serve three-year terms that are staggered to provide the Council with continuity. New members will be selected for terms beginning January 1, 1998, to replace members whose terms expire in December 1997; the Board expects to announce its appointment of new members by year-end. Nomination letters should include information about past and present positions held by the nominee; a description of special knowledge, interests or experience related to community reinvestment, consumer credit, or other consumer financial services; and the address and telephone number of both the nominee and the nominator. Individuals may nominate themselves. The Board is interested in candidates who have some familiarity with consumer financial services or community reinvestment and who are willing to express their viewpoints. Candidates do not have to be experts on all levels of consumer financial services or community reinvestment, but they should possess some basic knowledge of the area. They must be able and willing to make the necessary time commitment to prepare for and attend meetings three times a year (usually for two days, including committee meetings). In making the appointments, the Board will seek to complement the background of continuing Council members in terms of affiliation and geographic representation, and to ensure the representation of women and minority groups. The Board may consider prior years' nominees and does not limit consideration to individuals nominated by the public when making its selection. Council members whose terms end as of December 31, 1997, are the following: Julia W. Seward Vice President and Corporate Community Reinvestment Officer Signet Bank Richmond, Virginia David C. Fynn Regulatory Risk Manager National City Corporation Senior Vice President National City Bank Cleveland, Ohio Thomas R. Butler President and Chief Operating Officer NOVUS Services, Inc. Riverwoods, Illinois Robert G. Greer Chairman of the Board Bank of Tanglewood Houston, Texas Robert A. Cook Partner Hudson Cook, LLP Crofton, Maryland Kenneth R. Harney Journalist Washington Post Writers Group Chevy Chase, Maryland Emanuel Freeman President Greater Germantown Housing Development Corporation Philadelphia, Pennsylvania Gail K. Hillebrand Litigation Counsel West Coast Regional Office Consumers Union of U.S., Inc. San Francisco, California Terry Jorde President and CEO Towner County State Bank Cando, North Dakota Lisa Rice Executive Director Fair Housing Center Toledo, Ohio Eugene I. Lehrmann Immediate Past President American Association of Retired Persons Madison, Wisconsin John R. Rines President General Motors Acceptance Corporation Detroit, Michigan Ronald A. Prill Vice President, Credit Dayton Hudson Corporation Minneapolis, Minnesota Council members whose terms continue through 1998 and 1999 are the following: William N. Lund Director Office of Consumer Credit Regulation State of Maine Augusta, Maine Francine C. Justa Executive Director Neighborhood Housing Services of New York New York, New York Richard S. Amador President and Chief Executive Officer CHARO Community Development Corporation Los Angeles, California Janet C. Koehler Senior Manager of Electronic Commerce AT & T Universal Card Services Jacksonville, Florida Wayne-Kent A. Bradshaw President and Chief Executive Officer Family Savings Bank, FSB Los Angeles, California Errol T. Louis Treasurer, Manager Central Brooklyn Federal Credit Union Brooklyn, New York Heriberto Flores President and Chief Executive Officer Brightwood Development Corporation Springfield, Massachusetts Paul E. Mullings President and Chief Executive Officer Mortgage Electronic Registration Systems, Inc. McLean, Virginia Carol Parry Executive Vice President Chase Manhattan Bank New York, New York Yvonne S. Sparks Executive Director Neighborhood Housing Services of St. Louis, Inc. St. Louis, Missouri Philip Price, Jr. Executive Director The Philadelphia Plan Philadelphia, Pennsylvania Gregory D. Squires Professor Department of Sociology University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee Milwaukee, Wisconsin Marilyn Ross Executive Director Holy Name Housing Corporation Omaha, Nebraska George P. Surgeon Chief Financial Officer and Executive Vice President Shorebank Corporation Chicago, Illinois Margot Saunders Managing Attorney National Consumer Law Center Washington, D.C. Theodore J. Wysocki, Jr. Executive Director CANDO Chicago, Illinois Gail Small Executive Director Native Action Lame Deer, Montana By the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June 11, 1997. William W. Wiles, Secretary of the Board. Julia W. Seward Vice President and Corporate Community Reinvestment Officer Signet Bank Richmond, Virginia David C. Fynn Regulatory Risk Manager National City Corporation Senior Vice President National City Bank Cleveland, Ohio Thomas R. Butler President and Chief Operating Officer NOVUS Services, Inc. Riverwoods, Illinois Robert G. Greer Chairman of the Board Bank of Tanglewood Houston, Texas Robert A. Cook Partner Hudson Cook, LLP Crofton, Maryland Kenneth R. Harney Journalist Washington Post Writers Group Chevy Chase, Maryland Emanuel Freeman President Greater Germantown Housing Development Corporation Philadelphia, Pennsylvania Gail K. Hillebrand Litigation Counsel West Coast Regional Office Consumers Union of U.S., Inc. San Francisco, California Terry Jorde President and CEO Towner County State Bank Cando, North Dakota Lisa Rice Executive Director Fair Housing Center Toledo, Ohio Eugene I. Lehrmann Immediate Past President American Association of Retired Persons Madison, Wisconsin John R. Rines President General Motors Acceptance Corporation Detroit, Michigan Ronald A. Prill Vice President, Credit Dayton Hudson Corporation Minneapolis, Minnesota William N. Lund Director Office of Consumer Credit Regulation State of Maine Augusta, Maine Francine C. Justa Executive Director Neighborhood Housing Services of New York New York, New York Richard S. Amador President and Chief Executive Officer CHARO Community Development Corporation Los Angeles, California Janet C. Koehler Senior Manager of Electronic Commerce AT & T Universal Card Services Jacksonville, Florida Wayne-Kent A. Bradshaw President and Chief Executive Officer Family Savings Bank, FSB Los Angeles, California Errol T. Louis Treasurer, Manager Central Brooklyn Federal Credit Union Brooklyn, New York Heriberto Flores President and Chief Executive Officer Brightwood Development Corporation Springfield, Massachusetts Paul E. Mullings President and Chief Executive Officer Mortgage Electronic Registration Systems, Inc. McLean, Virginia Carol Parry Executive Vice President Chase Manhattan Bank New York, New York Yvonne S. Sparks Executive Director Neighborhood Housing Services of St. Louis, Inc. St. Louis, Missouri Philip Price, Jr. Executive Director The Philadelphia Plan Philadelphia, Pennsylvania Gregory D. Squires Professor Department of Sociology University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee Milwaukee, Wisconsin Marilyn Ross Executive Director Holy Name Housing Corporation Omaha, Nebraska George P. Surgeon Chief Financial Officer and Executive Vice President Shorebank Corporation Chicago, Illinois Margot Saunders Managing Attorney National Consumer Law Center Washington, D.C. Theodore J. Wysocki, Jr. Executive Director CANDO Chicago, Illinois Gail Small Executive Director Native Action Lame Deer, Montana
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice of Commerzbank AG, Frankfurt, Federal Republic of Germany, to acquire substantially all the assets of Montgomery Asset Management, L.P., San Francisco, California, and thereby engage in providing financial and investment advisory, open-end investment company administrative, securities brokerage, and private placement services. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Commerzbank AG Frankfurt am Main, Federal Republic of Germany Order Approving Notice to Engage in Nonbanking Activities Commerzbank AG, Frankfurt, Federal Republic of Germany ("Commerzbank"), a foreign banking organization subject to the provisions of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8)) and section 225.24(a) of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.24(a)) to acquire through its wholly owned subsidiary, CAM Acquisition, LLC, Wilmington, Delaware ("Company"), substantially all the assets of Montgomery Asset Management, L.P. ("Partnership"), including a membership interest in Montgomery Services, LLC ("Services LLC"), both in San Francisco, California. Commerzbank would thereby engage in the following activities: (1) Providing financial and investment advisory services, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(6) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(6)); (2) Providing securities brokerage and private placement services, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(7)(i) and (iii) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(7)(i) and (iii)); and (3) Providing administrative services for open-end investment companies or mutual funds. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (62 Federal Register 23,244 (1997)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the notice and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Commerzbank, with total consolidated assets of approximately $289 billion, is the fourth largest banking organization in the Federal Republic of Germany, and the 24th largest banking organization in the world. In the United States, Commerzbank operates branches in New York, New York; Chicago, Illinois; and Los Angeles, California; and an agency in Atlanta, Georgia. Commerzbank also engages in a number of nonbanking activities in the United States. Company would be an investment advisor registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") under the Investment Advisers Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. § 80b-1 et seq .) ("Advisers Act"), subject to the recordkeeping and reporting obligations, fiduciary standards, and other requirements of the Advisers Act and the SEC. In addition, Services LLC would be a broker-dealer registered with the SEC under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. § 78a et seq .), and would be subject to the recordkeeping and reporting obligations, fiduciary standards, and other requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 and the SEC. The Board previously has determined by regulation that the investment advisory, securities brokerage, and private placement services that Commerzbank proposes to conduct through Company are closely related to banking and permissible for bank holding companies under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Except as discussed below, the Board also previously has determined that the administrative services Commerzbank proposes to provide through Company are closely related to banking within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act, and Commerzbank has committed that it will conduct the proposed activities subject to the prudential and other limitations established by the Board in Mellon . Glass-Steagall Act Under the Glass-Steagall Act, a company that owns a member bank may not control "through stock ownership or in any other manner" a company that engages principally in distributing, underwriting or issuing securities. The Board has found that this provision prohibits affiliates of banks from sponsoring, organizing, or controlling a mutual fund. The Board previously has determined, however, that the Glass-Steagall Act does not prohibit a bank holding company from providing advisory and administrative services to a mutual fund. Commerzbank proposes to provide marketing support to the Funds by directly contacting broker-dealers, 401(k) plan providers, financial planners, insurance companies, and other financial intermediaries to recommend the Funds and to be primarily responsible for the development of marketing plans and the preparation of advertising and sales literature materials for the Funds. Although the Board has authorized bank holding companies to provide many different types of services to mutual funds including assisting the distributor of mutual funds in preparing advertising and marketing materials, the Board has not considered whether a bank holding company may provide the degree of promotional or marketing services proposed by Commerzbank. The Board does not believe that these promotional and marketing activities would cause Commerzbank to control the Funds or be involved in underwriting or distribution of the Funds' securities to the public. The proposed promotional activities involve contact only with financial intermediaries and are similar to activities that previously have been approved by the Board. Distribution and sales activities of the Funds would be the responsibility of an independent distributor. Commerzbank has committed that no U.S. affiliate of Commerzbank, including Company, will be obligated by any agreement to engage in any sales activities with regard to shares of the Funds or will enter into any distribution agreement with the Funds without the prior approval of the Board. An independent distributor would enter into an agreement with the Funds under which the distributor would serve as "principal underwriter" of the Funds. The independent distributor also would enter into the sales agreements with financial intermediaries to sell shares of the Funds on behalf of the Funds. Accordingly, actual sales activities would be conducted solely by the distributor or an independent broker-dealer for the Funds. Commerzbank does not propose to solicit retail customers to purchase shares in particular Funds, or accept orders for the purchase of shares, or to engage in any retail sales activities. In addition, neither the Company nor any employee of Company would receive transaction-based income or commissions in connection with Company's promotional or marketing activities. Furthermore, while Company would have primary responsibility for preparing the advertising and marketing materials, the independent distributor would be responsible for placing all advertisements. The independent distributor also would have legal responsibility under the rules of the National Association of Securities Dealers, Inc. ("NASD") for the form and use of all advertising and sales literature prepared by Company, and would be responsible for filing these materials with the NASD or the Securities and Exchange Commission. For these reasons, the Board believes that the promotional and marketing activities proposed by Commerzbank would not involve Commerzbank in the underwriting or distribution of shares of the Funds for purposes of the Glass-Steagall Act. Commerzbank also proposes that the chief executive officer of company serve as chairman of the four-member board of trustees for the Funds and that no more than three officers or employees of Company serve as junior-level officers of the funds. The Board previously has authorized a bank holding company to have director and officer interlocks with mutual funds that the bank holding company advises and administers. In this case, the Board does not believe that the proposed interlocks between Company and the Funds would compromise the independence of the boards of trustees of the Funds, or the independent distribution of the Funds, or result in control of the Funds by Commerzbank. Based on the foregoing, the Board concludes that control of the Funds would rest with the independent members of the boards of trustees of the Funds, and that the proposed interlocks between Company and the Funds would not compromise the independence of the boards of the Funds or permit Commerzbank to control the Funds. Thus, the Board concludes that this proposal is consistent with the Glass-Steagall Act. Proper Incident to Banking Test In order to approve this proposal, the Board also must find that the performance of the proposed activities by Commerzbank "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public . . . that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices." 12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8). The Board expects that the activities in which Commerzbank proposes to engage through Company would provide added convenience to Commerzbank's customers by offering an expanded range of products and investment management expertise. The proposed acquisition also would provide Commerzbank with further access to U.S. markets for its advisory services and products. In addition, the Board previously has determined that the provision of advisory and administrative services to mutual funds within certain parameters is not likely to result in the types of subtle hazards at which the Glass-Steagall Act is aimed or in any other adverse effects. For example, as required by the Board's regulations, Company would provide to customers disclosures designed to alert its customers to the relationships between Company and the Funds. These disclosures include those required by the Board's interpretive rule on investment advisory activities to address conflicts of interests that may be raised by the relationship between Company and the Funds. There is no evidence in the record, moreover, that consummation of this proposal, subject to the limitations noted above, would result in any significantly adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices that are not outweighed by the benefits of this proposal. On the basis of the foregoing and all the other facts of record, including the commitments made by Commerzbank, the Board has determined that the performance of the proposed activities by Company reasonably can be expected to produce benefits to the public that would outweigh any possible adverse effects under the proper incident to banking standard of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. In every case involving a proposal by a bank holding company to engage in nonbanking activities under section 4 of the BHC Act, the Board also must consider the financial and managerial resources of the notificant and its subsidiaries and the effect of the transaction on those resources. The Board notes that Commerzbank meets the relevant risk-based capital standards established under the Basle Accord and has capital equivalent to that which would be required of a U.S. banking organization. Based on these and other facts of record, the Board has determined that financial and managerial considerations are consistent with approval of this proposal. Conclusion Based on all the facts of record, including all the commitments and representations made by Commerzbank, and subject to all of the terms and conditions set forth in this order, the Board has determined that the notice should be, and hereby is, approved. This determination is subject to all the conditions set forth in the Board's Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.23(g), and to the Board's authority to require modification or termination of the activities of a bank holding company or any of its subsidiaries as the Board finds necessary to assure compliance with, or to prevent evasion of, the provisions and purposes of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders issued thereunder. The Board's decision is specifically conditioned on compliance with all the commitments and representations made in the notice, including the commitments and conditions discussed in this order. The commitments, representations, and conditions relied on in reaching this decision shall be deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision, and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. This proposal shall not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good.cause by the Board or the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective June 16, 1997. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Appendix List of Administrative Services 1. Maintaining and preserving the records of the Funds, including financial and corporate records. 2. Computing net asset value, dividends, performance data and financial information regarding the Funds. 3. Furnishing statistical and research data. 4. Preparing and filing with the SEC and state securities regulators registration statements, notices, reports, and other materials required to be filed under applicable laws. 5. Preparing reports and other informational materials regarding the Funds, including proxies and other shareholder communications, and reviewing prospectuses. 6. Providing legal and other regulatory advice to the Funds in connection with their other administrative functions. 7. Providing office facilities and clerical support for the Funds. 8. Developing and implementing procedures for monitoring compliance with regulatory requirements and compliance with the Funds' investment objectives, policies and restrictions as established by the trustees of the Funds. 9. Providing routine fund accounting services and liaison with outside auditors. 10. Preparing and filing tax returns. 11. Reviewing and arranging for payment of expenses of the Funds. 12. Providing communication and coordination services with regard to the Funds' transfer agent, custodian, distributor and other service organizations that render recordkeeping or shareholder communication services. 13. Preparing advertising materials, sales literature, and marketing plans for the Funds. 14. Providing information to the distributor's personnel concerning performance and administration of the Funds. 15. Providing marketing support with respect to sales of the Funds through financial intermediaries. 16. Assisting in the development of additional Funds. 17. Providing reports to the trustees of the Funds with regard to the activities of the Funds. 18. Providing telephone shareholder services through a toll-free 800 number. Footnotes As a foreign banking organization operating branches and an agency in the United States, Commerzbank is subject to certain provisions of the BHC Act by operation of section 8(a) of the International Banking Act of 1978 ("IBA") (12 U.S.C. § 3106(a)). After consummation of the proposal, Commerzbank would hold a majority ownership interest in Company and senior employees of Company would hold a minority interest. Asset data are as of December 31, 1996. Foreign ranking data are as of December 31, 1995. Commerzbank also owns a finance company, Commerzbank U.S. Finance, Inc., Wilmington, Delaware, and, pursuant to the grandfather provisions of section 8(c) of the IBA (12 U.S.C. § 3106(c)), engages in investment banking and securities brokerage activities through Commerzbank Capital Markets Corporation, New York, New York ("CCMC"). Commerzbank has committed that there will be no business transactions or relationships between CCMC and Company or Services LLC. Services LLC also would provide transfer agency services to mutual funds advised by Company (the "Funds"). See Mellon Bank Corporation 79 Federal Reserve Bulletin 626 (1993) (" Mellon "), and The Governor and Company of the Bank of Ireland , 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 1129 (1996) (" BOI "). The administrative services that Company would provide to mutual funds include computing the fund's financial data, maintaining and preserving the records of the fund, accounting and recordkeeping, providing office facilities and clerical support for the fund, and preparing and filing tax returns and regulatory reports for the fund. A complete list of the proposed administrative services is included in the Appendix. Commerzbank also would provide telephone services to shareholders through a toll-free 800 number. Commerzbank has committed that telephone service operators will not solicit callers to purchase shares in particular mutual funds and will refer to the independent distributor orders for the sale of shares. 12 U.S.C. §§ 221a and 377. See 12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(6); 12 C.F.R. 225.125; and Mellon . The Funds would be distributed through an independent distributor, and would not be "proprietary mutual funds" (funds sold primarily to customers of Commerzbank). See Barclays PLC , 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 158 at n. 7 (1996) (" Barclays "). The Board has permitted bank holding companies to present information about the operations of mutual funds advised and administered by the bank holding company at meetings or seminars for brokers of mutual funds. See Mellon at n.15. In addition, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency has authorized subsidiaries of national banks, in connection with their brokerage and advisory services, to provide marketing and advertising support to mutual funds. As defined under the Investment Company Act of 1940 ("1940 Act"), a principal underwriter is any underwriter who, as principal, purchases from a mutual fund any security for distribution, or who as agent for such fund sells or has the right to sell the fund's securities to a dealer and/or to the public. 15 U.S.C. § 80a-2(a)(29). The Funds also may enter into distribution agreements with intermediaries, but in no event will Company enter into such agreements. See Barclays at n. 8. These employees would serve as assistant secretary, assistant treasurer or assistant vice president of the Funds, and would be supervised by the board of trustees or senior-level officers. These employees would have no policy-making authority at the Funds and would not be responsible for, or involved in, making recommendations regarding policy decisions. No employee or officer of Company would serve as a senior-level officer of the Funds. Commerzbank also may acquire up to 5 percent of the shares of mutual funds for which it provides administrative or advisory services, but any such ownership may not be used in any way in marketing or selling the shares of the investment company. See Mellon at n. 21. See BOI. Any trustee of the Funds who also serves as an officer or employee of Company would be an "interested person" under the 1940 Act and, therefore, would be required to abstain from voting on the Funds' investment advisory and other major contracts. In addition, Commerzbank has committed that only disinterested persons would vote on the contract for administrative services provided to the Funds under the same requirements established for advisory contracts in the 1940 Act. See 12 C.F.R. 225.125. The interpretive rule requires a bank holding company that recommends to customers shares of a mutual fund that the bank holding company advises to caution customers to read the fund prospectus before investing and to advise customers in writing that the fund's shares are not insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and are not deposits, obligations of, or endorsed or guaranteed in any way, by any bank, unless that happens to be the case. The holding company also must disclose in writing to the customer the role of the company or its affiliate as investment advisor to the fund. 12 C.F.R. 225.26; Barclays ; The Fuji Bank, Limited , 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 94 (1989); Bayerishe Vereinbank AG , 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 155 (1987). Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Phillips and Meyer. Absent and not voting: Governor Kelley.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notices by Mellon Bank Corporation, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, to acquire all of the voting shares of Buck Consultants, Inc., New York, New York, and thereby engage in employee benefits consulting activities. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Mellon Bank Corporation Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania Order Approving Notice to Acquire an Employee Benefits Consulting Company Mellon Bank Corporation, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania ("Mellon"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1843(c)(8)) to acquire all of the voting shares of Buck Consultants, Inc., New York, New York ("Buck"), and thereby engage in certain employee benefits consulting activities pursuant to section 225.28(b)(9)(ii) of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(9)(ii)). Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (62 Federal Register 26,315 (1997)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the proposal and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Mellon, with total consolidated assets of $42.7 billion, is the 22nd largest bank holding company in the United States and engages in a wide range of permissible banking and nonbanking activities. Buck provides employee benefits consulting services worldwide. The Board previously has determined by order that bank holding companies may provide employee benefits consulting services under section 4 of the BHC Act, and this activity is now included in the list of permissible nonbanking activities set forth in Regulation Y. Mellon has committed to provide these services in accordance with the Board's rules. In connection with providing and designing Benefit Plans, Buck may provide insurance-related services because a client may choose to include a life, medical, dental, or other insurance plan as an element of its employee benefit program. In these circumstances, in addition to assisting in the analysis, recommendation, and selection of Benefit Plans, Buck may contact the selected insurer, negotiate with the insurer on behalf of the client, and otherwise communicate with the insurer concerning the client's employee benefit needs. In these types of projects, Buck may receive a commission from the insurance company. In these cases, however, Buck reduces the consulting fee charged to the client by the amount of any commission that Buck receives from the insurance company. Buck is, nevertheless, required to be licensed as an insurance broker under certain state insurance laws because it receives commissions from insurance companies. These commissions represent a small part of the total revenues Buck derives from its employee benefits consulting activities. Mellon proposes to continue these insurance-related activities after it acquires Buck. Section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act, as amended by the Garn-St Germain Act of 1982 ("Garn-St Germain Act"), expressly provides that providing insurance as a principal, agent, or broker is not closely related to banking. Mellon argues that Buck's insurance-related activities, while not closely related or grandfathered in this case, are a necessary incident to its permissible employee benefits consulting services. The Board and the courts have held that bank holding companies and their subsidiaries may engage in activities that may not be closely related to banking where those activities are incidental to other activities that are closely related to banking. In determining whether an activity is an incidental activity, the Board generally has considered whether the activity is reasonably necessary to the conduct of a permissible activity and whether the activity constitutes a relatively minor part of the overall business of the company conducting the activities. In this case, the insurance-related activities are a minor part of Buck's overall business, and are necessary to the conduct of Buck's employee benefits consulting services. Buck's core activity is the provision of employee benefits consulting services, which involves providing advice about the design, analysis, selection, valuation, and implementation of all types of Benefit Plans, including retirement, profit-sharing, human resource management, and health and medical plans, some of which may involve an insurance component. Buck also provides certain recordkeeping and other administrative services with respect to Benefit Plans. Buck generally becomes involved in insurance-related services only when the client selects an insurance plan and requests that Buck negotiate with the insurer on its behalf. Buck performs all of its consulting work on a fee-for-service basis, and offsets any insurance commission against that fee. Payment of the fee is never contingent on the receipt of an insurance commission or on the purchase of an insurance policy. Furthermore, as noted previously, insurance commissions represent only a small part of Buck's total revenues, and only a small fraction of Buck's consulting assignments involve the receipt of commissions. Mellon also maintains that the provision of insurance-related services is necessary because Buck would operate at a competitive disadvantage if it could not accept insurance commissions and satisfy the state licensing requirements that permit it to accept such commissions. As noted previously, Buck offsets any commissions it receives against the consulting fees to be paid by its clients. Mellon has indicated that the inability to accept commissions and pass them on to clients in the form of an offset would place Buck at a competitive disadvantage in pricing its consulting services against those of another firm that could accept commissions, and thereby reduce consulting fees, because it was not affiliated with a bank holding company. The Board believes the record here indicates that the proposed insurance-related activities are incidental activities. They are necessary elements of another permissible activity and represent a small fraction of the consulting work performed. Accordingly, the Board has concluded, under the unique circumstances of this case, that approval of this proposal is not prohibited by the Garn-St Germain Act, and that Buck may continue to perform these activities upon acquisition by Mellon. In order to approve the proposal, the Board also must determine that the proposed activities are a proper incident to banking, that is, that the proposal "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public, such as greater convenience, increased competition, or gains in efficiency, that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices." As part of its review of these factors, the Board has considered the financial and managerial resources of Mellon, its subsidiaries, and Buck, and the effect the proposal would have on such resources. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that financial and managerial considerations are consistent with approval of the proposal. The Board expects that the proposed activities would result in benefits to the public. In particular, Mellon would be able to offer a broader array of products and services to its customers. Because of the range of products and services that Mellon provides, customers of Buck also would derive increased convenience from being able to purchase a wider range of services from a single organization. Customers of Buck also would benefit from the operational efficiencies of consolidating their trust and participant service needs within one organization. Consummation of the transaction also may enhance Buck's ability to compete with other firms that provide both trust services and employee benefit consulting services. In addition, there is no evidence in the record that consummation of the proposal would produce any significant adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the balance of the public interest factors it is required to consider under the proper incident to banking standard of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act is favorable, and consistent with approval of the proposal. Based on the foregoing and all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the proposal should be, and hereby is, approved. Approval of the proposal is specifically conditioned on compliance by Mellon with all the commitments made in connection with the proposal and with the conditions referred to in this order. The Board's determination also is subject to all the conditions set forth in Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.25(c) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.7 and 225.25(c)), and to the Board's authority to require such modification or termination of the activities of a bank holding company or any of its subsidiaries as the Board finds necessary to ensure compliance with, and to prevent evasion of, the provisions of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders issued thereunder. For purposes of this action, these commitments and conditions shall be deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision, and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. This transaction shall not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good .cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective June 16, 1997. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes Mellon also would acquire the foreign subsidiaries of Buck under the general consent provisions of the Board's Regulation K (12 C.F.R. 211.5(c)). Asset data are as of December 31, 1996. Buck was established in 1916 and currently has 30 offices throughout the United States and provides services in 16 other countries. Buck currently serves approximately 5,000 clients, including large multinational corporations, other businesses, educational institutions, health care providers, state and local government retirement systems, and quasi-governmental organizations. Norstar Bancorp , 71 Federal Reserve Bulletin 656 (1985); Bank Vermont Corporation , 72 Federal Reserve Bulletin 337 (1986); Norstar Bancorp , 72 Federal Reserve Bulletin 729 (1986). 12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(9)(ii). Buck's services consist of providing plan actuarial consulting, employee benefit consulting, and plan administration and outsourcing services with respect to a broad range of employee benefit plans, including pension and other retirement plans, life insurance plans, medical and dental plans, disability plans, and compensation and human resource management plans (collectively, "Benefit Plans"). Plan actuarial consulting includes the design of Benefit Plans, valuation of plan assets and liabilities, allocation of plan costs, and cost projections associated with plan implementation or modification. Employee benefit consulting services involve the design, implementation, and analysis of Benefit Plans. Buck's plan administration and outsourcing services include recordkeeping and administrative services for Benefit Plans, as well as the performance of plan feasibility studies and plan participant education. See National Courier Association , 516 F.2d 1229, 1239-41 (1975) (" National Courier "). See also 12 C.F.R. 225.21(a)(2). See Letter to Patrick J. Mulhern, Esq., from Jennifer J. Johnson (June 19, 1989) (relating to Citicorp's acquisition of Quotron Systems, Inc.). In addition, due to Buck's practice of offsetting any commissions received against its consulting fee, Buck's insurance-related services do not provide it with any direct economic reward. Buck also has indicated that, in lieu of receiving commissions, it generally attempts to negotiate an elimination or reduction of commissions, and thereby to reduce the premiums paid by its clients, where such arrangements are permitted by law. Mellon also notes that, although commissions are paid only in a minority of projects, neither Buck nor its client would know at the commencement of a consulting assignment whether the client will elect insurance coverage involving a commission. Therefore, the competitive disadvantage will be present in every case in which the receipt of commissions is a possibility, even if the client eventually selects some other form of Benefit Plan. 12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1843(c)(8). See 12 C.F.R. 225.26(b). Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Phillips and Meyer. Absent and not voting: Governor Kelley.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application filed by AMCORE Financial, Inc., Rockford, Illinois, to acquire all of the voting shares of Country Bancshares Corporation, Mount Horeb, and Belleville Bancshares Corporation, Belleville, and thereby indirectly acquire their subsidiary banks: State Bank of Mount Hore, Mount Horeb; Montello State Bank, Montello; State Bank of Argyle, Argyle; Citizens State Bank, Clinton; and Belleville State Bank, Belleville, all in Wisconsin. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. AMCORE Financial, Inc. Rockford, Illinois Order Approving the Acquisition of Bank Holding Companies AMCORE Financial, Inc., Rockford, Illinois ("AMCORE"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 3 of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1842) to acquire all the voting shares of Country Bancshares Corporation, Mount Horeb, and its wholly owned subsidiary, Belleville Bancshares Corporation, Belleville (collectively "Country"), and thereby acquire their subsidiary banks: State Bank of Mount Horeb, Mount Horeb; Montello State Bank, Montello; State Bank of Argyle, Argyle; Citizens State Bank, Clinton; and Belleville State Bank, Belleville, all in Wisconsin. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (62 Federal Register 14,910 (1997)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the proposal and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 3 of the BHC Act. AMCORE is the tenth largest commercial banking organization in Illinois, controlling deposits of $1.9 billion, representing approximately 1.2 percent of total deposits in commercial banking organizations in the state, and is the 25th largest commercial banking organization in Wisconsin, controlling approximately $192.6 million in deposits, representing less than 1 percent of total deposits in commercial banking organizations in the state. Country is the 18th largest commercial banking organization in Wisconsin, controlling approximately $233.5 million in deposits, representing less than 1 percent of total deposits in commercial banking organizations in the state. On consummation of this proposal, AMCORE would become the tenth largest commercial banking organization in Wisconsin, controlling approximately $425.1 million in deposits, representing less than 1 percent of total deposits in commercial banking organizations in Wisconsin. Interstate Analysis Section 3(d) of the BHC Act, as amended by section 101 of the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act of 1994, allows the Board to approve an application by a bank holding company to acquire control of a bank located in a state other than the home state of such bank holding company, if certain conditions are met. For purposes of the BHC Act, AMCORE's home state is Illinois, and AMCORE would acquire a bank in Wisconsin. The conditions for an interstate acquisition under section 3(d) are met in this case, and the Board is permitted to approve the proposal under section 3(d) of the BHC Act. Competitive Considerations AMCORE and Country compete directly in the Madison, Wisconsin, banking market. AMCORE operates the 18th largest banking or thrift organization ("depository institution") in the Madison banking market, controlling deposits of approximately $48.8 million, representing approximately 1.1 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in the market ("market deposits"). Country operates the ninth largest depository institution in the market, controlling deposits of approximately $118.9 million, representing approximately 2.6 percent of market deposits. On consummation of the proposal, AMCORE would become the sixth largest depository institution in the Madison banking market, controlling deposits of $167.7 million, representing approximately 3.7 percent of market deposits. The market would remain moderately concentrated, as measured by the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index ("HHI"), and the HHI would increase 6 points to 1247 as a result of the acquisition. Numerous competitors also would remain in the banking market. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that consummation of this proposal would not result in any significantly adverse effects on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in the Madison banking market or any other relevant banking market. Other Factors Under the BHC Act The BHC Act also requires the Board, in acting on an application, to consider the financial and managerial resources of the companies and banks involved, the convenience and needs of the communities to be served, and certain other supervisory factors. A. Financial, Managerial, and other Supervisory Factors The Board has carefully considered the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of AMCORE, Country, and their respective subsidiary banks, and other supervisory factors in light of all the facts of record. The facts include supervisory reports of examination assessing the financial and managerial resources of the organizations and confidential financial information provided by AMCORE. Based on these and all other facts of record, the Board concludes that all the supervisory factors under the BHC Act, including financial and managerial resources, are consistent with approval of the proposal. B. Convenience and Needs Factor The Board has carefully considered the effect of the proposal on the convenience and needs of the communities to be served in light of all the facts of record. In reviewing the convenience and needs considerations in the proposal, the Board notes that AMCORE provides a full range of financial services through its banking subsidiaries, including a broad range of mortgage, consumer, agricultural, and small business loan products. AMCORE has stated that after consummation of the proposal, it would offer these services, some of which are not available through Country, in communities currently served by Country. AMCORE also has stated that it would review Country's credit products and retain the products that are unique to the local market, including the development and expansion of programs that serve rural and farm areas. The Board has long held that consideration of the convenience and needs factor includes a review of the records of the relevant depository institutions under the Community Reinvestment Act ("CRA"). The CRA performance records of the institutions involved are reviewed below in light of all the facts of record, including comments received on the proposal. CRA Performance Examinations . As provided in the CRA, the Board evaluates the convenience and needs factor in light of examinations of the CRA performance records of the relevant institutions by their primary federal supervisor. An institution's most recent CRA performance evaluation is a particularly important consideration in the applications process because it represents a detailed, on-site evaluation of an institution's overall record of performance under the CRA by its primary federal supervisor. All AMCORE subsidiary banks received "outstanding" or "satisfactory" ratings for CRA performance in the most recent evaluations by their primary federal supervisor. AMCORE's lead subsidiary bank, AMCORE Bank, N.A., Rockford, Rockford, Illinois, which controls a majority of the deposits in the AMCORE subsidiary banks, received an "outstanding" rating in its most recent CRA performance examination from the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency ("OCC"), as of August 1995 (the "Rockford Examination"). The six remaining AMCORE subsidiary banks received "satisfactory" ratings for CRA performance in their most recent evaluations. In addition, all of the subsidiary banks of Country received either "outstanding" or "satisfactory" ratings for CRA performance in their most recent evaluations by their primary federal supervisor. The Rockford Examination concluded that the bank's lending activities and loan originations reflected excellent responsiveness to meeting community credit needs and that the bank was a leader in a number of federal loan programs. Examiners also concluded that the bank's distribution of credit products was reasonable and significantly penetrated all segments of the delineated community, including low- and moderate-income ("LMI") neighborhoods. The Rockford Examination also noted that the bank was active in community development activities, including providing assistance to several community development organizations located in LMI areas. Comments on the Proposal . Commenter contends that AMCORE will close branches in Wisconsin, specifically in the Belleville community, as a result of this proposal and requests the Board to prohibit any branch closings in Wisconsin as a condition of approving the proposed acquisition. Federal banking law addresses branch closing by specifically requiring an insured depository institution to provide notice to the appropriate regulatory agency prior to closing a branch. The statute, however, does not authorize the federal regulators to prevent the closing of any branch, and the BHC Act does not make approval of a proposal contingent on an applicant maintaining all branch offices of an acquired institution open. The most recent CRA performance examinations of AMCORE's subsidiary banks, moreover, found that AMCORE has a branch closing policy that satisfactorily addresses the steps to be followed in case of a branch closing, and that the policy considers the impact a branch closing would have on a delineated community. Conclusion Regarding Convenience and Needs Factor . The Board has carefully considered the entire record in its review of the convenience and needs factor under the BHC Act, including all the information provided by the Commenters. Based on all the facts of record, and for the reasons discussed above and in the Board's previous orders involving AMCORE and Country, the Board concludes that considerations relating to the convenience and needs factor, including the CRA performance records of the institutions involved, are consistent with approval of the application. Conclusion Based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that this application should be, and hereby is, approved. The Board's approval is specifically conditioned on compliance by AMCORE with all the commitments made in connection with this application. The commitments and conditions relied on by the Board in reaching its decision are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The proposed acquisitions shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day following the effective date of this order, or later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended .by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective June 16, 1997. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes State deposit data are as of December 31, 1996, and reflect AMCORE's acquisition of First National Bancorp, Monroe, Wisconsin, which was consummated on April 18, 1997. Market deposit data are as of June 30, 1996. Pub. L. No. 103-328, 108 Stat. 2338 (1994). A bank holding company's home state is the state in which the operations of the bank holding company's banking subsidiaries were principally conducted on July 1, 1966, or the date on which the company became a bank holding company, whichever is later. See 12 U.S.C. ï¿½ï¿½ 1842(d)(1)(A) and (B) and 1842(d)(2)(A) and (B). AMCORE is adequately capitalized and adequately managed. On consummation of the proposal, AMCORE and its affiliates would control less than 10 percent of the total amount of deposits of insured depository institutions in the United States and less than 30 percent of the total amount of deposits of insured depository institutions in Wisconsin. The subsidiary banks of Country have been in existence and continuously operated for at least the minimum period required under Wisconsin law. In addition, all other requirements of section 3(d) of the BHC Act would be met on consummation of the proposal. The Madison, Wisconsin, banking market ("Madison banking market") is approximated by Dane County except for the townships of York, Medina, Deerfield, Christiana, and Albion; and Dekorra, Lowville, Otsego, Fountain, Prairie, Columbus, Hampden, Leeds, Arlington, Lodi, and West Point townships in Columbia County, all in Wisconsin. The Wisconsin Rural Development Center, Inc. ("Commenter") maintains that the proposal would increase market concentration and adversely affect competition for loans in a four county area in southwestern Wisconsin. Commenter presents no facts to support lending as the relevant product market or the four county area in southwestern Wisconsin as the relevant geographic market. The appropriate product market for evaluating the competitive effects of acquisitions of depository institutions is the cluster of products and services offered by such institutions. See Chemical Banking Corporation , 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 239 (1997). The Board and the courts also have concluded that the relevant banking market for analyzing the competitive effects of a proposal must reflect commercial and banking realities and should consist of the local area where the banks involved offer their services and where local customers can practicably turn for alternatives. Id . The Board has considered Commenter's contentions in light of all the facts of record, and concludes that the appropriate geographic market is the Madison banking market as defined above. The Board bases this conclusion on an analysis of employment, commuting data, shopping patterns, newspaper circulation, advertising by financial institutions, loan and deposit data, traffic patterns, and other facts of record. Market data are as of June 30, 1995. Market share data are based on calculations in which the deposits of thrift institutions are included at 50 percent. The Board previously has indicated that thrift institutions have become, or have the potential to become, significant competitors of commercial banks. See Midwest Financial Group , 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 386 (1989); National City Corporation , 70 Federal Reserve Bulletin 743 (1984). Thus, the Board has regularly included thrift deposits in the calculation of market share on a 50-percent weighted basis. See, e.g., First Hawaiian, Inc ., 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 52 (1991). Under the revised Department of Justice Merger Guidelines, 49 Federal Register 26,823 (June 29, 1984), a market in which the post-merger HHI is between 1000 and 1800 is considered moderately concentrated. The Justice Department has informed the Board that a bank merger or acquisition generally will not be challenged (in the absence of other factors indicating anticompetitive effects) unless the post-merger HHI is at least 1800 and the merger increases the HHI by more than 200 points. The Justice Department has stated that the higher than normal threshold for an increase in the HHI when screening bank mergers and acquisitions for anticompetitive effects implicitly recognizes the competitive effects of limited-purpose lenders and other non-depository financial entities. The Statement of the Federal Financial Supervisory Agencies Regarding the Community Reinvestment Act ("Agency CRA Statement") (54 Federal Register 13,742, 13,745 (1989)) provides that a CRA examination is an important and often controlling factor in consideration of an institution's CRA record and that reports of these examinations will be given great weight in the applications process. Commenter also contends that efforts by AMCORE and Country to assess and to serve the banking needs of LMI borrowers and communities in rural and farming areas in Wisconsin are inadequate. The Board recently has considered almost identical contentions by Commenter in connection with AMCORE's application to acquire First National Bancorp, Inc., Monroe, Wisconsin, and Country's application to acquire Belleville Bancshares Corporation, Belleville, Wisconsin, and concluded that the CRA performance records of AMCORE and Country were consistent with approval of those applications under the convenience and needs factor. See Amcore Financial, Inc. , 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin 429 (1997), and Country Bank Shares Corporation , 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin 112 (1997) ("Country/Belleville Order"). Commenter reiterates contentions that unfair and discriminatory lending practices occur at Country's lead subsidiary bank, State Bank of Mount Horeb, Mount Horeb, Wisconsin ("Mt. Horeb Bank"). After sampling accepted and rejected loan applications in connection with Mt. Horeb Bank's most recent examination for CRA performance, examiners concluded that loan denials appeared to be reasonable and supported. The examination found no violations of substantive provisions of anti-discrimination laws and regulations. The Country/Belleville Order also noted that the bank's primary supervisor, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ("FDIC"), was considering Commenter's allegations of unfair practices, particularly in connection with agricultural lending. The FDIC concluded that the bank did not engage in improper practices. Section 42 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1831r-1) ("section 42"), as implemented by the Joint Policy Statement Regarding Branch Closing (58 Federal Register 49,083 (1993)) ("Joint Policy Statement"), requires that a bank provide the public with at least 30 days notice and the primary federal supervisor with at least 90 days notice before the date of the proposed branch closing. The bank also is required to provide reasons and other supporting data for the closure, consistent with the institution's written policy for branch closing. Commenter has requested that the Board postpone action on this proposal until Commenter has had the opportunity to arrange a meeting between Commenter and AMCORE. The Board has indicated in previous orders and in the Agency CRA Statement that communication by depository institutions with community groups provides a valuable method of assessing and determining how best to address the credit needs of the community. Neither the CRA nor the Agency CRA Statement, however, require an insured depository institution to meet with community representatives. In reviewing an application under the BHC Act, the CRA and the Agency CRA Statement instead require the Board to focus on the established record of performance of the institutions involved and the programs and policies that the institutions have in place to assist in meeting the credit needs of their entire communities. In this case, the facts discussed above and the other facts of record indicate that the relevant institutions have programs to help serve the credit needs of their communities, and that denial or delay of the application is not warranted. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Phillips and Meyer. Absent and not voting: Governor Kelley.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and John Widmer, a former officer and institution-affiliated party of the New York branch of Swiss Bank Corporation, New York. Mr. Widmer, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the written agreement to address his alleged inadequate supervision of the foreign exchange trading of the New York branch of Swiss Bank Corporation. A copy of the written agreement is attached.
For immediate release
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the applications and notices of First Bank System, Inc., Minneapolis, Minnesota, to acquire U.S. Bancorp, Portland, Oregon, and thereby acquire U.S. Bancorp's banking and nonbanking subsidiaries. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced amendments to Regulation D and Regulation I to define the location of a depository institution to facilitate interstate branching. The final amendments are effective October l, l997 . The amendments clarify the Federal Reserve District where a depository institution is eligible for Federal Reserve membership and the location of a depository institution's reserve account. The Board's notices are attached. |
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of an order of Prohibition against David A. Kuhn, a former bond trader and institution-affiliated party of the New York branch of Credit Lyonnais, Paris, France. Mr. Kuhn, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the order in connection with his alleged falsification of the business records of Credit Lyonnais by mispricing his trading positions to conceal losses in his trading portfolio. A copy of the order is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of a Cease and Desist Order against the Zia New Mexico Bank, Tucumcari, New Mexico, and G.A. Poling, Jr., president of the bank. A copy of the order is attached.