For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application by Huntington Bancshares Incorporated, Columbus, Ohio, to acquire First Michigan Bank Corporation, Holland, Michigan ("FMB"), and thereby acquire FMB's bank and nonbank subsidiaries. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Huntington Bancshares Incorporated Columbus, Ohio Order Approving Acquisition of a Bank Holding Company Huntington Bancshares Incorporated, Columbus, Ohio ("Huntington"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 3 of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1842) to acquire First Michigan Bank Corporation, Holland, Michigan ("FMB"), and thereby acquire the subsidiary banks of FMB listed in the appendix. Huntington also has requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8)) and section 225.24 of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.24) to acquire the nonbanking subsidiaries of FMB also listed in the appendix, and thereby engage in certain trust, securities brokerage, and credit life insurance activities. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (62 Federal Register 33,871 (1997)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the proposal and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in sections 3 and 4 of the BHC Act. Huntington, with total consolidated assets of approximately $21.6 billion, is the 37th largest commercial banking organization in the United States, controlling less than 1 percent of the total banking assets of insured commercial banks ("total banking assets"). Its two subsidiary banks operate in Ohio, Florida, Indiana, Kentucky, Michigan, and West Virginia. After consummation of the proposal, Huntington would remain the 37th largest commercial banking organization and control less than 1 percent of total banking assets. In Michigan, Huntington is the 10th largest depository institution, controlling $1.8 billion in deposits, representing 1.8 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in the state. FMB is the ninth largest depository institution in Michigan, controlling $2.9 billion in deposits, representing approximately 2.8 percent of all deposits in depository institutions in the state. On consummation of the proposal, Huntington would become the 7th largest commercial or thrift organization in Michigan, controlling deposits of $4.7 billion, representing approximately 4.6 percent of all deposits in depository institutions in the state. Interstate Banking Analysis Section 3(d) of the BHC Act, as amended by section 101 of the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act of 1994, allows the Board to approve an application by a bank holding company to acquire a bank located in a state other than the home state of such bank holding company if certain conditions are met. Huntington's home state is Ohio, and Huntington proposes to acquire FMB's subsidiary banks in Michigan. The conditions for an interstate acquisition under section 3(d) are met in this case. In view of all the facts of record, the Board is permitted to approve the proposal under section 3(d) of the BHC Act. BHC Act Factors Huntington and FMB do not compete with each other in any geographic banking market. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that consummation of the proposal would not have a significantly adverse effect on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in any relevant banking market. The BHC Act also requires the Board to consider the financial and managerial resources of the companies and banks involved, the convenience and needs of the communities to be served, and certain other supervisory factors. The Board has carefully considered the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of Huntington, FMB, and each of their respective subsidiaries, and other supervisory factors, in light of all the facts of record. These facts include supervisory reports of examination assessing the financial and managerial resources of the organizations and recent pro forma financial information provided by Huntington. The Board notes that Huntington, FMB, and each of their respective subsidiary banks meet or exceed the "well capitalized" thresholds under applicable law and are expected to continue to do so after consummation of the proposal. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that the financial and managerial considerations, and all other supervisory factors that must be considered are consistent with approval of the proposal. The Board also has considered the effect of the proposal on the convenience and needs of the communities to be served in light of all the facts of record. The Board has long held that consideration of the convenience and needs factor includes a review of the records of the relevant depository institutions under the Community Reinvestment Act (12 U.S.C. 2901 et seq. ) ("CRA"). As provided in the CRA, the Board evaluates the convenience and needs factor in light of examinations of the CRA performance records of the relevant institutions by their primary federal supervisor. An institution's most recent CRA performance evaluation is a particularly important consideration in the applications process because it represents a detailed, on-site evaluation of an institution's overall record of performance under the CRA by its primary federal supervisor. Huntington's lead subsidiary bank, Huntington Bank, received a "satisfactory" rating in its most recent CRA performance examination by the OCC, as of October 17, 1996. All of FMB's subsidiary banks received either "outstanding" or "satisfactory" ratings for CRA performance in their most recent evaluations by their primary federal supervisor. The Board has carefully reviewed comments from a city councilman in Cleveland ("Commenter") regarding the operations of two Huntington Bank branches in the Cleveland area. One branch is in the Church Square shopping center, a neighborhood with predominately minority residents, and is the only branch of Huntington Bank that is closed on Wednesdays. The other branch is in Randall Mall, a mall with a predominately minority clientele, and it offers banking services only to merchants ("merchant-only services"). Commenter contends that these aspects of the branches' operations affect and treat minorities in an illegally disparate manner. Huntington states that although the Church Square branch is closed on Wednesdays, it is open on Saturday mornings from 9:00 a.m. until 12:00 p.m. unlike approximately one-third of Huntington Bank's full-service branches and that the branch operates a full-service ATM that is available 24 hours a day. Huntington also notes that its Randall Mall branch provides needed services to the mall's merchants and that mall patrons are served by cash-dispensing ATMs on the upper and lower levels of the mall. The Board has carefully considered all the facts of record including the comments and responses discussed above, the CRA performance examinations of the institutions involved, and management's record of compliance with applicable rules and regulations. Based on a review of the entire record, the Board concludes that convenience and needs considerations, including the CRA performance records of both organizations' subsidiary banks, are consistent with approval of the proposal. Nonbanking Considerations Huntington also has filed notice, under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act, to acquire the nonbanking subsidiaries of FMB and thereby engage in trust, securities brokerage, and credit life insurance activities. The Board has determined by regulation that each of these activities is closely related to banking, and Huntington has committed to conduct the nonbanking activities in accordance with Regulation Y. In order to approve the proposal, the Board also must determine that the proposed activities are a proper incident to banking, that is, that the proposed transaction "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public . . . that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices." As part of the Board's evaluation of these factors, the Board considers the financial and managerial resources of the notificant and its subsidiaries, including any company to be acquired, and the effect the transaction would have on such resources. For the reasons noted above, and based on all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that financial and managerial considerations are consistent with approval of the proposal. The Board also has considered the competitive effects of the proposed acquisition of FMB's nonbanking subsidiaries. Huntington operates subsidiaries engaged in nonbanking activities that compete with certain nonbanking subsidiaries of FMB. In each case, the markets for these nonbanking services are unconcentrated, and there are numerous providers of these services. As a result, consummation of the proposal would have a de minimis effect on competition for these services, and the Board has concluded that the proposal would not result in a significantly adverse effect on competition in any relevant market. In addition, the Board expects that the acquisition would provide added convenience to FMB's customers and the public. Huntington states that FMB customers would have a wider variety of banking products and fiduciary services and would be able to take advantage of innovative delivery systems for banking services developed by Huntington. Accordingly, based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the balance of public benefits that the Board must consider under the proper incident to banking standard of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act is favorable and consistent with approval of the proposal. Conclusion Based on the foregoing and all the other facts of record, the Board has determined that the application and notice should be, and hereby are, approved. The Board's approval is specifically conditioned on compliance by Huntington with all the commitments made in connection with the proposal and with the conditions stated or referred to in this order, and on receipt by Huntington of all necessary approvals from state and federal regulators and other authorities. The Board's determination on the nonbanking activities is also subject to all the terms and conditions set forth in Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.25(c) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.7 and 225.25(c)), and to the Board's authority to require such modification or termination of the activities of a bank holding company or any of its subsidiaries as the Board finds necessary to ensure compliance with, and to prevent evasion of, the provisions of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders issued thereunder. The commitments and conditions relied on by the Board in reaching this decision are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision, and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The acquisition of FMB's subsidiary banks shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day following the effective date of this order, and the proposal shall not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Reserve Bank of Cleveland acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective September 2, 1997. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Appendix A. FMB subsidiary banks to be acquired by Huntington, all in Michigan: (1) FMB-First Michigan Bank, Zeeland; (2) FMB-First Michigan Bank-Grand Rapids, Grand Rapids; (3) FMB-Lumberman's Bank, Muskegon; (4) FMB-Northwestern Bank, Boyne City; (5) FMB-State Savings Bank, Lowell; (6) FMB-Commercial Bank, Greenville; (7) FMB- Sault Bank, Sault St. Marie; (8) FMB-Security Bank, Manistee; (9) FMB-Community Bank, Dowagiac; (10) FMB-Oceana Bank, Hart; (11) FMB-Reed City Bank, Reed City; (12) FMB-Maynard Allen Bank, Portland; (13) FMB-Old State Bank, Fremont; and (14) FMB-Arcadia Bank, Kalamazoo. B. FMB nonbanking subsidiaries to be acquired by Huntington, all in Holland, Michigan: (1) FMB-Trust, and thereby engage in trust company functions, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(5) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R.225.28(b)(5)); (2) FMB Brokerage Services, Inc., and thereby engage in securities brokerage services, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(7)(i) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(7)(i)); and (3) First Michigan Life Insurance Company, and thereby engage in underwriting and brokering life, health, and accident insurance directly related to extensions of credit made by Huntington or any of its subsidiaries, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(11)(i) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(11)(i)). Footnotes Huntington intends to merge FMB's subsidiary banks with and into its lead subsidiary bank, The Huntington National Bank, Columbus, Ohio ("Huntington Bank"). The merger is subject to the approval of the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency ("OCC"), the primary federal supervisor of Huntington Bank, under the Bank Merger Act (12 U.S.C. § 1828(c)). Huntington also has requested the Board's approval to exercise an option to purchase up to 19.9 percent of the voting shares of FMB. The option would terminate on consummation of this proposal. National asset and ranking data are as of March 31, 1997. In this context, depository institutions include commercial banks, savings banks, and savings associations. State deposit and ranking data are as of June 30, 1996. Pub. L. No. 103-328, 108 Stat. 2338 (1994). A bank holding company's home state is the state in which the operations of the bank holding company's banking subsidiaries were principally conducted on July 1, 1966, or the date on which the company became a bank holding company, whichever is later. 12 U.S.C. §§ 1842(d)(1)(A) and (B) and 1842(d)(2)(A) and (B). Huntington is adequately capitalized and adequately managed. In addition, on consummation of the proposal, Huntington would control less than 10 percent of the total amount of deposits of insured depository institutions in the United States and less than 30 percent of the total amount of deposits of insured depository institutions in Michigan. Michigan does not have a statewide concentration limit or a minimum age requirement. All other requirements of section 3(d) of the BHC Act also would be met on consummation of the proposal. The Statement of the Federal Financial Supervisory Agencies Regarding the Community Reinvestment Act ("Agency CRA Statement") (54 Federal Register 13,742, 13,745 (1989)) provides that a CRA examination is an important and often controlling factor in consideration of an institution's CRA record and that reports of these examinations will be given great weight in the applications process. Huntington's other subsidiary bank, Huntington State Bank, Alexandria, Ohio, received an "outstanding" rating from the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, as of August 24, 1994. Examiners found no evidence of illegal discrimination or practices to discourage applications for credit on a prohibited basis at either of the Huntington subsidiary banks. Commenter also contends that Huntington's failure to close its Cleveland offices in observance of Martin Luther King Day creates an atmosphere that is hostile to African Americans. Huntington states that, despite the closing of government offices, Martin Luther King Day is an active business day in Cleveland and that its holiday closing policy is adjusted in other cities to reflect Huntington Bank's perception of customer demand, local custom, and competitive considerations, and includes input from community groups. Huntington also notes that Huntington Bank treats Martin Luther King Day the same as other holidays such as President's Day and Veteran's Day, and offers its employees the opportunity to take the day off or receive compensatory time. Commenter notes that Huntington Bank has erroneously designated two limited-service branches as full-service branches in its CRA public file. Huntington has amended its description in the public CRA file of branch services to reflect the limited nature of these two branches. Commenter also asserts that these branches are in controlled-access buildings which makes it difficult for area residents, who predominately are minorities, to obtain banking services. Huntington responds that the branches are located in privately owned nursing and retirement centers to provide banking services to residents and staff on a part-time basis. Huntington has a nondiscrimination policy for establishing such facilities. Huntington also notes that a full-service branch of Huntington Bank is located within walking distance of the two limited-access branches. Huntington states that its experience shows that the Saturday morning business hours are advantageous to individuals who do not work in the area and can only bank and shop on Saturdays. Huntington's Randall Mall branch office was opened at the request of mall management after the departure of another bank that had reduced its original full-service presence to a merchant-only office. The branch office is located in the interior of the mall and lacks the design features necessary to function as a full-service branch, such as access to the mall exterior, a drive-through facility, and an exterior drive-up ATM. The Board has provided a copy of Commenter's submission to the OCC, the primary federal supervisor of Huntington Bank. See 12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(5), (7)(i), and (11)(i). See 12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8). See 12 C.F.R. 225.26; see also The Fuji Bank, Limited , 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 94 (1989); Bayerische Vereinsbank AG , 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 155 (1987). Voting for this action: Vice Chair Rivlin and Governors Kelley, Phillips, and Meyer. Absent and not voting: Chairman Greenspan.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board, along with the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, today issued a final rule that adopts uniform regulations implementing section 109 of the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act of 1994 (Interstate Act). The rule is effective October 10, 1997 . As required by section 109, the rule prohibits any bank from establishing or acquiring a branch or branches outside of its home state under the Interstate Act primarily for the purpose of deposit production. The rule also provides guidelines for determining whether such a bank is reasonably helping to meet the credit needs of the communities served by the interstate branches. The interagency notice is attached. |
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice by Associated Banc-Corp, Green Bay, to acquire First Financial Corporation, and its wholly owned subsidiary, First Financial Bank, F.S.B., both in Stevens Point, and all in Wisconsin. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Associated Banc-Corp Green Bay, Wisconsin Order Approving Notice to Acquire a Savings Association and to Engage in Certain Nonbanking Activities Associated Banc-Corp, Green Bay ("Associated"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8)) and section 225.24 of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.24) to acquire First Financial Corporation ("FFC"), and its wholly owned subsidiary, First Financial Bank, F.S.B. ("Thrift"), both in Stevens Point, and all in Wisconsin, and engage in operating a savings association pursuant to section 225.28(b)(4) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28 (b)(4)). Associated also has requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act to acquire two wholly owned subsidiaries of Thrift and engage in performing appraisals of real estate and tangible personal property pursuant to section 225.28(b)(2)(i) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28 (b)(2)), and operating a credit card bank pursuant to section 225.28(b)(1) and (2) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(1) and (2)). Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (62 Federal Register 39,243 (1997)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the proposal and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 4 of the BHC Act. Associated, with total consolidated assets of approximately $4.5 billion operates 12 subsidiary banks in Wisconsin and Illinois. Associated is the fourth largest depository institution in Wisconsin, controlling deposits of $3.1 billion, representing approximately 4.9 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in Wisconsin. FFC is the fifth largest depository institution in Wisconsin, controlling deposits of $2.4 billion in Wisconsin. On consummation of the proposal, Associated would become the third largest depository institution in Wisconsin, controlling total deposits of $5.5 billion, representing approximately 8.8 percent of the total deposits in depository institutions in Wisconsin. As noted, the Board previously has determined by regulation that operating a savings association, providing real estate and tangible personal property appraisals, and operating a credit card bank are closely related to banking for purposes of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. The Board requires savings associations acquired by bank holding companies to conform their direct and indirect activities to those permissible for bank holding companies under section 4 of the BHC Act and Regulation Y. Associated has committed to conform all activities of Thrift with those requirements and to conduct all the proposed activities in accordance with Regulation Y. Competitive Considerations In order to approve the proposal, the Board also must determine that the performance of the proposed activities are a proper incident to banking, that is, that the proposed transaction "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public . . . that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices." As part of the Board's evaluation of these factors, the Board has carefully considered the competitive effects of the proposed transaction in light of all the facts of record. Associated and FFC compete directly in 12 banking markets in Wisconsin. The Board has carefully reviewed the competitive effects of the proposal in these banking markets in light of all the facts of record, including the number of competitors that would remain in the markets, the characteristics of the markets, the projected increase in the concentration of total deposits in depository institutions in the markets ("market deposits"), as measured by the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index ("HHI"), under the Department of Justice Merger Guidelines ("DOJ Guidelines"). Consummation of the proposal would not exceed the DOJ Guidelines in 11 of the 12 banking markets in which Associated and FFC compete and a number of competitors would remain in the markets. In the remaining banking market of Manitowoc-Two Rivers ("Manitowoc-Two Rivers banking market"), consummation of the proposal would increase the HHI by 305 points to 2144, and Associated would control 33 percent of the market deposits. In considering the competitive effects of the proposal, the Board also has considered that, after consummation of the proposal, 12 depository institutions would remain in the Manitowoc-Two Rivers banking market. Two competitors, not including Associated, would each have market shares of approximately 22 percent. The banking market also has characteristics that make it attractive for entry for out-of-market firms. For example, the number of residents per banking office, the average amount of deposits per banking office, and the per capita income in the Manitowoc-Two Rivers banking market substantially exceed the state average for these statistics in non-MSA markets in Wisconsin. Two banking organizations have entered the banking market de novo since August 1994. Wisconsin law, moreover, authorizes banks to branch statewide. Based on these and all of the other facts of record, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposal would not have a significantly adverse effect on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in the Manitowoc-Two Rivers banking market or in any other relevant banking market. Other Considerations As part of its evaluation of the public interest factors, the Board has carefully considered, in light of all the facts of record, the financial and managerial resources of Associated, FFC, and their subsidiaries, and the effect the transaction would have on such resources. The information considered includes supervisory reports of examination assessing the financial and managerial resources of the organizations and recent pro forma financial information provided by Associated. The Board notes that Associated and FFC, and each of their insured depository institutions, meet or exceed the "well capitalized" thresholds under applicable law, and FFC would continue to do so after consummation of the proposal. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that the financial and managerial resources of the organizations involved in the proposal are consistent with approval. The record also indicates that the proposal would result in public benefits. Consummation of the proposal would result in a broader financial network through which Associated could serve its customers and the customers of Thrift. Associated also would offer new financial services to customers of Thrift, including assistance in managing funds in IRA and Keogh accounts, specialized lending services to corporate customers, and comprehensive trust administration and investment management services. Associated's customers also would have access to a variety of mortgage, consumer loan, and credit card services offered by FFC. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the proposal by Associated can reasonably be expected to produce public benefits that outweigh possible adverse effects under the proper incident to banking standard of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Accordingly, the Board has determined that the balance of public interest factors it must consider under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act is favorable and consistent with approval. Conclusion Based on the foregoing and all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the notice should be, and hereby is approved. The Board's approval of the notice is specifically conditioned on compliance by Associated and FFC with commitments made in connection with this notice. The Board's determination also is subject to all the conditions in Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.25(c) (12 C.F.R. 225.7 and 225.25(c)) and to the Board's authority to require such modification or termination of the activities of a holding company or any of its subsidiaries as the Board finds necessary to assure compliance with, or to prevent evasion of, the provisions and purposes of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders issued thereunder. The commitments and conditions relied on by the Board in reaching this decision shall be deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decisions, and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. This proposal shall not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective September 8, 1997. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Appendix Banking markets where the depository institution subsidiaries of Associated and FFC compete, all in Wisconsin unless indicated otherwise: Rhinelander -- approximated by Vilas and Oneida Counties; Forest County, excluding Alvin and Popple River Townships; and the northern two-fifths of Lincoln County. After consummation of the proposal, Associated would control 18.3 percent of the market deposits and would become the second largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase 63 points to 1977. Sheboygan -- approximated by Sheboygan County, excluding Russell and Rhine Townships. After consummation of the proposal, Associated would control 6.3 percent of the market deposits and would become the fifth largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would not increase. Oshkosh -- approximated by Winnebago County, except for Winchester, Clayton, Menasha, and Neenah townships. After consummation of the proposal, Associated would control 17 percent of the market deposits and would become the third largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase 50 points to 1829. Green Bay -- approximated by Brown County; Morgan, Abrams, Pensaukee, Chase, and Little Suamico townships in Oconto County; Angelica and Maple Grove townships in Shawano County; Oneida township in Outagamie County; Cooperstown township in Manitowoc County, Wisconsin; and Red River, Luxemburg, and Montpelier townships in Kewaunee County. After consummation of the proposal, Associated would control 29.6 percent of the market deposits and would remain the largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase 94 points to 1685. Hurley-Ironwood -- approximated by Iron County, and Gogebic and Ontonagon Counties in Michigan. After consummation of the proposal, Associated would control 15.5 percent of the market deposits and would remain the third largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase 37 points to 1563. Wausau -- approximated by the southern three-fifths of Lincoln County; Marathon County, excluding, Holton, Hull, Brighton, Spencer, McMillan, and Day townships. After consummation of the proposal, Associated would control 9.8 percent of the market deposits and would become the third largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would not increase. Beloit-Janesville -- approximated by Rock County. After consummation of the proposal, Associated would control 3.5 percent of the market deposits and would become the eighth largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would not increase. Milwaukee -- approximated by Milwaukee, Waukesha, and Ozaukee Counties, and portions of Jefferson, Racine, Walworth, and Washington Counties. After consummation of the proposal, Associated would control 8.8 percent of the market deposits and would become the fourth largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would not increase. Wood -- approximated by Wood County, and Spencer, McMillan, and Day townships in Marathon County. After consummation of the proposal, Associated would control 21.3 percent of the market deposits and would become the largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase 158 points to 1375. Watertown -- approximated by the southern two tiers of townships in Dodge County, and the northern two tiers of townships in Jefferson County, excluding Ixonia township. After consummation of the proposal, Associated would control 21.9 percent of the market deposits and would become the second largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase 171 points to 1481. Appleton -- approximated by Outagamie County, excluding Oneida township; Winchester, Claton, Neenah, and Menasha townships in Winnebago County; and Harrison, Woodville, Brillion, and Rantoul townships in Calumet County. After consummation of the proposal, Associated would control 15.6 percent of the market deposits and would remain the third largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase 29 points to 1236. Footnotes Associated proposes to charter a wholly owned subsidiary, Badger Merger Corporation, Green Bay, Wisconsin, that would merge with and into FFC with FFC as the surviving corporation. The subsidiaries are: (1) Appraisal Services, Inc., Milwaukee (real estate and personal property appraisals); and (2) First Financial Card Services Bank, N.A., Stevens Point (credit card bank), both in Wisconsin. State and market data are as of June 30, 1996. In this context, the term depository institutions includes commercial banks, savings banks, and savings associations. Associated has committed that all impermissible real estate activities will be divested or terminated within two years of consummation of the proposal, that no new impermissible projects or investments will be undertaken during this period, and that capital adequacy guidelines will be met, excluding impermissible real estate investments. Associated also has committed that all impermissible insurance activities conducted by FFC or its subsidiaries will cease within six months of consummation of the proposal, and Associated has indicated that the activities will be divested to an unaffiliated third party or transferred to an affiliated bank subsidiary that is authorized under relevant state law to engage in the activities. 12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8). Market share data before consummation are based on calculations in which the deposits of thrift institutions are included at 50 percent. The Board previously has indicated that thrift institutions have become, or have the potential to become, significant competitors of commercial banks. See Midwest Financial Group , 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 386 (1989); National City Corporation , 70 Federal Reserve Bulletin 743 (1984). Thus, the Board has regularly included thrift deposits in the calculation of market share on a 50-percent weighted basis. See, e.g., First Hawaiian, Inc. , 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 52 (1991). Because the deposits of Thrift would be acquired by a commercial banking organization under the proposal, those deposits are included at 100 percent in the calculation of Associated's pro forma market share. See Norwest Corporation , 78 Federal Reserve Bulletin 452 (1992). First Banks, Inc. , 76 Federal Reserve Bulletin 669, 670 n.9 (1990). Under the revised DOJ Guidelines, 49 Federal Register 26,823 (June 29, 1984), a market in which the post-merger HHI is more than 1800 is considered highly concentrated. The Department of Justice has informed the Board that a bank merger or acquisition generally will not be challenged (in the absence of other factors indicating anticompetitive effects) unless the post-merger HHI is at least 1800 and the merger increases the HHI by more than 200 points. The Department of Justice has stated that the higher than normal threshold for an increase in the HHI when screening bank mergers and acquisitions for anticompetitive effects implicitly recognizes the competitive effects of limited-purpose lenders and other non-depository financial entities. The banking markets are discussed in the Appendix. The Manitowoc-Two Rivers banking market is approximated by Manitowoc County, except for Schleswig, Eaton, and Cooperstown townships, all in Wisconsin. See Wis. Stat. Ann. § 221.032(1) (1995). Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan and Governors Kelley, Phillips, and Meyer. Absent and not voting: Vice Chair Rivlin.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice filed by KeyCorp to engage, through its wholly owned subsidiary, Key Capital Markets, Inc., both of Cleveland, Ohio, in a variety of securities-related activities, including engaging to a limited extent in underwriting and dealing in all types of debt and equity securities. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. KeyCorp Cleveland, Ohio Order Approving Notice to Engage in Underwriting and Dealing in All Types of Debt and Equity Securities on a Limited Basis and Certain Other Nonbanking Activities KeyCorp, Cleveland, Ohio ("KeyCorp"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8)) and section 225.24 of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.24) to engage in the following nonbanking activities through its wholly owned subsidiary, Key Capital Markets, Inc., Cleveland, Ohio ("KCMI"): Underwriting and dealing in, to a limited extent, all types of debt and equity securities except ownership interests in open-end investment companies; Providing investment and financial advice, as described in section 225.28(b)(6) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(6)); Conducting securities brokerage activities, buying and selling all types of securities on the order of customers as a "riskless principal," acting as agent in the private placement of all types of securities, acting as a futures commission merchant in the execution, clearance, and execution and clearance of futures contracts and options on futures contracts, and providing other transactional services, all as described in section 225.28(b)(7) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(7)); and Underwriting and dealing in government obligations and money market instruments, engaging in investing and trading activities, and buying and selling bullion and related activities, all as described in section 225.28(b)(8) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(8)). KeyCorp seeks approval for KCMI to conduct the activities listed above worldwide. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (62 Federal Register 38,308 and 40,088 (1997)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the notice and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. KeyCorp, with total consolidated assets of approximately $68 billion, is the 14th largest commercial banking organization in the United States. KeyCorp operates subsidiary banks in 14 states, and engages in a broad range of permissible nonbanking activities through its subsidiaries. KCMI currently engages in limited underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities as permitted under section 20 of the Glass-Steagall Act (12 U.S.C. § 377). KCMI is, and will continue to be, registered as a broker-dealer with the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. § 78a et seq .) and is a member of the National Association of Securities Dealers, Inc. ("NASD"). KCMI, therefore, is subject to the recordkeeping and reporting obligations, fiduciary standards, and other requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the SEC, and the NASD. Underwriting and Dealing in Bank-Ineligible Securities The Board has determined that, subject to the prudential framework of limitations established in previous decisions to address the potential for unsound banking practices or other adverse effects, the proposed activities of underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities are so closely related to banking as to be proper incidents thereto within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. The Board also has determined that the conduct of the proposed activities is consistent with section 20 of the Glass-Steagall Act, provided that the company engaged in the underwriting and dealing activities derives no more than 25 percent of its gross revenues from underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities over a two-year period. KeyCorp has committed that KCMI will conduct its underwriting and dealing activities in bank-ineligible securities subject to this revenue limit. Other Activities Approved by Regulation As noted above, KeyCorp proposes to engage in providing investment and financial advice, agency transactional services for customer investments, and investment and trading services. The Board previously has determined by regulation that each of the proposed activities is closely related to banking for purposes of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Proper Incident to Banking Standard To approve this notice, the Board also must consider whether performance of the proposed activities is a proper incident to banking, that is, whether the proposed activities "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public . . . that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices." KeyCorp has proposed to conduct its underwriting and dealing activities in accordance with the framework of prudential limitations established by the Board in the Section 20 Orders to address potential adverse effects. The Board recently modified several of the prudential limitations established in the Section 20 Orders ("Section 20 firewalls") after concluding that a narrower set of restrictions is fully consistent with safety and soundness, should improve the operating efficiencies of section 20 subsidiaries, and increases options for customers of section 20 subsidiaries. The Board's action in this case is based on compliance by KeyCorp and its subsidiaries, including KCMI, with the prudential limitations established by the Board in the Section 20 Orders, as recently revised by the Board. KeyCorp and KCMI also will conduct the proposed activities in accordance with the limitations set forth in Regulation Y and the Board's orders and interpretations relating to each of the activities. As part of its evaluation of these factors, the Board also considers the financial condition and managerial resources of the notificant and its subsidiaries and the effect the transaction would have on such resources. The Board has reviewed the capitalization of KeyCorp and KCMI in accordance with the standards set forth in the Section 20 Orders and finds the capitalization of each to be consistent with approval. With respect to KCMI, this determination is based on all the facts of record, including KeyCorp's projections of the volume of KCMI's underwriting and dealing activities in bank-ineligible securities. On the basis of all the facts of record, including the foregoing, the Board concludes that financial considerations are consistent with approval of the notice. The Board also has considered the managerial resources of KeyCorp and its subsidiaries in light of all the facts of record, including comments from Inner City Press/Community on the Move ("ICP") contending that KCMI should not be permitted to expand its section 20 activities until it has gained additional experience in operating under its current section 20 powers and further demonstrated its operational and compliance capabilities. The facts also include KCMI's record of satisfactory operations to date as reflected in supervisory reports of examination and the results of a recent infrastructure review of KCMI performed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland ("Reserve Bank") in connection with the notice. The infrastructure review considered the operational and managerial infrastructure of KeyCorp and KCMI for underwriting and dealing in all types of debt securities, including computer, audit, and accounting systems and internal risk management controls. The Board has determined on the basis of the infrastructure review that KeyCorp and KCMI have established policies and procedures to ensure compliance with the Section 20 firewalls and other requirements of this order and the Section 20 Orders for underwriting and dealing in debt securities. As discussed below, a satisfactory infrastructure review of KeyCorp and KCMI related to underwriting and dealing in all types of equity securities must be completed before KCMI may engage in these activities. Based on all the facts of record, including ICP's comments, and for the reasons discussed above, and subject to the completion of a satisfactory infrastructure review of KeyCorp and KCMI related to underwriting and dealing in all types of equity securities, the Board concludes that considerations relating to the managerial resources of KeyCorp and its subsidiaries, including KCMI, are consistent with approval of the proposal. The Board expects that the expansion of the underwriting and dealing services to be provided by KCMI under the proposal would provide added convenience to KeyCorp's customers, lead to improved methods of meeting customers' financing needs, and increase the level of competition among existing providers of these services. In addition, there are public benefits to be derived from permitting bank holding companies to engage in potentially profitable activities when those activities are consistent, as in this case, with the relevant considerations under the BHC Act. As noted above, KeyCorp has committed that KCMI will conduct its bank-ineligible securities underwriting and dealing activities in accordance with the prudential framework established by the Board's Section 20 Orders. Under the framework and conditions established in this order and the Section 20 Orders, the Board concludes that KCMI's proposed limited conduct of underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities is not likely to result in significantly adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices that would outweigh the public benefits. Similarly, the Board finds no evidence that KCMI's proposal to provide investment and financial advice, agency transactional services for customer investments, and investment and trading services would likely result in any significantly adverse effects that would outweigh the public benefits of the proposal. Accordingly, the Board has determined that performance of the proposed activities by KeyCorp can reasonably be expected to produce public benefits that outweigh possible adverse effects under the proper incident to banking standard of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. For the reasons set forth in this order, the Section 20 Orders, and the Modification Orders, the Board has concluded that KeyCorp's proposal to engage through KCMI in the proposed activities is consistent with the Glass-Steagall Act and that the proposed activities are so closely related to banking as to be proper incidents thereto within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act, provided that KeyCorp limits KCMI's activities as specified in this order, the Section 20 Orders, and the Modification Orders. Based on the foregoing and all other facts of record, the Board has determined to, and hereby does, approve this notice subject to all terms and conditions discussed in this order, the Section 20 Orders and the Modification Orders. The Board's approval of the proposal extends only to activities conducted within the limitations of this order and those orders, including the Board's reservation of authority to establish additional limitations to ensure that KCMI's activities are consistent with safety and soundness, avoidance of conflicts of interests, and other relevant considerations under the BHC Act. Underwriting and dealing in any manner other than as approved in this order, the Section 20 Orders, and the Modification Orders is not authorized for KCMI. The Board's approval of the proposed underwriting and dealing in all types of equity securities is conditioned on a future determination by the Board that KeyCorp and KCMI have established policies and procedures for equity underwriting and dealing to ensure compliance with the requirements of this order, the Section 20 Orders, and the Modification Orders, including computer, audit, and accounting systems, internal risk management controls, and the necessary operational and managerial infrastructure. After notification by the Board that this condition has been satisfied, KCMI may commence the proposed equity underwriting and dealing activities, subject to the other conditions of this order, the Section 20 Orders, and the Modification Orders. The Board's determination is subject to all the terms and conditions set forth in Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.25(c) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.7 and 225.25(c)), and to the Board's authority to require such modification or termination of the activities of a bank holding company or any of its subsidiaries as the Board finds necessary to ensure compliance with, and prevent evasion of, the provisions of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders issued thereunder. In approving the proposal, the Board has relied on all the facts of record and all the representations and commitments made by KeyCorp in connection with the proposal, and the Board's determination is specifically conditioned thereon. These commitments and conditions are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decisions, and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The proposal shall not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective September 8, 1997. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the applications of Citizens Commercial Bank & Trust Company, Celina, Ohio, to acquire 11 branches from KeyBank, N.A., Cleveland, Ohio ("KeyBank"), and to establish branches at the locations of the former KeyBank branches. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. A of Governor Meyer will be released later. Citizens Commercial Bank & Trust Company Celina, Ohio Order Approving Acquisition and Establishment of Branches Citizens Commercial Bank & Trust Company, Celina ("Citizens"), a state member bank, has requested the Board's approval under section 18(c) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. § 1828(c)) (the "Bank Merger Act") to acquire 11 branches from KeyBank, N.A., Cleveland ("KeyBank"), both in Ohio, and under section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. § 321) to establish branches at the locations of the former KeyBank branches. Notice of the applications, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been given in accordance with the Bank Merger Act and the Board's Rules of Procedure (12 C.F.R. 262.3(b)). As required by the Bank Merger Act, reports on the competitive effects of the proposal were requested from the United States Attorney General ("Justice Department"), the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency ("OCC"), and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ("FDIC"). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the application and all the facts of record in light of the factors set forth in the Bank Merger Act and section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act. First Financial is the 11th largest commercial banking organization in Ohio, controlling deposits of $1.1 billion, representing 1.1 percent of the total deposits in commercial banking organizations in Ohio. The KeyBank branches to be acquired control deposits of $230.8 million, representing less than 1 percent of the total deposits in commercial banking organizations in Ohio. On consummation of the proposal, First Financial would remain the 11th largest commercial banking organization in Ohio, controlling deposits of $1.3 billion, representing 1.3 percent of the total deposits in commercial banking organizations in the state. Competitive Considerations The Bank Merger Act prohibits the Board from approving an application if the proposal would result in a monopoly or if the effect of the proposal may be to substantially lessen competition in any relevant market, unless the Board finds that the anticompetitive effects of the proposal are clearly outweighed in the public interest by the probable effect of the proposal in meeting the convenience and needs of the community to be served. Citizens and KeyBank compete in the Celina-St. Mary's, Ohio, banking market. Citizens is the largest depository institution in the market, controlling $178.3 million in deposits, representing 18.7 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in the market ("market deposits"). Citizens proposes to acquire eight KeyBank branches in the banking market that control deposits of $164.9 million, representing 17.2 percent of market deposits. On consummation, Citizens would remain the largest depository institution in the Celina-St. Mary's banking market, controlling $343.3 million in deposits, representing 35.9 percent of market deposits. Concentration in the banking market, as measured by the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index ("HHI") under the Department of Justice Merger Guidelines ("DOJ Guidelines"), would increase 645 points to 1908. In evaluating the effect on competition, the Board also has considered that the Celina-St. Mary's banking market is a relatively small rural banking market near the Ohio and Indiana border and would continue to be served by ten depository institutions after consummation of the proposal. Five competitors, not including Citizens, would each control a market share of more than 5 percent, and three of these competitors would each control a market share of more than 10 percent. Two competitors, including a competitor that controls a market share of more than 10 percent, are large multistate bank holding companies. In addition, two other competitors have announced plans to open branches in the banking market in the near future. Commercial banks in Ohio, moreover, may branch de novo statewide. As in other cases, the Board has sought comments from the Justice Department, the OCC, and the FDIC on the competitive effects of the proposal. The Justice Department has advised the Board that consummation of the proposal would not be likely to have any significantly adverse competitive effects in the Celina-St. Mary's banking market or in any other relevant banking markets. The OCC and FDIC did not object to consummation of the proposal or indicate it would have any significantly adverse competitive effects in the Celina-St. Mary's banking market or in any other relevant banking markets. Based on these and all the other facts of record, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposal would not have a significantly adverse effect on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in any relevant banking market. Other Considerations The Bank Merger Act also requires the Board to consider the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the institutions involved in the proposal, and the convenience and needs of the communities to be served. Based on all the facts of record, including supervisory reports of examination assessing the financial and managerial resources of the organizations and financial information provided by Citizens, the Board concludes that financial and managerial resources and future prospects considerations are consistent with approval as are considerations relating to the convenience and needs of the communities to be served. The Board also concludes that factors required to be considered under the Federal Reserve Act are consistent with approval. Conclusion Based on the foregoing and all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the applications should be, and hereby are, approved. The Board's approval of the applications is conditioned on compliance by Citizens with all the commitments made in connection with the applications. For purposes of this action, the commitments and conditions relied on in reaching this decision are both conditions imposed in writing by the Board and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The acquisition of the KeyBank branches may not be consummated before the fifteenth day following the date of this order, or later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective September 9, 1997. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Appendix Locations of KeyBank Branches to be Acquired and Established as Branches of Citizens, all in Ohio 327 South Main Street, Bryan 128 West Market, Celina 810 North Main Street, Celina 730 East Main Street, Coldwater 202 North Main Street, Delphos Jackson and Main Street, Paulding 166 South Main Street, Rockford 1210 Celina Road, St. Mary's 153 East Spring Street, St. Mary's 11230 State Route 364, St. Mary's 228 East South Street, St. Mary's Footnotes Citizens is a wholly owned subsidiary bank of First Financial Bancorp, Hamilton, Ohio ("First Financial"). The locations of the KeyBank branches to be acquired are set forth in the appendix. All data are as of June 30, 1996. 12 U.S.C. § 1828(c)(5) The Celina-St. Mary's banking market is approximated by Mercer County; the townships of German, Jackson, Noble, St. Mary's and Washington in Auglaize County; and the townships of Allen, Mississinawa, Patterson, Wabash, and York in Darke County, all in Ohio. In this context, depository institution includes commercial banks, savings banks and savings associations. Market share data are based on calculations in which the deposits of thrift institutions are included at 50 percent. The Board previously has indicated that thrift institutions have become, or have the potential to become, significant competitors of commercial banks. See Midwest Financial Group , 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 386 (1989); National City Corporation , 70 Federal Reserve Bulletin 743 (1984). Thus, the Board has regularly included thrift deposits in the calculation of market share on a 50-percent weighted basis. See e.g. First Hawaiian, Inc. , 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 52 (1991). Under the revised DOJ Guidelines, 49 Federal Register 26,823 (June 29, 1984), a market in which the post-merger HHI is above 1800 is considered highly concentrated. The Justice Department has informed the Board that a bank merger or acquisition generally will not be challenged (in the absence of other factors indicating anticompetitive effects) unless the post-merger HHI is at least 1800 and the merger increases the HHI by more than 200 points. The Justice Department has stated that the higher than normal HHI thresholds for screening bank mergers for anticompetitive effects implicitly recognize the competitive effect of limited-purpose lenders and other non-depository financial institutions. Ohio Rev. Code Ann. § 1117.01 (Anderson 1996). 12 U.S.C. § 36(c). Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan and Governors Kelley, Phillips, and Meyer. Absent and not voting: Vice Chair Rivlin.
For immediate release The Basle Committee on Banking Supervision has issued a policy statement entitled "The Year 2000: A Challenge for Financial Institutions and Bank Supervisors," which addresses the need for financial institutions to check all their computer applications in advance of the new millennium. This paper sets out a strategic approach for the development, testing and implementation of system solutions as well as defining the role that central banks and other bank supervisors need to play in promoting awareness of the Year 2000 issue and enforcing action. The text of the Basle Committee document is attached. It also is available on the BIS Website at . and the Federal Reserve Board Website at . Attachments are available on the BIS Website |
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice of NationsBank Corporation, Charlotte, North Carolina, to acquire Montgomery Securities and The Pyramid Company, both of San Francisco, California, and thereby engage in underwriting and dealing, to a limited extent, in all types of debt and equity securities, and in certain other nonbanking activities. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. NationsBank Corporation Charlotte, North Carolina Order Approving Notice to Engage in Certain Nonbanking Activities NationsBank Corporation, Charlotte, North Carolina ("NationsBank"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8)) and section 225.24 of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.24) to acquire all the assets and assume all the liabilities of two related companies, Montgomery Securities and The Pyramid Company, both of San Francisco, California (together, "Montgomery"). NationsBank would thereby engage in the following activities: Underwriting and dealing, to a limited extent, in all types of debt and equity securities, other than ownership interests in open-end investment companies; Underwriting and dealing in government obligations and money market instruments in which state member banks may underwrite and deal under 12 U.S.C. §§ 335 and 24(7) ("bank-eligible securities"), pursuant to section 225.28(b)(8)(i) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(8)(i)); Providing financial and investment advisory services, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(6) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(6)); and Providing securities brokerage, private placement, and riskless principal services, pursuant to section 225.25(b)(7)(i), (ii), and (iii) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.25(b)(7)(i), (ii), and (iii)). Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (62 Federal Register 39,243 (1997)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the notice and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. NationsBank, with total consolidated assets of $239 billion, is the fourth largest commercial banking organization in the United States. NationsBank operates bank subsidiaries in 17 states and the District of Columbia. NationsBank also engages through its subsidiaries in a broad range of permissible nonbanking activities. Montgomery, with total consolidated assets of $2.5 billion, engages in investment advisory, securities brokerage, securities underwriting, and related activities. NationsBank proposes to merge Montgomery with and into NCMI, a subsidiary of NationsBank that engages in a wide range of securities activities, including engaging to a limited extent in underwriting and dealing in all types of debt and equity securities in which a state member bank may not underwrite or deal ("bank-ineligible securities"). Following consummation, NCMI would be renamed NationsBanc Montgomery Securities, Inc. ("NMSI"). NCMI is, and NMSI would continue to be, a broker-dealer registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") and a member of the National Association of Securities Dealers, Inc. ("NASD"). Accordingly, NCMI is, and NMSI would remain, subject to the recordkeeping and reporting obligations, fiduciary standards, and other requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. § 78a et seq .), the SEC, and the NASD. Activities Previously Approved by the Board The Board previously has determined by order or regulation that the activities NationsBank proposes to conduct after its acquisition of Montgomery are closely related to banking within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act, and the Board previously has authorized NationsBank to engage in each of the activities. NationsBank would continue to conduct the activities in accordance with the NationsBank Order , Regulation Y, and the relevant Board interpretations and orders pertaining to each of the activities. As noted above, NationsBank engages, through NCMI, in limited underwriting and dealing activities that the Board previously has determined to be permissible under section 20 of the Glass-Steagall Act (12 U.S.C. § 377). Montgomery also is engaged in underwriting and dealing activities. The Board has concluded that conduct of the proposed activities is consistent with section 20, provided that NMSI derives no more than 25 percent of its gross revenues from underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities over a two-year period. NationsBank has committed that, following the acquisition of Montgomery, NMSI will continue to conduct its bank-ineligible underwriting and dealing activities subject to the 25-percent revenue limitation and the prudential limitations previously established by the Board with respect to bank-ineligible securities underwriting and dealing. Financial Factors, Managerial Resources, and Other Considerations In order to approve this notice, the Board also must consider whether performance of the proposed activities is a proper incident to banking, that is, whether the activities proposed "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public . . . that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices." As part of its evaluation of these factors, the Board considers the financial condition and managerial resources of the notificant and its subsidiaries and the effect the transaction would have on such resources. The review has included supervisory reports of examination assessing the financial and managerial resources of the organizations and pro forma financial information provided by NationsBank. Financial and Managerial Resources In considering the financial resources of the notificant, the Board has reviewed the capitalization of NationsBank and NMSI in accordance with the standards set forth in the Section 20 Orders. The Board finds the capitalization of each to be consistent with approval of the proposal. With respect to NMSI, the Board's determination is based on all the facts of record, including NationsBank's projections of the volume of NMSI's underwriting and dealing activities in bank-ineligible securities. The Board also has reviewed the managerial resources of each of the entities involved in this proposal. As part of that review, the Board has carefully examined comments submitted by Inner City Press/Community on the Move and the New Mexico Alliance ("Protestants"). Protestants raise concerns regarding the managerial resources of NationsBank, Montgomery, and NCMI, and contend that the proposed acquisition would have adverse competitive effects on the markets currently served by Montgomery and NCMI. Protestants further raise concerns regarding certain adverse effects that they allege have arisen from the consummation of NationsBank's acquisition of Boatmen's Bancshares, Inc., St. Louis, Missouri ("Boatmens"), which the Board approved on December 16, 1996. Protestants' concerns about the managerial resources of NationsBank and Montgomery include concerns arising out of litigation involving the two parties, alleged adverse effects of NationsBank's acquisition of Boatmens, and published articles about NationsBank's underwriting and dealing activities. The Board has considered this information in light of examination reports, supervisory information, and its supervisory experience with NationsBank and NCMI. The Board also has considered that NationsBank has established policies and procedures to ensure compliance with this order and the Section 20 Orders, including computer, audit, and account systems, internal risk management controls, and the necessary operational and managerial infrastructure. On the basis of these and all the facts of record -- including the Board's review of the managerial resources of the entities, the commitments provided in this case, and the proposed managerial structure and risk management systems of NMSI -- the Board has concluded that financial and managerial considerations are consistent with approval of the notice. Competitive Effects The Board has carefully considered the competitive effects of the proposed acquisition. NationsBank operates certain nonbanking subsidiaries, including NCMI, that compete with Montgomery. Protestants are concerned that the transaction will reduce competition because NationsBank has stated that NCMI and Montgomery offer their services to the same customers. NationsBank represents that there are few overlaps in the services provided by NationsBank and Montgomery to those customers. NationsBank states that Montgomery specializes in underwriting and trading equity securities, while NationsBank's securities business is focused almost exclusively on underwriting debt securities. To the extent that NationsBank and Montgomery offer different products, the proposed acquisition would result in no loss of competition. There are some overlaps in the securities brokerage, underwriting and dealing, and financial advisory products that NationsBank and Montgomery offer. In those markets in which Montgomery's and NationsBank's product offerings do overlap, there are numerous existing and potential competitors. Consummation of the proposal, therefore, would have a de minimis effect on competition in the market for these services, and the Board has concluded that the proposal would not result in any significantly adverse competitive effects in any relevant market. Public Benefits The Board expects that the proposed acquisition would provide added convenience to customers of both NationsBank and Montgomery and lead to improved methods of meeting customer financing needs. NationsBank has indicated that the acquisition would expand the range of products and services available to both its customers and those of Montgomery. Following consummation of the proposed acquisition, NationsBank's customers would have better access to equity financing, in which Montgomery specializes, and Montgomery's customers would have better access to debt financing and the risk management products now offered by NCMI. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that performance of the proposed activities by NationsBank can reasonably be expected to produce public benefits. As noted above, NationsBank has committed that NMSI will conduct its bank-ineligible securities underwriting and dealing activities in accordance with the prudential framework established by the Board's Section 20 Orders. Under the framework and conditions established in this order and the Section 20 Orders, and based on all the facts of record, including Protestants' comments, the Board concludes that NMSI's proposed underwriting and dealing activities in bank-ineligible securities are not likely to result in significantly adverse effects that would outweigh the public benefits. Similarly, the Board finds no evidence that NMSI's proposed riskless principal, private placement, and other nonbanking activities -- conducted under the framework and conditions established in this order and Regulation Y -- would likely result in any significantly adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices, that would outweigh the public benefits of the proposal. Accordingly, the Board has determined that performance of the proposed activities by NationsBank is a proper incident to banking for purposes of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Conclusion On the basis of all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the notice should be, and hereby is, approved, subject to all the terms and conditions in this order and the Section 20 Orders, as modified by the Modification Orders. The Board's approval of the proposal extends only to activities conducted within the limitations of those orders and this order, including the Board's reservation of authority to establish additional limitations to ensure that NMSI's activities are consistent with safety and soundness, avoidance of conflicts of interests, and other relevant considerations under the BHC Act. Underwriting and dealing in any manner other than as approved in this order and the Section 20 Orders (as modified by the Modification Orders) is not within the scope of the Board's approval and is not authorized for NMSI. The Board's determination is subject to all the terms and conditions set forth in Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.25(c) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.7 and 225.25(c)), and to the Board's authority to require such modification or termination of the activities of a bank holding company or any of its subsidiaries as the Board finds necessary to ensure compliance with, and to prevent evasion of, the provisions of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders issued thereunder. The Board's decision is specifically conditioned on compliance with all the commitments made in connection with this notice, including the commitments discussed in this order, and the conditions set forth in this order and the above-noted Board regulations and orders. These commitments and conditions are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision, and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The proposal shall not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good .cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective September 10, 1997. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes The acquisition would be structured as a simultaneous merger of Montgomery Securities and The Pyramid Company into Acquisition Co., a newly created, wholly owned subsidiary of NationsBank. Immediately following the acquisition, Acquisition Co. would be merged with and into NationsBanc Capital Markets, Inc., Charlotte, North Carolina ("NCMI"). Asset and ranking data are as of March 31, 1997. See NationsBank Corporation , 79 Federal Reserve Bulletin 892 (1993) (" NationsBank Order "). See NationsBank Order See J.P. Morgan & Co. Incorporated, et al. , 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 192 (1989), aff'd sub nom . Securities Industries Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System , 900 F.2d 360 (D.C. Cir. 1990); Citicorp, et al. , 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 473 (1987), aff'd sub nom. Securities Industry Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System , 839 F.2d 47 (2d Cir. 1988), cert. den., 486 U.S. 1059 (1988); as modified by Review of Restrictions on Director, Officer and Employee Interlocks, Cross-Marketing Activities, and the Purchase and Sale of Financial Assets Between a Section 20 Subsidiary and an Affiliated Bank or Thrift , 61 Federal Register 57,679 (1996), and Amendments to the Restrictions in the Board's Section 20 Orders , 62 Federal Register 45,295 (1997) (collectively, "Section 20 Orders"). See Section 20 Orders. Effective March 6, 1997, the Board increased from 10 to 25 percent the amount of total revenue that a section 20 subsidiary may derive from underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities. Revenue Limit on Bank-Ineligible Activities of Subsidiaries of Bank Holding Companies Engaged in Underwriting and Dealing in Securities , 61 Federal Register 68,750 (1996). Compliance with the revenue limitation shall be calculated in accordance with the method stated in the Section 20 Orders, as modified by the Order Approving Modifications to the Section 20 Orders , 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 751 (1989), and 10 Percent Revenue Limit on Bank-Ineligible Activities of Subsidiaries of Bank Holding Companies Engage in Underwriting and Dealing in Securities , 61 Federal Register 48,953 (1996) (collectively, "Modification Orders"). Effective October 27, 1997, the Board substantially revised the prudential limitations with respect to bank-ineligible securities underwriting and dealing. See Amendments to Restrictions in the Board's Section 20 Orders , 62 Federal Register 45,295 (1997). NationsBank has committed that NMSI will conduct its bank-ineligible underwriting and dealing activities subject to the Board's new operating standards on the effective date. NMSI may provide services that are necessary incidents to the proposed underwriting and dealing activities. Unless NMSI receives specific approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act to conduct the activities independently, any revenues from the incidental activities must be treated as ineligible revenues subject to the Board's revenue limitation. 12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8). See 12 C.F.R. 225.26. See NationsBank Corporation , 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin 148 (1997). Protestants cite: (a) an administrative complaint filed by the Department of Labor ("DOL") alleging that NationsBank engaged in discriminatory hiring practices in Charlotte, North Carolina, in 1993; (b) two settled class-action lawsuits against NationsBank in which allegations of improper sales practices of nondeposit investment products were raised; and (c) a class-action lawsuit settled by Montgomery involving allegations of price fixing and other impermissible market-making activities. The Board has carefully reviewed Protestants' comments in light of all the facts of record, including confidential information received from the DOL. The Board notes that none of the actions cited by Protestants has resulted in adjudications of wrongdoing on the part of NationsBank or Montgomery. The DOL administrative case is at a preliminary stage, and NationsBank has not yet responded to the allegations, and each of the class actions cited by Protestants were settled without determinations of wrongdoing. Protestants raise concerns about various alleged adverse effects of NationsBank's acquisition of Boatmens and NationsBank's fair lending record. Protestants allege that the effects of NationsBank's acquisition of Boatmens differ from the expected effects that NationsBank's management presented to the Board when it sought approval for the acquisition. There is no evidence that NationsBank's management misrepresented the probable effects of the Boatmens transaction or that the Boatmens transaction will not result in the public benefits that the Board reasonably expected when it approved the transaction. In raising these concerns, Protestants have largely reiterated allegations that the Board carefully considered when it approved the acquisition of Boatmens by NationsBank. S ee NationsBank Corporation , 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin 148 (1997). Under the Board's Rules of Procedure, Protestants may not now seek a reconsideration of the Board's determination in that case. See 12 C.F.R. 262.3(k). Protestants have requested a hearing or a public meeting on the proposal. Section 4 of the BHC Act and the Board's rules thereunder provide for a hearing on an application to acquire a savings association if there are disputed issues of material fact that cannot be resolved in some other manner. See 12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8). This case does not involve the acquisition of a savings association. Under its rules, the Board may also, in its discretion, hold a public hearing or meeting on an application or notice to clarify factual issues related to the notice and to provide an opportunity for testimony, if appropriate. See 12 C.F.R. 262.3(e) and 262.25(d). The Board has carefully considered Protestants' request for a hearing in light of all the facts of record. In the Board's view, Protestants have had ample opportunity to present their views, and they have submitted written comments that have been carefully considered by the Board in acting on the proposal. Protestants' request fails to demonstrate why their written presentations do not adequately present their evidence, allegations, and views. For these reasons, and based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that a public hearing or meeting is not required or warranted to clarify the factual record in the proposal, or otherwise warranted in this case. Accordingly, the request for a hearing on the proposal is hereby denied. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, and Governors Kelley, Phillips, and Meyer. Absent and not voting: Vice Chair Rivlin.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice of Union Planters Corporation, Memphis, Tennessee, to acquire Magna Bancorp, Inc., and thereby indirectly acquire Magnolia Federal Bank for Savings and Magna Mortgage Company, all of Hattiesburg, Mississippi. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Union Planters Corporation Memphis, Tennessee Order Approving Acquisition of a Savings Association Union Planters Corporation, Memphis, Tennessee ("Union Planters"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act") has requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8)) to acquire Magna Bancorp, Inc. ("Magna"), and thereby acquire Magnolia Federal Bank for Savings ("Savings Bank"), and Magna Mortgage Company ("Magna Mortgage"), all of Hattiesburg, Mississippi. Magna Mortgage engages in originating and servicing mortgage loans, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(1) of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(1)), and in providing real estate appraisal and inspection services, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(2) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(2)). Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (62 Federal Register 39,243 (1997)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the notice and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Union Planters, with total consolidated assets of approximately $14.9 billion, is the 46th largest commercial banking organization in the United States, controlling less than 1 percent of total banking assets in the United States. Union Planters operates subsidiary banks in Alabama, Arkansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Mississippi, Missouri, and Tennessee. Magna operates offices in Mississippi and Alabama. On consummation, Union Planters would become the third largest depository institution in Mississippi, controlling $2.8 billion in deposits, representing approximately 11.5 percent of total deposits in the state. Union Planters also would remain the tenth largest depository institution in Alabama, controlling $542.7 million in deposits, representing approximately 1.2 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in the state. The Board previously has determined by regulation that the operation of a savings association by a bank holding company and the activities of extending credit, servicing loans, and providing services related to extending credit are closely related to banking for purposes of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. The Board requires that savings associations acquired by a bank holding company conform their direct and indirect activities to those permissible for a bank holding company under section 4 of the BHC Act and Regulation Y. Union Planters has committed that it will conduct the proposed activities in accordance with the Board's regulations. Competitive Considerations In order to approve the proposal, the Board also must determine that the performance of the proposed activities is a proper incident to banking, that is, that the proposed transaction "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public . . . that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices." As part of the Board's evaluation of these factors, the Board has carefully considered the competitive effects of the proposed transaction. Union Planters and Savings Bank compete directly in nine banking markets, all in Mississippi. The Board has carefully reviewed the competitive effects of the proposal in those markets in light of all the facts of record, including the number of competitors that would remain in the markets, the projected increase in the concentration of total deposits in depository institutions in the markets ("market deposits"), as measured by the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index ("HHI") under the Department of Justice Merger Guidelines ("DOJ Guidelines"), and commitments made by Union Planters to divest branches in certain markets to address potential anticompetitive effects. As described in more detail in the Appendix, and considering the effect of proposed divestitures, consummation of the proposal would exceed the DOJ Guidelines in only one banking market. In the Washington County, Mississippi ("Washington County"), banking market, the HHI would increase by 280 points to 2053. Union Planters would remain the largest depository institution in the banking market, controlling 31.2 percent of market deposits. In analyzing the competitive effects of the proposal on this market, the Board also has considered that the Washington County banking market is a rural banking market and that seven commercial banking organizations would remain in the market after consummation of the proposal. Four competitors other than Union Planters would have market shares of 9.9 percent or more, including two of the largest bank holding companies in Mississippi, which would have market shares of 22 percent and 19 percent. Based on the number and size of the remaining competitors, the characteristics of the market, and all other facts of record, the Board concludes that consummation of this proposal would not have a significantly adverse effect on competition in the Washington County banking market. Similarly, based on all the facts of record, including the proposed divestitures, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposal would not have a significantly adverse effect on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in any other relevant banking market. Other Considerations As part of its consideration of the public interest factors, the Board has carefully considered, in light of all the facts of record, the financial and managerial resources of Union Planters and Magna and their subsidiaries and the effect the transaction would have on such resources. Information considered included supervisory reports of examination assessing the financial and managerial resources of the organizations and recent pro forma financial information provided by Union Planters. The Board notes that Union Planters, Magna, and each of their insured depository institutions meet or exceed the "well capitalized" thresholds under applicable law, and that Union Planters would continue to meet those thresholds after consummation of the proposal. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that the financial and managerial resources of the organizations involved in the proposal are consistent with approval. The record also indicates that consummation of the proposal would result in public benefits. The proposal would result in a broader financial network through which Magna's customers would have access to the increased services offered at Union Planters's subsidiary banks. Additionally, there are public benefits from permitting capital markets to operate so that bank holding companies may make potentially profitable investments in nonbanking companies when those investments are consistent, as in this case, with the relevant considerations under the BHC Act, and from permitting banking organizations to allocate their resources in the manner they believe is most efficient. As discussed above, the proposal is not expected to result in any significantly adverse competitive effects, and financial and managerial factors are consistent with approval. Based on all the facts or record, the Board has determined that the Union Planters proposal can reasonably be expected to produce public benefits that outweigh possible adverse effects under the proper incident to banking standard of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Accordingly, the Board has determined that the balance of public interest factors it must consider under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act is favorable and consistent with approval. Conclusion Based on the foregoing and all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the notice should be, and hereby is, approved. The Board's approval of the proposal is specifically conditioned on compliance by Union Planters with the commitments made in connection with this notice, including the divestiture commitments discussed in the order. The Board's determination also is subject to all the conditions set forth in Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.25(c) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.7 and 225.25(c)), and to the Board's authority to require such modification or termination of the activities of a bank holding company or any of its subsidiaries as the Board finds necessary to ensure compliance with, and to prevent evasion of, the provisions of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders issued thereunder. The commitments and conditions relied on by the Board in reaching this decision shall be deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision, and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. This transaction shall not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective September 10, 1997. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Appendix A. Banking markets in Mississippi in which consummation of the proposal would not exceed the DOJ Guidelines without divestitures: Biloxi : Approximated by Hancock and Harrison Counties, plus the city of Ocean Springs in Jackson County. Union Planters would control 9.9 percent of the market deposits and would become the third largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would not increase and ten depository institutions would remain in the market after consummation of the proposal. Hattiesburg : Approximated by Forrest and Lamar Counties. Union Planters would control 25 percent of the market deposits and would remain the largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase 147 points to 2077. Eight depository institutions would remain in the market after consummation of the proposal. Indianola : Approximated by the southern half of Sunflower County. Union Planters would control 12.7 percent of the market deposits and would remain the third largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would not increase and three depository institutions would remain in the market after consummation of the proposal. Jackson : Approximated by Hinds, Madison and Rankin Counties, plus Copiah County excluding the town of Wesson, and including the town of Mendenhall in Simpson County. Union Planters would control 9.9 percent of the market deposits and would remain the third largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would not increase and 17 depository institutions would remain in the market after consummation of the proposal. Leflore County : Approximated by Leflore County. Union Planters would control 17.9 percent of the market deposits and would remain the fourth largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase 26 points to 2338. Five depository institutions would remain in the market after consummation of the proposal. Pascagoula : Approximated by Jackson County, less the town of Ocean Springs, and George County. Union Planters would control 9.4 percent of the market deposits and would become the fourth largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would not increase and eight depository institutions would remain in the market after consummation of the proposal. B. Banking markets in Mississippi in which consummation of the proposal would not exceed the DOJ Guidelines with divestitures: Covington County : Approximated by Covington County. With the proposed divestiture, Union Planters would control 33.2 percent of the market deposits and would remain the largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would not increase and four depository institutions would remain in the market after consummation of the proposal. Grenada County : Approximated by Grenada County. With the proposed divestiture, Union Planters would control 53.6 percent of the market deposits and would remain the largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would not increase and five depository institutions would remain in the market after consummation of the proposal. Footnotes Union Planters plans to merge Savings Bank with and into one of Union Planters's state-chartered subsidiary banks. The merger is subject to the approval of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation under section 18(c) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. § 1828(c)) (the "Bank Merger Act"). All asset data are as of March 31, 1997. All deposit data are as of June 30, 1996. In this context, depository institutions include commercial banks, savings banks, and savings associations. In Mississippi, Union Planters currently is the fourth largest depository institution, controlling total deposits of $2.1 billion, representing approximately 8.5 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in that state, and Magna is the seventh largest depository institution, controlling total deposits of $739.1 million, representing approximately 3 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in that state. In Alabama, Union Planters currently is the tenth largest depository institution, controlling total deposits of $418.7 million, representing less than 1 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in the state, and Magna is the 34th largest depository institution in Alabama, controlling $124 million in deposits, representing less than 1 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in the state. 12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(4)(ii) (savings association) and 225.28(b)(1) and (2) (extensions of credit and related activities). 12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8). Market share data before consummation are based on calculations in which the deposits of thrift institutions are included at 50 percent. The Board previously has indicated that thrift institutions have become, or have the potential to become, significant competitors of commercial banks. See WM Bancorp , 76 Federal Reserve Bulletin 788 (1990); National City Corporation , 70 Federal Reserve Bulletin 743 (1984). Thus, the Board has regularly included thrift deposits in the calculation of market share on a 50-percent weighted basis. See, e.g., First Hawaiian, Inc ., 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 52 (1991). Because the deposits of Savings Bank would be controlled by a commercial banking organization after consummation of the proposal, those deposits are included at 100 percent in the calculation of Union Planters' pro forma market share. See Norwest Corporation , 78 Federal Reserve Bulletin 452 (1992); First Banks, Inc. , 76 Federal Reserve Bulletin 669 (1990). Under the revised DOJ Guidelines, 49 Federal Register 26,823 (June 29, 1984), a market in which the post-merger HHI is between 1000 and 1800 is considered moderately concentrated, and a market in which the post-merger HHI exceeds 1800 is considered highly concentrated. The Justice Department has informed the Board that a bank merger or acquisition generally will not be challenged (in the absence of other factors indicating anticompetitive effects) unless the post-merger HHI is at least 1800 and the merger increases the HHI by more than 200 points. The Justice Department has stated that the higher than normal HHI thresholds for screening bank mergers for anticompetitive effects implicitly recognize the competitive effect of limited-purpose lenders and other non-depository financial institutions. In each market in which Union Planters has committed to divest offices to mitigate the anticompetitive effects of the proposal, Union Planters has committed to execute sales agreements with a competitively suitable purchaser prior to consummation of the acquisition of Magna and to complete the divestitures within 180 days of consummation of the acquisition. Union Planters also has committed that, in the event it is unsuccessful in completing any divestiture within 180 days of consummation of the proposal, Union Planters will transfer the unsold branch(es) to an independent trustee that is acceptable to the Board and that will be instructed to sell the branches promptly. See BankAmerica Corporation , 78 Federal Reserve Bulletin 338 (1992); United New Mexico Financial Corporation , 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 484 (1991). Union Planters has further committed to submit to the Board, prior to consummation, an executed trust agreement acceptable to the Board stating the terms of these divestitures. The Washington County banking market consists of Washington County, Mississippi. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan and Governors Kelley, Phillips, and Meyer. Absent and not voting: Vice Chair Rivlin.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today released the statement of Governor Meyer, concurring in the approval of the applications of Citizens Commercial Bank & Trust Company, Celina, Ohio, to acquire 11 branches from KeyBank, N.A., Cleveland, Ohio ("KeyBank"), and to establish branches at the location of the former KeyBank branches. The relating to this action was released on September 8, 1997. Governor Meyer's Concurring Statement is attached. Concurring Statement of Governor Meyer I believe that the proposed acquisition presents a close case. The Celina/St. Mary's banking market, as measured by the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index ("HHI"), would become highly concentrated; and, under the Department of Justice merger guidelines, the amount of change in market concentration raises concerns about the potential competitive effects of this proposal. A divestiture of one office in the market would have substantially reduced the change in the HHI and the market would have remained moderately concentrated after consummation under the DOJ guidelines. Such a divestiture would have substantively improved the competitive considerations for this proposal, and a future application that presents such a large change in the HHI in a more highly concentrated post-acquisition banking market or where there are fewer remaining competitors, may well require a divestiture. The change in the HHI resulting from this proposal is at the upper limits of an acquisition that should be approved without a divestiture in my view. September 10, 1997
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced amendments to Regulation J to help ease the transition to interstate branching in the check collection area. The amendments are effective January 2, 1998 . Beginning January 2, 1998, the Federal Reserve Banks will implement a new account structure under which each depository institution will have a single Federal Reserve account relationship. The Regulation J amendments will allow an institution to send checks to any Reserve Bank for collection, but all of its check collection transactions through the Federal Reserve will be reflected in a single account held at its "Administrative Reserve Bank" no matter where the institution has its branches. The Board's notice is attached. |
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice by Barnett Banks, Inc., Jacksonville, Florida, to acquire First of America Bank-Florida, FSB, Tampa, Florida, and thereby engage in operating a savings association. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action, together with the Concurring Statement of Governor Meyer. Attachments Barnett Banks, Inc. Jacksonville, Florida Order Approving Notice to Acquire a Savings Association Barnett Banks, Inc., Jacksonville ("Barnett"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8)) and section 225.24 of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.24) to acquire First of America Bank-Florida, FSB, Tampa, both in Florida ("Thrift"), and thereby engage in operating a savings association pursuant to section 225.28(b)(4) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28 (b)(4)). Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (62 Federal Register 39,243 (1997)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the proposal and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 4 of the BHC Act. Barnett, with total consolidated assets of approximately $42 billion, operates four subsidiary banks in Florida and Georgia. Barnett is the largest depository institution in Florida, controlling deposits of $34.2 billion, representing approximately 19.2 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in the state. Thrift is the 23d largest depository institution in Florida, controlling deposits of $953.7 million, representing less than 1 percent of total deposits in the state. On consummation of the proposal, Barnett would remain the largest depository institution in Florida, controlling total deposits of $35.2 billion, representing approximately 19.7 percent of the total deposits in depository institutions in Florida. The Board previously has determined by regulation that operating a savings association is closely related to banking for purposes of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. The Board requires savings associations that are acquired by bank holding companies to conform their direct and indirect activities to those permissible for bank holding companies under section 4 of the BHC Act and Regulation Y. Barnett has committed to conform all of Thrift's activities of Thrift to those requirements. Competitive Considerations In order to approve the proposal, the Board also must determine that the performance of the proposed activities is a proper incident to banking, that is, that the proposed transaction "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public . . . that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices." As part of the Board's evaluation of these factors, the Board has carefully considered the competitive effects of the proposed transaction in light of all the facts of record. Barnett and Thrift compete directly in nine banking markets in Florida. The Board has carefully reviewed the competitive effects of the proposal in these banking markets in light of all the facts of record, including the number of competitors that would remain in the markets, the characteristics of the markets, and the projected increase in the concentration of total deposits in depository institutions in the markets ("market deposits"), as measured by the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index ("HHI"), under the Department of Justice Merger Guidelines ("DOJ Guidelines"). In the Punta Gorda banking market, consummation of the proposal would exceed the DOJ Guidelines. The HHI would increase by 653 points to 2143 points, and Barnett would become the largest depository institution in the market, controlling approximately 36 percent of market deposits. In evaluating the competitive effects of the proposal in the Punta Gorda banking market, the Board has considered that, after consummation of the proposal, 12 depository institutions would remain in the market. Three of the competitors, other than Barnett, are large multi-state commercial banking organizations that would each control more than 10 percent of market deposits. The Punta Gorda banking market also has characteristics that make it attractive for entry for out-of-market firms. The rates of increase in population for the Punta Gorda Metropolitan Statistical Area ("MSA") and in deposits in depository institutions for the Punta Gorda banking market have exceeded the averages for these statistics for Florida MSAs and for the state of Florida. Since 1991, three commercial banks have entered the Punta Gorda banking market de novo , and four depository institutions have entered through acquisitions. In the De Soto County banking market, consummation of the proposal would exceed the DOJ Guidelines, and the HHI would increase by 299 points to 3241 points. Barnett would become the third largest depository institution in the De Soto County banking market, controlling approximately 24 percent of market deposits. Four depository institutions, including two large multi-state commercial banking organizations, would remain in the banking market. Two competitors would have market shares larger than Barnett's, one controlling approximately 43 percent of market deposits and one, a large multi-state commercial banking organization, controlling approximately 28 percent of market deposits. The market also has characteristics that make it attractive for entry for out-of-market firms. In De Soto County, deposits statewide and in non-MSAs have increased at a higher rate than the average for deposit growth. De Soto County's population per branch office and deposits per branch office also are higher than the average for other non-MSAs. Since 1991, two depository institutions have entered the banking market through acquisitions. Based on these and all the other facts of record, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposal would not have a significantly adverse effect on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in the Punta Gorda or the De Soto County banking markets. Consummation of the proposal would not exceed the DOJ Guidelines in the seven other banking markets in which Barnett and Thrift compete and numerous competitors would remain in these markets. Accordingly, consummation of the proposal would not have a significantly adverse effect on competition in any other relevant banking market. Other Considerations As part of its evaluation of the public interest factors, the Board has carefully considered the financial and managerial resources of Barnett, its subsidiaries and Thrift, and the effect the transaction would have on such resources in light of all the facts of record. These facts of record include supervisory reports of examination assessing the financial and managerial resources of the organizations and recent pro forma financial information provided by Barnett. The Board notes that Barnett, Thrift, and Barnett's insured depository institutions, meet or exceed the "well capitalized" thresholds under applicable law, and Barnett would continue to do so after consummation of the proposal. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that the financial and managerial resources of the organizations involved in the proposal are consistent with approval. The record also indicates that consummation of the proposal would result in public benefits. Barnett intends to offer Thrift's current and potential customers an expanded branch network and a broader array of banking products and services. Thrift customers would gain access to consumer and commercial investment services, consumer leasing services, commercial lending services, cash management services, international banking services, and electronic banking services and products. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the proposal by Barnett can reasonably be expected to produce public benefits that outweigh possible adverse effects under the proper incident to banking standard of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Accordingly, the Board has determined that the balance of public interest factors it must consider under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act is favorable and consistent with approval. Conclusion Based on the foregoing and all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the notice should be, and hereby is, approved. The Board's approval of the notice is specifically conditioned on compliance by Barnett and Thrift with commitments made in connection with the notice. The Board's determination also is subject to all the conditions in Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.25(c) (12 C.F.R. 225.7 and 225.25(c)) and to the Board's authority to require such modification or termination of the activities of a holding company or any of its subsidiaries as the Board finds necessary to assure compliance with, or to prevent evasion of, the provisions and purposes of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders issued thereunder. The commitments and conditions relied on by the Board in reaching this decision are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision, and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. This proposal shall not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective September 15, 1997. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Appendix Local banking markets where Barnett and Thrift's subsidiary depository institutions compete, all in Florida: Beverly Hills -- approximated by Citrus County, excluding the town of Citrus Springs. After consummation of the proposal, Barnett would control 21.3 percent of the market deposits and would remain the second largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase 43 points to 1731. Fort Myers -- approximated by Lee County, excluding the town of Boca Grande, but including the town of Immokalee in Collier County. After consummation of the proposal, Barnett would control 18.5 percent of the market deposits and would remain the third largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase 40 points to 1677. Jacksonville -- approximated by Baker, Clay, Duval and Nassau Counties, and the towns of Fruit Cove, Ponte Vedra, and Ponte Vedra Beach in St. Johns County, plus the city of Folkston in Charlton County, Georgia. After consummation of the proposal, Barnett would control 23.4 percent of the market deposits and would remain the second largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would remain unchanged. Orlando -- approximated by Orange, Osceola and Seminole Counties, plus the western half of Volusia County and the towns of Clermont and Groveland in Lake County. After consummation of the proposal, Barnett would control 21 percent of the market deposits and would remain the second largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase by 1 point to 1618. Sarasota -- approximated by Sarasota and Manatee Counties, excluding the town of North Port in Sarasota County, and including the towns of Cape Haze, Englewood, Englewood Beach, Grove City, New Point Comfort, Placida, and Rotonda West in Charlotte County, and the town of Boca Grande in Lee County. After consummation of the proposal, Barnett would control 25.1 percent of the market deposits and would remain the largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase by 195 points to 1590. Tampa Bay -- approximated by Hernando, Hillsborough, Pinellas and Pasco Counties. After consummation of the proposal, Barnett would control 25.5 percent of the market deposits and would remain the largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase by 44 points to 1485. West Palm Beach -- approximated by Palm Beach County east of Loxahatchee and the towns of Indiantown and Hobe Sound in Martin County. After consummation of the proposal, Barnett would control 18.3 percent of the market deposits and would remain the second largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase by 7 points to 1036. Concurring Statement of Governor Meyer I believe that the proposed acquisition presents a close case because of the concentration results in two markets: Punta Gorda and DeSoto. In the Punta Gorda market, there will be a very large increase in the HHI of 653 points, which in itself raises concerns about the potential competitive effects. Furthermore, following the merger, the market will be in the highly concentrated range based on the Department of Justice merger guidelines. The DeSoto market is already so highly concentrated that the more modest but still substantial increase in the HHI resulting from the merger raises concerns about the potential competitive effects. Were it not for unusually strong mitigating factors in both of these markets, I could not support approval of this acquisition without appropriate divestiture. Footnotes Asset data are as of March 31, 1997, and state deposit data are as of June 30, 1996. These data have been updated to account for structural changes as of July 25,1997. In this context, the term depository institutions includes commercial banks, savings banks, and savings associations. See 12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(4). Thrift currently does not engage in any impermissible activities. 12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8). These banking markets are discussed in the Appendix. Market share data are as of June 30, 1996. Market share data before consummation are based on calculations in which the deposits of thrift institutions are included at 50 percent. The Board previously has indicated that thrift institutions have become, or have the potential to become, significant competitors of commercial banks. See Midwest Financial Group , 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 386 (1989); National City Corporation , 70 Federal Reserve Bulletin 743 (1984). Because Thrift is currently affiliated with and would be acquired by a commercial banking organization, Thrift's deposits are included at 100 percent in the calculations of market share. See Norwest Corporation , 78 Federal Reserve Bulletin 452 (1992). First Banks, Inc. , 76 Federal Reserve Bulletin 669, 670 n.9 (1990). Under the DOJ Guidelines, 49 Federal Register 26,823 (June 29, 1984), a market in which the post-merger HHI is more than 1800 is considered highly concentrated. The Justice Department has informed the Board that a bank merger or acquisition generally will not be challenged (in the absence of other factors indicating anticompetitive effects) unless the post-merger HHI is at least 1800 and the merger increases the HHI by more than 200 points. The Justice Department has stated that the higher than normal threshold for an increase in the HHI when screening bank mergers and acquisitions for anticompetitive effects implicitly recognizes the competitive effects of limited-purpose lenders and other non-depository financial entities. The Punta Gorda, Florida, banking market is approximated by Charlotte County excluding the towns of Cape Haze, Englewood, Englewood Beach, Grove City, New Point Comfort, Placida, and Rotonda West, and including the town of North Port in Sarasota County. The Board notes that if Thrift's deposits were weighted at 50 percent on a pre-merger basis, the HHI in the De Soto banking market would increase by only 42 points to 3241. The De Soto County, Florida, banking market is approximated by De Soto County, Florida. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Phillips, and Meyer.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application by New Prague Bancshares, Inc., New Prague, Minnesota, to become a bank holding company by acquiring 100 percent of the voting shares of Community Security Bank, New Prague, Minnesota, a de novo bank. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. New Prague Bancshares, Inc. New Prague, Minnesota Order Approving the Formation of a Bank Holding Company New Prague Bancshares, Inc., New Prague, Minnesota ("Bancshares"), has requested the Board's approval under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act (12 U.S.C. § 1842) ("BHC Act") to become a bank holding company by acquiring all the voting shares of Community Security Bank ("Bank"), a de novo state chartered bank also in New Prague. Notice of the application, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (62 Federal Register 31,821 (1997)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the application and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 3 (c) of the BHC Act. Bancshares is a newly formed nonoperating corporation that would acquire Bank, which is a de novo bank. The addition of a new bank in the relevant banking market would increase the number of alternative sources of banking products and services available to customers in the market and increase competition. The Board previously has stated that the promotion of competition through de novo entry is a positive consideration in an application under section 3 of the BHC Act. Accordingly, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposal would not have a significantly adverse effect on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in any relevant banking market. The Board has carefully considered the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of Bancshares and Bank in light of all the facts of record. The Board received comments from a national bank that has a branch in New Prague ("Commenter") that contend that the demographic and economic characteristics of Bank's proposed trade area show insufficient demand to support another bank and that the projections by Bancshares for the Bank's deposits and income are exaggerated. Bancshares maintains that the ability of its organizers to raise approximately $2.8 million in capital from local area residents and businessmen and the fact that Bank has been formed and would be owned by local residents demonstrate a demand for the bank's services. Bancshares supports its projections with a business plan. Bancshares also notes that Bank would be located in a developing downtown area of New Prague and would be managed by an experienced chief executive officer and a board of directors composed of local residents. The Board also has considered the characteristics of the relevant market. The record shows that the population in Bank's proposed trade area has increased from 1990 to 1995. The Board also has reviewed the growth and success of other de novo banks in or near the Twin Cities MSA that were started within the last five years. Based on this review, the Board concludes that the projections offered by Bank are reasonable. In reviewing the financial and managerial factors, the Board also has considered Bank's capital level in relation to its projections. Bank appears to have sufficient capital to operate for a significant time at levels below the projections provided for Bank's pro forma operation. In addition, Bancshares does not intend to incur significant amounts of debt and appears to have the financial flexibility to act as a source of strength for Bank. The Board also notes that the Minnesota Commissioner of Commerce, after a review of the application, including the financial aspects of the proposal, granted Bank's state charter request on July 14, 1997. For these reasons and based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that the record does not indicate that the proposal would adversely affect the safety and soundness of Bancshares or Bank. On this basis, the Board concludes that the financial factor and future prospects of Bancshares and Bank are consistent with approval. In evaluating the managerial resources, the Board has considered the experience of several of the organizers and reports of examination assessing their performance in other depository institutions. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that the managerial resources, and the convenience and needs, and other supervisory factors the Board is required to consider under section 3 of the BHC Act also are consistent with approval of the proposal. Based on the foregoing and all the facts of record, the Board has determined that this application should be, and hereby is, approved. The Board's approval is expressly conditioned on compliance with all the commitments made by New Prague, including those made by the principals of New Prague, in connection with the application. For purposes of this action, the commitments and conditions relied on by the Board in reaching this decision are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision, and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. This transaction shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day following the effective date of this order, or later than three months following the effective date of this order, and Bank shall be open for business within six months following the effective date of this order, unless such periods .are extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective September 15, 1997. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes See Wilson Bank Holding Company , 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 568 (1996). New Prague is a community on the southwestern edge of the Minneapolis-St. Paul Metropolitan Statistical Area ("Twin Cities MSA"). Bank's proposed trade area would encompass the area within approximately a seven-mile radius of New Prague. Commenter argues that Bancshares's obligation under its shareholder agreement to redeem its stock adversely affects the bank holding company's permanent capital. Bancshares modified this provision so that Bancshares is not obligated to purchase any offered shares for which it has a right of first refusal. Under these circumstances, the bank holding company's stock is considered permanent capital and would be considered Tier 1 capital. Commenter argues that allegations raised in pending litigation between Commenter and some of the organizers and directors of Bank and the fact that the lawsuit was not disclosed in the biographical information provided in the application reflect adversely on the managerial factor in this case. Commenter filed the lawsuit after these individuals left their employment with Commenter to form Bancshares and Bank. The litigation is in its preliminary stages, and no findings of wrongdoing on the part of the Bank's organizers and directors have been found. The Board previously has determined that its limited jurisdiction to review applications and notices under the specific factors in the BHC Act does not authorize the Board to adjudicate disputes between a commenter and an applicant that arise under state laws relating to corporate governance that may be enforced by the courts. The Board also notes that a copy of the lawsuit was included in the application. Commenter maintains that certain contractual agreements in the proposal raise supervisory issues. Commenter argues, for example, that Bank's stock plan for its chief executive officer is a noncompete agreement that should have been disclosed in the application. The stock plan rewards the officer with additional compensation based on the performance of the bank but terminates payments if the officer directly or indirectly solicits business in competition with Bank. The stock option plan does not restrict the officer's ability to be employed by a competitor, but only terminates future bonus payments if he solicits business away from Bank. Commenter also contends that because shareholders have a right to transfer Bancshares stock to a trust, such trust may be deemed to be a "company" under the BHC Act. Shareholders proposing such transfers are responsible for complying with all applicable laws, and the Board has sufficient supervisory authority to address the transfer of shares to a trust that does not qualify for an exemption under the BHC Act. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Phillips, and Meyer.
Testimony of Vice Chair Alice M. Rivlin Role of the Federal Reserve in the payment system Before the Subcommittee on Domestic and International Monetary Policy of the Committee on Banking and Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives September 16, 1997
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice by BankAmerica Corporation to acquire Robertson, Stephens & Company Group, LLC, and Robertson, Stephens & Company, Inc., and thereby indirectly acquire both of their subsidiaries and affiliates, all of San Francisco, California. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. BankAmerica Corporation San Francisco, California Order Approving Notice to Engage in Nonbanking Activities BankAmerica Corporation, San Francisco, California ("BankAmerica"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8)) and section 225.24 of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.24) to acquire Robertson, Stephens & Company Group, L.L.C., ("Robertson Group"), Robertson, Stephens & Company, Inc., ("Robertson Stephens Co."), and all of their subsidiaries and affiliates (collectively, "Robertson"), all of San Francisco, California. BankAmerica would thereby engage in the following nonbanking activities: providing financial and investment advisory services, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(6) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28 (b)(6)); providing securities brokerage, private placement, and riskless principal services, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(7)(i), (ii), and (iii) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(7)(i), (ii), and (iii)); underwriting and dealing in obligations of the United States, general obligations of states and their political subdivisions, and other obligations that state member banks of the Federal Reserve System may be authorized to underwrite and deal in under 12 U.S.C. §§ 24 and 335, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(8) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(8)); underwriting and dealing, to a limited extent, in all types of debt and equity securities, other than ownership interests in open-end investment companies ("mutual funds"); providing administrative and other services to investment companies, including mutual funds; Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (62 Federal Register 45,255 (1997)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the notice and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. BankAmerica, with total consolidated assets of $258 billion, is the third largest commercial banking organization in the United States. BankAmerica operates five subsidiary banks in 13 states and engages, directly and through its subsidiaries, in a broad range of permissible nonbanking activities in the United States and throughout the world. Robertson, with combined consolidated assets of $455 million, engages worldwide in a broad range of investment advisory, securities brokerage, securities underwriting, and related activities. BankAmerica engages through BASI in a wide range of securities activities, including engaging, to a limited extent, in underwriting and dealing in all types of debt and equity securities (other than securities issued by open-end investment companies) in which a state member bank may not underwrite or deal ("bank-ineligible securities"). BASI is, and will continue to be, a broker-dealer registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. § 78a et seq .) and a member of the National Association of Securities Dealers ("NASD"). Accordingly, BASI is, and would remain, subject to the recordkeeping and reporting obligations, fiduciary standards, and other requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the SEC, and the NASD. Activities Previously Approved by the Board The Board previously has determined by regulation or order that the proposed activities are closely related to banking within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act and the Board previously has authorized BankAmerica to engage in most of these activities. BankAmerica would conduct the activities in accordance with the BankAmerica Order , Regulation Y, and the relevant Board interpretations and orders pertaining to each of the activities. Bank-Ineligible Securities Underwriting and Dealing Activities As noted above, BASI currently is engaged in limited underwriting and dealing activities that the Board previously has determined are permissible under section 20 of the Glass-Steagall Act (12 U.S.C. § 377). Robertson Sub also is engaged in underwriting and dealing in securities. The Board has concluded that conduct of securities underwriting and dealing is consistent with section 20, provided that the company derives no more than 25 percent of its total gross revenue from underwriting and dealing in securities over any two-year period. BankAmerica has committed that, following acquisition of Robertson, BASI will continue to conduct its bank-ineligible securities underwriting and dealing subject to the 25-percent revenue limitation and the prudential limitations previously established by the Board with respect to bank-ineligible securities underwriting and dealing. Other Considerations In order to approve this notice, the Board must determine that the proposed activities are a proper incident to banking, that is, that the performance of the activities "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public . . . that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices." As part of its review of these factors, the Board considered the financial and managerial resources of BankAmerica and its subsidiaries and the effect the transaction would have on such resources. The Board also has reviewed the capitalization of BankAmerica and BASI in accordance with the standards set forth in the Section 20 Orders and finds the capitalization of each to be consistent with approval. The determination about the capitalization of BASI is based on all the facts of record, including BankAmerica's projections of the volume of BASI's underwriting and dealing activities in bank-ineligible securities. Effective October 27, 1997, the Board substantially revised the prudential limitations with respect to bank-ineligible securities underwriting and dealing. BankAmerica has committed that BASI will conduct its bank-ineligible underwriting and dealing activities subject to the Board's new operating standards on October 27, 1997. On the basis of its supervisory experience with BankAmerica and BASI, the commitments provided in this case, and the proposed management of BASI, the Board also has determined that BankAmerica and BASI have established policies and procedures to ensure compliance with this order and the Section 20 Orders, including computer, audit, and accounting systems, internal risk management controls, and the necessary operational and managerial infrastructure. The Board also has reviewed other aspects of the managerial resources of the entities involved in this proposal, including the expected effect of this proposal on such resources. On the basis of the foregoing and all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that financial and managerial considerations are consistent with approval of this proposal. The Board expects that the proposed acquisition would provide added convenience to customers of BankAmerica and Robertson, including Robertson's current mutual fund clients. The Board previously has determined that the provision of advisory and administrative services to mutual funds within certain parameters is not likely to result in the types of subtle hazards at which the Glass-Steagall Act is aimed or in any other adverse effects. As required by the Board's regulations, for example, BankAmerica would provide to its customers disclosures designed to alert them to the relationships between BankAmerica and the Funds. These disclosures include those required by the Board's interpretive rule on investment advisory activities to address conflicts of interests that may be presented by the relationship between BankAmerica and the Funds. BankAmerica also has indicated that the proposed transaction would result in operational efficiencies that would allow it to become a more effective competitor and thereby provide improved services at a lower cost to its customers. The Board also has carefully considered the competitive effects of this proposal. BankAmerica operates nonbanking subsidiaries that compete with certain nonbanking subsidiaries of Robertson. In each case, the markets for the nonbanking services are unconcentrated, and there are numerous providers of the services. As a result, consummation of this proposal would have a de minimis effect on competition for the services, and the Board has concluded that the proposal would not result in a significantly adverse effect on competition in any relevant market. Under the framework established in this and prior decisions, including the prudential limitations established by the Board in the Section 20 Orders, the Board has determined that consummation of the proposal is not likely to result in any significantly adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices that would outweigh the public benefits of the proposal. Accordingly, based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the balance of public benefits that it must consider under the proper incident to banking standard of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act is favorable and consistent with approval of the proposal. Conclusion On the basis of all the facts of record, including all the commitments and representations made by BankAmerica, the Board has determined to, and hereby does, approve this notice subject to all the terms and conditions discussed in this order and in the Section 20 Orders, as modified by the Modification Orders. The Board's approval of this proposal extends only to activities conducted within the limitations of those orders and this order, including the Board's reservation of authority to establish additional limitations to ensure that activities of BankAmerica and BASI are consistent with safety and soundness, avoiding conflicts of interests, and other relevant considerations under the BHC Act. Underwriting and dealing in any manner other than as approved in this order and the Section 20 Orders, as modified by the Modification Orders, is not authorized for BASI. The Board's determination also is subject to all the terms and conditions set forth in Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.25(c) (12 C.F.R. 225.7 and 225.25(c)), and to the Board's authority to require modification or termination of the activities of a bank holding company or any of its subsidiaries as the Board finds necessary to assure compliance with and to prevent evasion of the provisions of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders issued thereunder. The Board's decision is specifically conditioned on BankAmerica's compliance with all the commitments made in connection with this notice, including the commitments discussed in this order and the conditions set forth in the Board regulations and orders noted above. The commitments and conditions shall be deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decisions, and may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. This transaction shall not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective September 17, 1997. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Appendix List of Administrative Services Maintaining and preserving the records of the Funds, including financial and corporate records. Computing net asset value, dividends, performance data and financial information regarding the Funds. Furnishing statistical and research data. Preparing and filing with the SEC and state securities regulators registration statements, notices, reports, and other materials required to be filed under applicable laws. Preparing reports and other informational materials regarding the Funds, including proxies and other shareholder communications. Providing legal and other regulatory advice to the Funds in connection with their other administrative functions. Providing office facilities and clerical support for the Funds. Developing and implementing procedures for monitoring compliance with regulatory requirements and compliance with the Funds' investment objectives, policies and restrictions as established by the board of directors/trustees of the Funds. Providing routine fund accounting services and liaison with outside auditors. Preparing and filing tax returns, and monitoring tax compliance. Reviewing and arranging for payment of expenses of the Funds. Providing communication and coordination services with regard to the Funds' investment advisor, transfer agent, custodian, distributor and other service organizations that render recordkeeping or shareholder communication services. Reviewing and providing advice to the distributor, the fund and the investment advisor regarding sales literature and marketing plans for the Funds. Providing information to the distributor's personnel concerning performance and administration of the Funds. Providing marketing support with respect to sales of the Funds through financial intermediaries, including participating in seminars, meetings and conferences designed to present information concerning the operations of the Funds. Providing reports to the directors of the Funds with regard to the activities of the Funds. Providing telephone shareholder services through a toll-free 800 number. Footnotes Robertson Group owns 99 percent of Robertson, Stephens & Company, L.L.C ("Robertson Sub"). Robertson Stephens Co. owns the remaining 1 percent membership interest in Robertson Sub and is the managing member. BankAmerica proposes to merge Robertson into Ladder Merger Corporation, a newly formed Delaware corporation, wholly owned by BankAmerica ("BAC Sub"). Simultaneously, BankAmerica would merge the principal subsidiary of Robertson Sub with and into BankAmerica Securities, Inc., San Francisco, California, ("BASI"), a subsidiary of BankAmerica. A list of the administrative services that BankAmerica would provide is included in the Appendix. Asset and ranking data are as of June 30, 1997. Robertson currently controls several private investment funds. BankAmerica has committed to conform, within two years of acquiring Robertson, all activities and investments of Robertson and its subsidiaries, including its involvement with various investment funds, to those permissible for bank holding companies under section 4 of the BHC Act and Regulation Y. BankAmerica also has committed that, upon the acquisition of Robertson by BankAmerica, Robertson Sub will cease acting as a distributor of mutual funds. After the merger, BAC Sub would acquire from Robertson Sub two subsidiaries engaged in offshore broker-dealer activities. The activities of these two subsidiaries are within BankAmerica's existing authority and are permissible under Regulation K. The subsidiaries may be acquired under the general consent authority in Regulation K. See 12 C.F.R. 211.5(c)(1), (d). See BankAmerica , 80 Federal Reserve Bulletin 1104 (1994) (" BankAmerica Order "). See BankAmerica , 79 Federal Reserve Bulletin 1163 (1993); and BankAmerica Order . BankAmerica would engage in the proposed mutual fund advisory and administrative activities in a manner consistent with previous orders. See Commerzbank AG , 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin 678 (1997) (" Commerzbank "); and Bankers Trust New York Corporation , 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin 780 (1997) (" Bankers Trust "). An independent distributor would distribute shares of the mutual funds that BankAmerica advises and administers. See Bankers Trust, p. 782 n. 13. See BankAmerica Order . See J.P. Morgan & Co. Incorporated, et al. , 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 192 (1989), aff'd sub nom . S ecurities Industry Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System , 900 F.2d 360 (D.C. Cir. 1990); Citicorp, et al. , 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 473 (1987), aff'd sub nom. Securities Industry Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System , 839 F.2d 47 (2d Cir. 1988), cert. denied , 486 U.S. 1059 (1988); as modified by Review of Restrictions on Director, Officer and Employee Interlocks, Cross-Marketing Activities, and the Purchase and Sale of Financial Assets Between a Section 20 Subsidiary and an Affiliated Bank or Thrift , 61 Federal Register 57,679 (1996) (collectively, "Section 20 Orders"). See also Revenue Limit on Bank-Ineligible Activities of Subsidiaries of Bank Holding Companies Engaged in Underwriting and Dealing in Securities , 61 Federal Register 68,750 (1996). Compliance with the 25-percent revenue limitation shall be calculated in accordance with the method stated in the Section 20 Orders, as modified by the Order Approving Modifications to the Section 20 Orders , 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 751 (1989); and 10 Percent Revenue Limit on Bank-Ineligible Activities of Subsidiaries of Bank Holding Companies Engaged in Underwriting and Dealing Securities , 61 Federal Register 57,679 (1996) (collectively, "Modification Orders"). See Section 20 Orders and Modification Orders. BASI may provide services that are necessary incidents to the proposed underwriting and dealing activities. Unless BASI receives specific approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act to conduct the activities independently, any revenues from the incidental activities must be treated as ineligible revenues subject to the Board's revenue limitation. 12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8). See 12 C.F.R. 225.26. The Board notes that, as a registered broker-dealer, BASI must comply with the SEC's net capital rule. See 15 C.F.R. 240.15c3-1. See Amendments to Restrictions in the Board's Section 20 Orders , 62 Federal Register 45,295 (1997). See 12 C.F.R. 225.125. The interpretive rule requires a bank holding company that recommends to customers shares of a mutual fund that the bank holding company advises to caution customers to read the fund prospectus before investing and to advise customers in writing that the fund's shares are not insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and are not deposits, obligations of, or endorsed or guaranteed in any way, by any bank, unless that happens to be the case. The holding company also must disclose in writing to the customer the role of the company or its affiliate as investment advisor to the fund. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, and Phillips. Absent and not voting: Governor Meyer.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice by BB&T Corporation, Winston-Salem, North Carolina, to acquire Craigie Incorporated, Richmond, Virginia, and thereby engage in several securities-related activities. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. BB&T Corporation Winston-Salem, North Carolina Order Approving Notice to Engage in Nonbanking Activities BB&T Corporation, Winston-Salem, North Carolina ("BB&T"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1843(c)(8)) and section 225.24 of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.24) to acquire all the voting securities of Craigie Incorporated, Richmond, Virginia ("Company"), and thereby engage in the following nonbanking activities: underwriting and dealing in, to a limited extent, all types of debt and equity securities other than interests in open-end investment companies ("bank-ineligible securities"); extending credit and servicing loans, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(1) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(1)); providing leasing services, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(3) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(3)); providing financial and investment advisory services, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(6) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(6)); providing securities brokerage, riskless principal, private placement and other transactional services, pursuant section 225.28(b)(7)(i), (ii), (iii) and (v) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(7)(i), (ii), (iii) and (v)); and underwriting and dealing in government obligations and money market instruments in which state member banks may underwrite and deal under 12 U.S.C. ï¿½ï¿½ 335 and 24(7) ("bank-eligible securities"), and engaging in investing and trading activities, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(8)(i) and (ii) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(8)(i) and (ii)). Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (62 Federal Register 42,130 (1997)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the proposal and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. BB&T, with total consolidated assets of $23 billion, is the 35th largest banking organization in the United States. BB&T controls five banking subsidiaries and one thrift subsidiary that operate in North Carolina, South Carolina, and Virginia, and engages in a broad range of permissible nonbanking activities throughout the United States. Company, with consolidated assets of $76 million, engages in investment advisory, securities brokerage, securities underwriting, and related activities. Company is, and following the proposed acquisition will continue to be, a broker-dealer registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") under the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934 ("1934 Act") (15 U.S.C. ï¿½ 78a et seq .) and a member of the National Association of Securities Dealers ("NASD"). Accordingly, Company is, and will remain, subject to the recordkeeping and reporting obligations, fiduciary standards, and other requirements of the 1934 Act, the SEC, and the NASD. Underwriting and Dealing Activities The Board has determined -- subject to the framework of prudential limitations to address the potential for conflicts of interests, unsound banking practices, or other adverse effects -- that the proposed activities of underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities are so closely related to banking as to be a proper incident thereto within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. The Board also has determined that conduct of the proposed activities is consistent with section 20 of the Glass-Steagall Act (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 377), provided that the company engaged in underwriting and dealing activities derives no more than 25 percent of its gross revenues from underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities over a two-year period. BB&T has committed that Company will conduct its bank-ineligible securities underwriting and dealing activities subject to the Board's 25 percent revenue limit. Other Activities Approved by Regulation The Board previously has determined by regulation that the proposed credit and loan servicing activities; leasing activities; financial and investment advisory services; securities brokerage, riskless principal, private placement and other transactional activities; bank-eligible underwriting and dealing, and investment and trading activities to be conducted by BB&T after its acquisition of Company are closely related to banking within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. BB&T has committed to conduct each of these activities in accordance with Regulation Y and relevant Board interpretations and orders. Proper Incident to Banking Standard In order to approve this proposal, the Board also must determine that the proposed activities are a proper incident to banking, that is, that the proposed transaction "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public . . . that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices." BB&T has proposed to conduct its underwriting and dealing activities in bank-ineligible securities in accordance with the framework of prudential limitations established by the Board in the Section 20 Orders. After concluding that a narrower set of restrictions is fully consistent with safety and soundness, should improve the operating efficiencies of section 20 subsidiaries, and should increase options for customers of section 20 subsidiaries, the Board recently modified the prudential limitations it had established in the Section 20 Orders. The Board's action in this case is conditioned on compliance by BB&T and its subsidiaries, including Company, with the prudential limitations established in the Section 20 Orders, as recently revised. As noted above, BB&T and Company also will conduct the other proposed activities in accordance with the limitations set forth in Regulation Y, and the Board's orders and interpretations relating to each of these activities. As part of its evaluation of the proper incident to banking factors, the Board also considers the financial and managerial resources of the notificant and its subsidiaries and the effect the transaction would have on such resources. The Board has reviewed the capitalization of BB&T and Company in accordance with the standards set forth in the Section 20 Orders and finds the capitalization of each to be consistent with the approval. The determination about the capitalization of Company is based on all the facts of record, including BB&T's projections of the volume of Company's underwriting and dealing activities in bank-ineligible securities. On the basis of its supervisory experience with BB&T, the results of a recent infrastructure review of Company, the commitments provided in this case, and the proposed management of Company, the Board has determined that BB&T and Company have established policies and procedures to ensure compliance with this order and the Section 20 Orders, including computer, audit, and accounting systems, internal risk management controls, and the necessary operational and managerial infrastructure. The Board also has reviewed other aspects of the managerial resources of the entities involved in the proposal, including the expected effect of the proposal on such resources. On the basis of the foregoing and all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that financial and managerial considerations are consistent with approval of the proposal. The Board also has carefully considered the competitive effects of this proposal. BB&T operates a subsidiary that competes with Company. The markets for the nonbanking services offered by BB&T and Company are unconcentrated, and there are numerous providers of the nonbanking services that BB&T and Company offer. As a result, consummation of this proposal would have a de minimis effect on competition for these services, and the Board has concluded that the proposal would not result in a significantly adverse effect on competition in any relevant market. The Board expects that the proposed acquisition would provide added convenience to customers of both BB&T and Company and lead to improved methods of meeting customer financing needs. BB&T notes that the proposed acquisition would give Company greater access to capital and enhanced marketing and administrative support that would make Company a stronger competitor. Additionally, following consummation of the proposed acquisition, BB&T would be able to offer to its customers the underwriting and dealing services of Company. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that consummation of the proposal by BB&T can reasonably be expected to produce public benefits. Under the framework and conditions established in this order and the Section 20 Orders (as revised), and based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that Company's proposed underwriting and dealing activities in bank-ineligible securities are not likely to result in significantly adverse effects that would outweigh the public benefits. Similarly, the Board finds no evidence that Company's proposed riskless principal, private placement, and other nonbanking activities -- conducted under the framework and conditions established in this order and Regulation Y -- would likely result in any significantly adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices, that would outweigh the public benefits of the proposal. Accordingly, the Board has determined that performance of the proposed activities by BB&T are a proper incident to banking for purposes of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Conclusion On the basis of all the facts of record, including all the commitments and representations made by BB&T, the Board has determined to, and hereby does, approve this notice subject to all the terms and conditions discussed in this order and in the Section 20 Orders, as modified by the Modification Orders. The Board's approval of this proposal extends only to activities conducted within the limitations of those orders and this order, including the Board's reservation of authority to establish additional limitations to ensure that Company's activities are consistent with safety and soundness, avoiding conflicts of interests, and other relevant considerations under the BHC Act. Underwriting and dealing in any manner other than as approved in this order and the Section 20 Orders, as modified by the Modification Orders, is not within the scope of the Board's approval and is not authorized for Company. The Board's determination also is subject to all the terms and conditions set forth in Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.25(c) (12 C.F.R. 225.7 and 225.25(c)), and to the Board's authority to require modification or termination of the activities of a bank holding company or any of its subsidiaries as the Board finds necessary to assure compliance with and to prevent evasion of the provisions of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders issued thereunder. The Board's decision specifically is conditioned on BB&T's compliance with all the commitments made in connection with this notice, including the commitments discussed in this order and the conditions set forth in the Board regulations and orders noted above. The commitments and conditions shall be deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decisions, and may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. This transaction shall not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order unless such period is extended for good .cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective September 17, 1997. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes Asset and ranking data are as of June 30, 1997. See J.P. Morgan & Co. Incorporated, et al. , 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 192 (1989), aff'd sub nom. Securities Industries Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System , 900 F.2d 360 (D.C. Cir. 1990); Citicorp, et al., 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 473 (1987), aff'd sub nom. Securities Industry Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System , 839 F.2d 47 (2d Cir. 1988), cert. denied , 486 U.S. 1059 (1988); as modified by Review of Restrictions on Director, Officer and Employee Interlocks, Cross-Marketing Activities, and the Purchase and Sale of Financial Assets Between a Section 20 Subsidiary and an Affiliated Bank or Thrift , 61 Federal Register 57,679 (1996) and Amendments to Restrictions in the Board's Section 20 Orders , 62 Federal Register 45,295 (1997) (collectively, the "Section 20 Orders"). Compliance with the revenue limitation shall be calculated in accordance with the method stated in the Section 20 Orders, as modified by the Order Approving Modifications to the Section 20 Orders , 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 751 (1989), and 10 Percent Revenue Limit on Bank-Ineligible Activities of Subsidiaries of Bank Holding Companies Engaged in Underwriting and Dealing in Securities , 61 Federal Register 48,953 (1996), and Revenue Limit on Bank-Ineligible Activities of Subsidiaries of Bank Holding Companies Engaged in Underwriting and Dealing in Securities , 61 Federal Register 68,750 (1996) (collectively, "Modification Orders"). Company may provide services that are necessary incidents to the proposed underwriting and dealing activities. Unless Company receives specific approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act to conduct the activities independently, Company must treat any revenues from the incidental activities as ineligible revenues subject to the Board's revenue limitation. See 12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(1), (3), (6), (7)(i), (7)(ii), (7)(iii), (7)(v), (8)(i) and (8)(ii). See 12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1843(c)(8). See Amendments to Restrictions in the Board's Section 20 Orders , 62 Federal Register 45,295 (1997). See 12 C.F.R. 225.26. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley and Phillips. Absent and not voting: Governor Meyer.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today its approval of the application of Südwestdeutsche Landesbank Girozentrale, Stuttgart and Mannheim, Germany, to establish a branch office in New York, New York. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Südwestdeutsche Landesbank Girozentrale Stuttgart and Mannheim, Federal Republic of Germany Order Approving Establishment of a Branch Südwestdeutsche Landesbank Girozentrale ("Bank"), Stuttgart and Mannheim, Germany, a foreign bank within the meaning of the International Banking Act ("IBA"), has applied under section 7(d) of the IBA (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 3105(d)) to establish a state-licensed branch in New York, New York. The Foreign Bank Supervision Enhancement Act of 1991 ("FBSEA"), which amended the IBA, provides that a foreign bank must obtain the approval of the Board to establish a branch in the United States. Notice of the application, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published in a newspaper of general circulation in New York, New York ( The New York Times , October 28, 1996). The time for filing comments has expired, and all comments have been considered. Bank, with assets equivalent to approximately $134 billion, is the 14th largest bank in Germany. The Savings Bank Association of Baden ("BSGV") and the Savings Bank Association of Württemberg ("WSGV") hold a 15 percent and 33 percent interest in Bank, respectively. The remaining interest in Bank is held by 82 German savings banks. Bank operates three branches in Germany, two foreign branches (Singapore and London) and four representative offices (New York, Hong Kong, Beijing, and Hanoi). In addition, Bank owns a subsidiary bank in Luxembourg, and operates several nonbank subsidiaries in Germany engaged in various activities, including factoring, investment services, and real estate development and management activities. Bank's primary purpose for establishing the proposed branch is to provide trade financing, treasury, and advisory services primarily to corporate clients based in the State of Baden-Württemberg with offices in the United States. In addition, the proposed branch would participate in syndicated loans and issue commercial paper and other debt instruments. Bank does not engage directly or indirectly in any nonbanking activities in the United States, and, after establishing the proposed branch, would be a qualifying foreign banking organization within the meaning of Regulation K (12 C.F.R. 211.23(b)). The Federal Banking Supervisory Office ("FBSO") and the Deutsche Bundesbank, Bank's primary home country supervisors, have indicated no objection to the establishment of Bank's proposed branch. In order to approve an application by a foreign bank to establish a branch in the United States, the IBA and Regulation K require the Board to determine that the foreign bank applicant engages directly in the business of banking outside of the United States, and has furnished to the Board the information it needs to assess the application adequately. The Board also must determine that the foreign bank is subject to comprehensive supervision or regulation on a consolidated basis by its home country supervisor (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 3105(d)(2); 12 C.F.R. 211.24)). The Board also may take into account additional standards as set forth in the IBA and Regulation K (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 3105(d)(3)-(4); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)). As noted above, Bank engages directly in the business of banking outside the United States. Bank also has provided the Board with the information necessary to assess the application through submissions that address the relevant issues. Regulation K provides that a foreign bank will be considered to be subject to comprehensive supervision or regulation on a consolidated basis if the Board determines that the bank is supervised and regulated in such a manner that its home country supervisor receives sufficient information on the foreign bank's worldwide operations, including the relationship of the foreign bank to any affiliate, to assess the overall financial condition of the foreign bank and its compliance with law and regulation (12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)(1)). With respect to supervision by home country authorities, the Board has considered the following information. The FBSO and the Deutsche Bundesbank share responsibility as Bank's home country supervisors. Generally, the FBSO reviews periodic financial reports and information provided by external and internal auditors, has authority to carry out on-site audits, has enforcement powers with regard to bank regulation and supervision, and works closely with the Deutsche Bundesbank in supervising Bank. The Board has determined, in connection with a previous application, that Bank is subject to comprehensive consolidated supervision. No material changes have occurred in the manner of Bank's supervision since that time that would alter the Board's previous determination. The Board also has taken into account the additional standards set forth in section 7 of the IBA (see 12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 3105(d)(3)-(4); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)(2)). As noted above, Bank's home country authorities have no objection to establishment of the proposed state-licensed branch. Germany is a signatory to the Basle risk-based capital standards, and German risk-based capital standards meet those established by the Basle Capital Accord ("Accord"). Bank's capital is in excess of the minimum levels that would be required by the Accord and can be considered equivalent to capital that would be required of a U.S. banking organization. Managerial and other financial resources of Bank also are considered consistent with approval, and Bank appears to have the experience and capacity to support the proposed branch. Bank has established controls and procedures for the proposed branch in order to ensure compliance with U.S. law, as well as controls and procedures for its worldwide operations generally. The Board has reviewed the restrictions on disclosure in relevant jurisdictions in which Bank operates and has communicated with relevant authorities about access to information. Bank and WSGV have committed to make available to the Board such information on the operations of Bank and any affiliate of Bank that the Board deems necessary to determine and enforce compliance with the IBA, the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956, as amended, and other applicable federal law. To the extent that the provision of such information is prohibited or impeded by law, Bank and WSGV have committed to cooperate with the Board to obtain any consents or waivers that might be required from third parties in connection with disclosure of such information. In addition, subject to certain conditions, the FBSO and the Deutsche Bundesbank may share information on Bank's operations with other supervisors, including the Board. In light of these commitments and other facts of record, and subject to the condition described below, the Board concludes that Bank has provided adequate assurances of access to any necessary information the Board may request. On the basis of all the facts of record, and subject to the commitments made by Bank and WSGV, and the terms and conditions set forth in this order, the Board has determined that Bank's application to establish a branch should be, and hereby is, approved. Should any restrictions on access to information on the operations or activities of Bank or any of its affiliates subsequently interfere with the Board's ability to obtain information to determine and enforce compliance by Bank or its affiliates with applicable federal statutes, the Board may require termination of any of Bank's direct or indirect activities in the United States. Approval of the application also is specifically conditioned on compliance by Bank and WSGV with the commitments made in connection with this application, and with the conditions in this order. The commitments and conditions referred to above are conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its decision, and may be enforced in proceedings under 12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1818 or 12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1847 against Bank, its offices, and its affiliates. By order of the Board of Governors, effective September 17, 1997. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes All data are as of December 31, 1996, unless otherwise noted. In assessing this standard, the Board considers, among other factors, the extent to which the home country supervisors: (i) ensure that the bank has adequate procedures for monitoring and controlling its activities worldwide; (ii) obtain information on the condition of the bank and its subsidiaries and offices through regular examination reports, audit reports, or otherwise; (iii) obtain information on the dealings with and relationship between the bank and its affiliates, both foreign and domestic; (iv) receive from the bank financial reports that are consolidated on a worldwide basis, or comparable information that permits analysis of the bank's financial condition on a worldwide consolidated basis; (v) evaluate prudential standards, such as capital adequacy and risk asset exposure, on a worldwide basis. These are indicia of comprehensive, consolidated supervision. No single factor is essential and other elements may inform the Board's determination. West Merchant Bank Limited , 81 Federal Reserve Bulletin 519 (1995). The Board's authority to approve the establishment of the proposed office parallels the continuing authority of the New York State Banking Department to license offices of a foreign bank. The Board's approval of the application does not supplant the authority of the State of New York and the New York State Banking Department ("Department") to license the proposed office of Bank in accordance with any terms or conditions that the Department may impose. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley and Phillips. Absent and not voting: Governor Meyer.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today its approval of the application of Housing & Commercial Bank, Seoul, Korea, to establish a state-licensed branch in New York, New York. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Housing & Commercial Bank Seoul, Korea Order Approving Establishment of a Branch Housing & Commercial Bank, Seoul, Korea ("Bank"), a foreign bank within the meaning of the International Banking Act ("IBA"), has applied under section 7(d) of the IBA (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 3105(d)) to establish a state-licensed branch in New York, New York. The Foreign Bank Supervision Enhancement Act of 1991 ("FBSEA"), which amended the IBA, provides that a foreign bank must obtain the approval of the Board to establish a branch in the United States. Notice of the application, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published in a newspaper of general circulation in New York ( The New York Times , September 30, 1996). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the application and all comments received. Bank, with total assets of approximately $35 billion as of year-end 1996, is the ninth largest bank in Korea. Founded by the Korean government in 1967 to support funding for low- and medium-income housing, Bank now engages in a wide range of commercial banking activities. In addition to its network of more than 400 domestic branches, Bank has six domestic subsidiaries involved in construction, leasing, investment management, loan financing, and real estate management and brokerage. Outside of Korea, Bank operates a branch in Tokyo and seven representative offices. Bank would be a "qualifying foreign banking organization" under Regulation K after establishment of the proposed branch (12 C.F.R. 211.23(b)). Bank seeks to upgrade its existing representative office in New York to a state-licensed branch that would offer a wide range of wholesale banking services, including acceptance of wholesale deposits, commercial lending, trade finance, and mortgage finance. In order to approve an application by a foreign bank to establish a branch in the United States, the IBA and Regulation K require the Board to determine that the foreign bank applicant engages directly in the business of banking outside of the United States and has furnished to the Board the information it needs to assess the application adequately. The Board also generally must determine that the foreign bank is subject to comprehensive supervision or regulation on a consolidated basis by its home country supervisor (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 3105(d)(2); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)(1)(i)). The Board also may take into account additional standards set forth in the IBA and Regulation K (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 3105(d)(3)-(4); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)(2)). The IBA recently was amended to include a limited exception to the general requirement relating to comprehensive, consolidated supervision (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 3105(d)(6)). This exception provides that, if the Board is unable to find that a foreign bank seeking to establish a branch, agency, or commercial lending company is subject to comprehensive supervision or regulation on a consolidated basis by the appropriate authorities in its home country, the Board may nevertheless approve an application by such foreign bank if: (i) the appropriate authorities in the home country of the foreign bank are actively working to establish arrangements for the consolidated supervision of such bank; and (ii) all other factors are consistent with approval (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 3105(d)(6)(A)). In deciding whether to exercise its discretion to approve an application under authority of this exception, the Board shall also consider whether the foreign bank has adopted and implements procedures to combat money laundering (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 3105(d)(6)(B)). The Board also may take into account whether the home country of the foreign bank is developing a legal regime to address money laundering or is participating in multilateral efforts to combat money laundering (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 3105(d)(6)(B)). Bank engages directly in the business of banking outside the United States through its banking operations in Korea. Bank also has provided the Board with the information necessary to assess the application through submissions that address the relevant issues. With respect to supervision by Bank's home country authorities, the Board has considered the following information. Under the current legislative regime, Bank is chartered under the Korea Housing Bank Act which designates the Ministry of Finance and Economy ("Ministry") as Bank's primary supervisor. The Ministry often delegates its supervisory powers to the Office of Bank Supervision and Examination ("OBSE") of the Bank of Korea, which also has a supervisory role in relation to Bank. In addition, Bank is under the supervision of the Board of Audit and Inspection ("BAI"), an independent agency of the Korean government that examines the records of certain government-invested institutions. The Board previously has determined, in connection with an application involving another specially chartered Korean bank, that this bank was subject to home country supervision on a comprehensive, consolidated basis. Bank is supervised by the Korean authorities on substantially the same terms and conditions as the other Korean bank. Recently, however, the Korean financial system has experienced difficulties arising primarily from large credit exposures to certain business conglomerates. The Korean authorities have concluded that these difficulties were, at least in part, the result of gaps in the supervisory system, primarily relating to credit assessment and approval processes. The Korean government and supervisory authorities have taken steps to seek to close these gaps by, among other things, setting new limits on exposures to the largest Korean business conglomerates and requiring that Korean banks establish credit committee systems to diversify authority for credit decisions. In addition, the Korean government is considering the proposal of new legislation that would transfer supervisory authority for all Korean financial institutions to a new entity. With regard to measures to prevent money laundering, although the Korean government has not formally adopted the recommendations of the Financial Action Task Force ("FATF") regarding the prevention and detection of money laundering, certain Korean laws and regulations contain provisions that parallel certain of the FATF recommendations. The Emergency Presidential Order on Real Name Financial Transactions and the Protection of Confidentiality, for example, which became effective in August 1993, requires banks to conduct all financial transactions with customers on a real-name basis and to confirm customers' identity before engaging in any transactions. In addition, in September 1994, the OBSE issued guidelines ("OBSE Guidelines") which, among other things, prohibit Korean financial institutions from participating in or aiding money laundering. Under the OBSE Guidelines, Korean financial institutions are required to establish internal policies and procedures to prevent money laundering and to review these controls as part of the internal audit. Bank has implemented policies and procedures to ensure compliance with Korean law and the OBSE Guidelines. Bank's employees are prohibited from conducting any banking transaction without verifying the true identity of the customer. In addition, Bank's branch managers are required to report any breach of the OBSE Guidelines to Bank's auditing department which must report any material breach of the OBSE Guidelines to the OBSE and the BAI. Furthermore, employees with knowledge or suspicion of the use of funds for illicit activities are required to report in writing to a public prosecutor's office. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that Bank's home country authorities are actively working to establish arrangements for the consolidated supervision of Bank, and that considerations relating to the steps taken by Bank and its home country to combat money laundering are consistent with approval under this standard. The Board also has taken into account the additional standards set forth in the IBA (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 3105(d)(3)-(4); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)(2)). Bank has received the consent of the Ministry to establish the proposed branch. Managerial and financial considerations are consistent with approval, and Bank appears to have the experience and capacity to support the proposed branch. Bank must comply with the minimum capital standards of the Basle Capital Accord ("Accord"), as implemented by Korea. Bank's capital is in excess of the minimum levels that would be required by the Accord and is considered equivalent to capital that would be required of a U.S. banking organization. With regard to access to information, the Board has reviewed the restrictions on disclosure in relevant jurisdictions in which Bank operates and has communicated with relevant government authorities about access to information. Bank has committed to make available to the Board such information on the operations of Bank and any affiliate of Bank that the Board deems necessary to determine and enforce compliance with the IBA, the Bank Holding Company Act, and other applicable federal law. To the extent that the provision of such information may be prohibited or impeded by law or otherwise, Bank has committed to cooperate with the Board to obtain any necessary consents or waivers that might be required from third parties in connection with disclosure of certain information. In addition, subject to certain conditions, the Ministry may share information on Bank's operations with other supervisors, including the Board. In light of these commitments and other facts of record, and subject to the condition described below, the Board has concluded that Bank has provided adequate assurances of access to any necessary information the Board may request. On the basis of all the facts of record, and subject to the commitments made by Bank, as well as the terms and conditions set forth in this order, the Board has determined that Bank's application to establish a state-licensed branch should be, and hereby is, approved. Should any restrictions on access to information on the operations or activities of Bank and its affiliates subsequently interfere with the Board's ability to obtain information to determine and enforce compliance by Bank or its affiliates with applicable federal law, the Board may require termination of any of Bank's direct or indirect activities in the United States. Approval of this application is also specifically conditioned on Bank's compliance with the commitments made in connection with this application and with the conditions in this order. The commitments and conditions referred to above are conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its decision, and may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law against Bank, its offices, and its affiliates. By order of the Board of Governors, effective September 17, 1997. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes Regulation K provides that a foreign bank will be considered to be subject to comprehensive supervision or regulation on a consolidated basis if the Board determines that the bank is supervised and regulated in such a manner that its home country supervisor receives sufficient information on the foreign bank's worldwide operations, including the relationship of the foreign bank to any affiliate, to assess the overall financial condition of the foreign bank and its compliance with law and regulation (12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)(1)(ii)). In assessing this standard, the Board considers, among other factors, the extent to which the home country supervisors: (i) ensure that the bank has adequate procedures for monitoring and controlling its activities worldwide; (ii) obtain information on the condition of the bank and its subsidiaries and offices through regular examination reports, audit reports, or otherwise; (iii) obtain information on the dealings with and relationship between the bank and its affiliates, both foreign and domestic; (iv) receive from the bank financial reports that are consolidated on a worldwide basis, or comparable information that permits analysis of the bank's financial condition on a worldwide consolidated basis; and (v) evaluate prudential standards, such as capital adequacy and risk asset exposure, on a worldwide basis. These are indicia of comprehensive, consolidated supervision. No single factor is essential and other elements may inform the Board's determination. Korea Development Bank, 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 969 (1996) (bank under supervision of Ministry, OBSE, and BAI). The Board also has considered the application of another specially chartered bank that was under the primary supervision of the Ministry, which also delegated its supervisory authority with regard to that bank to the OBSE. However, because it was a privately owned bank, that bank was not supervised by the BAI. See Korea Long Term Credit Bank, 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 767 (1996). In brief, Bank is currently required to submit periodic reports and financial statements to the Ministry or the OBSE providing information on, among other things, capital adequacy, credit exposures, adequacy of internal controls, and the operations of subsidiaries and foreign offices. Bank is also subject to examination of head office and branches by both the OBSE and the BAI. The Ministry, the OBSE, and the BAI each have enforcement powers over Bank. In addition, Bank's annual internal audit reports are forwarded to the Korean authorities, and external audits also are conducted of its operations. Recent legislation in Korea provides that Bank will be treated as a commercial bank and become subject to the supervision of the OBSE. This action is expected by year-end. The Board also has previously determined, in connection with applications involving other Korean banks subject to supervision by the OBSE, that these banks were subject to supervision on a comprehensive, consolidated basis. See, e.g., Shinhan Bank, 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 951 (1996); Donghwa Bank, 81 Federal Reserve Bulletin 744 (1995). The Board's authority to approve establishment of the proposed office parallels the continuing authority of the State of New York to license offices of a foreign bank. The Board's approval of this application does not supplant the authority of the State of New York and its agent, the New York State Banking Department, to license the proposed office of Bank in accordance with any terms or conditions that the New York State Banking Department may impose. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley and Phillips. Absent and not voting: Governor Meyer.
For immediate release The Basle Committee on Banking Supervision has modified the Amendment to the Capital Accord to incorporate market risk that it issued in January l996 and that was subsequently adopted by the Federal Reserve Board for state member banks and bank holding companies. The modified Amendment is effective January l, l998. The modification has the effect of removing the so-called floor which would have applied to banks using internal models to assess specific risk as part of their overall modeling of market risk. Banks will benefit from the removal of the floor since its retention would have burdened them with dual calculations. The text of the Basle Committee document is attached. It is also available on the BIS Website at .
For immediate release The Basle Committee on Banking Supervision has released the Basle Core Principles for Effective Supervision, which sets out the principles that the Committee believes must be in place for a supervisory system to be effective. These 25 Core Principles are intended to serve as a basic reference for supervisory and other public authorities worldwide to apply in the supervision of all the banks within their jurisdiction. Supervisory authorities throughout the world are invited to endorse them by October l998. The text of the Core Principles is attached. It is also available on the BIS Website at .
For immediate release The Basle Committee on Banking Supervision has released a paper containing a set of Principles for the Management of Interest Rate Risk. The document is a revised version of a consultative paper issued in January l997. It re-emphasises the need for banks to maintain adequate risk management practices in all their activities and identifies specific agreed principles that supervisory authorities will consider in evaluating banks' management of interest rate risk. The text of the Basle Committee document is attached. It is also available on the BIS Website at .
Testimony of Governor Laurence H. Meyer Debit cards and unsolicited "loan checks" Before the Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit of the Committee on Banking and Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives September 24, 1997 The Board of Governors appreciates this opportunity to comment on issues concerning debit cards that can be used without security codes (sometimes referred to as "check cards" or "offline" debit cards). Users of these cards have some consumer protections related to liability, issuance, and disclosure under the Electronic Fund Transfer Act (EFTA) and the Board's Regulation E. A bill introduced by Representatives Schumer and Gonzalez, and another by Representative Barrett, would further limit a consumer's potential liability for the unauthorized use of debit cards and place restrictions on their issuance. The Board's testimony discusses the existing statutory and regulatory scheme concerning debit card liability and issuance and provides comment on the legislative proposals. The testimony also provides comment on issues related to unsolicited "loan checks," which are addressed in proposed legislation introduced by Representatives Hinchey and Gonzalez that would amend the Truth in Lending Act (TILA). Generally speaking, the oldest type of debit card in the United States is the automated teller machine (ATM) card used by consumers to make deposits, withdrawals, and transfers between deposit accounts. The cards require the use of a magnetic stripe reader (built into the ATM) and the consumer's security code -- a personal identification number (PIN). Because of the method of operation, these cards are sometimes characterized as "online" debit cards. That is, at the time of the transaction, the account number, PIN, and account balance are verified; and instructions for the funds transfer are communicated, through the ATM network, to a database at the card-issuing institution. At first, institutions issued cards that could be used only at their own ATMs. Over time, the development of regional, nationwide, and internationally linked networks has enabled consumers to access funds using ATMs at institutions other than their own. The subsequent linking of electronic point-of-sale (POS) terminals to these networks has allowed consumers to use their debit cards to pay for purchases at supermarkets, gas stations, and other sites by debiting their deposit accounts. At merchant locations requiring the use of a PIN, the cards operate as "online" debit cards. The use of PIN-protected cards in these online systems has increased substantially in the United States over the past several years, while until recently the use of "offline" debit cards has remained more limited. Some financial institutions began issuing "offline" debit cards more than a decade ago. Consumers have used these cards in place of credit cards at retail locations. Typically, the consumer signs a charge slip, rather than entering a PIN, and the transactions are processed much like credit card transactions. Indeed, early on, this largely "paper-based" mode of operation generated questions about whether these card transactions were covered by the EFTA and Regulation E. As a consequence, the Board amended Regulation E in 1984 to make clear that debit card transactions are covered by the regulation, whether the transaction takes place at a terminal that captures the transaction data electronically, or is carried out manually and only later converted to electronic form. Over the past year or so, card issuers have begun marketing offline debit cards aggressively, encouraging consumers to use them in place of writing checks. Besides just making them available, many institutions have automatically replaced their customers' existing ATM cards, previously usable only with PINs, with cards that can be used with a PIN at ATMs and electronic POS terminals, and without a PIN in the "offline" mode. This development has raised concerns about the potentially greater consumer exposure to losses in the absence of PIN protection. Both the TILA and the EFTA--which govern credit cards and debit cards, respectively--contain provisions on unauthorized use and unsolicited issuance. The TILA provisions were enacted in 1970, and the EFTA provisions have been part of the act since it became law in 1978. The TILA limits consumer liability for the unauthorized use of a credit card to $50. Under the EFTA, the rules are more complex. Liability for the unauthorized use of a debit card is determined based on when the consumer notifies the financial institution of a lost or stolen card or an unauthorized transaction. If notice is provided within two business days of learning of the loss, the consumer's liability is limited to $50. For the consumer who fails to report the loss or theft of a debit card within two business days of learning of the loss or theft, the potential liability increases to $500. This higher limit applies to unauthorized transactions taking place after the two-business-day period. For example, if a $600 unauthorized debit-card purchase takes place the same day the card is stolen, the consumer's maximum liability for that transaction is $50 even if the consumer fails to give notice within two business days after learning of the theft. If unauthorized transactions appear on the consumer's account statement and the consumer fails to report them within 60 days after the statement is sent, the consumer's potential liability is unlimited for unauthorized transactions occurring after the 60 days. Liability up to the 60th day is capped at $50 (or at $500, if the consumer knew about a debit card loss or theft and failed to report it within two business days). The explanation for the more complex rules in the EFTA can be gleaned from the history of the act, which followed a study completed in 1977 by the National Commission on Electronic Fund Transfers. The Commission's report on emerging EFT payment mechanisms, which responded to a congressional directive, recommended legislative action to foster the orderly development of EFT systems. At that time, the banking industry had raised objections to having a $50 cap on consumer liability for debit cards, the same as for credit cards. Industry representatives urged that a negligence standard should apply if the consumer was negligent in handling the card and PIN. The industry believed that a $50 cap was an insufficient incentive for consumers to protect their cards and security codes. In turn, the Commission's report recommended a negligence standard that would hold the consumer liable for acts such as writing the PIN on the card. The Congress considered and ultimately decided against imposing a negligence standard. Instead, both the House and Senate agreed on the basic $50 liability limit. But in addition, to encourage consumers to protect debit cards and promptly report unauthorized use, the House favored holding a consumer liable for unauthorized transactions occurring a "reasonable time" after the consumer learned of the loss or theft of the card and failed to notify the card issuer. The Senate bill provided for unlimited liability for the failure to report any unauthorized transactions appearing on a statement within 60 days after the statement was sent. The law as finally enacted blended the two exceptions, changing "reasonable time" to two business days and adding the $500 cap for unauthorized transactions taking place within the 60 days. As to disclosures, both the TILA and the EFTA require that, to impose liability, the card issuer disclose the limits on consumer liability and give a telephone number or address (both phone number and address, in the case of the EFTA) for reporting loss or theft of the card or unauthorized transactions. For issuance, the TILA prohibits outright the unsolicited issuance of credit cards. The EFTA permits the unsolicited issuance of debit cards, but only if disclosures are given and the card is not usable until after the consumer has requested validation and the consumer's identity has been verified. Both laws permit issuing a new card to replace or substitute for an existing card. Regulation Z (which implements the TILA) and Regulation E also permit an issuer to add features to a card at the time of substitution. Under these rules, it is thus permissible to send a debit card that can be used without PIN protection to replace an "online" PIN-protected debit card, and these substitute cards can be sent validated or unvalidated. When a substitution is made, if there are adverse changes in the terms and conditions that were originally disclosed to the cardholder (such as higher liability limits or higher fees), the issuer must disclose the revised terms. But adding the capability for offline use to a debit card does not, by itself, require a new disclosure under Regulation E. Without doubt, the issuance of a card that does not require a PIN increases the consumer's risk. The consumer deserves to be informed about this in a very straightforward way. This risk may involve liability for unauthorized transactions or it may simply be the necessity of having to sort out unauthorized activity problems, even if there is no ultimate financial loss. It also seems appropriate to apply a lower liability limit than that which presently applies: under current law, adding non-PIN-protected capability to a card subjects the consumer to higher liability than applies to credit cards. Apart from what the law requires, both VISA and MasterCard have decided to voluntarily limit consumer liability for unauthorized use of debit cards to $50 or less, and this should deal with consumer concern about unwarranted financial risk, although the potential aggravation of demonstrating unauthorized use may remain. Therefore, it seems to us the question is whether voluntary industry activity is sufficient to deal with these concerns, or whether legislation is necessary. Now, let me turn to the two proposed bills. H.R. 2319, the Consumer Debit Card Protection Act, introduced by Representative Barrett, limits consumer liability to $50 or less for all unauthorized debit card transactions, including those that require a PIN. The bill also calls for a warning notice for debit cards that can be used without a PIN, and would give consumers the option to reject such cards in favor of PIN-protected cards. Each periodic statement would have to include a detailed notice of the procedures for notifying the card issuer of the loss or theft of the debit card, or of unauthorized transactions. For cards without PIN protection, the Barrett bill would also require the card issuer to provisionally reimburse consumers for claims of unauthorized use within three business days. Currently, the EFTA provides that claims of unauthorized use must be resolved within 10 business days; alternatively, the disputed amount must be recredited within 10 business days if an investigation cannot be completed within that time, and the investigation must then be completed within 45 days. For POS and foreign transactions, Regulation E doubles the time periods: 20 business days to resolve a claim of error (or to recredit an account if the investigation takes longer); and 90 days to complete the investigation. The longer periods were adopted in 1984, at the same time that Regulation E was amended to cover paper-based debit card transactions. The longer times were deemed necessary for resolving claims that involved third-party merchants or remote institutions, and card issuers wanted to avoid having to provisionally recredit an account before the investigation was complete. The Board is aware that VISA is changing its rules to provide for recrediting within 5 business days, and this suggests that technological improvements in payment systems may permit these consumer claims to be investigated more quickly. We will reexamine the Board's rule in light of these developments. H.R. 2234, the Dual-Use Debit Cardholder Protection Act, introduced by Representatives Schumer and Gonzalez, addresses liability, disclosures, and issuance. The bill limits a consumer's liability to $50 for a debit card that is not PIN-protected and does not use some other unique identifier; a signature is deemed not to be a unique identifier. It requires card issuers, as a condition of imposing any liability on consumers, to disclose the importance of promptly reporting loss or theft of the card. Under current law, this disclosure is optional. The Schumer-Gonzalez bill also prohibits issuing a debit card that can function without a PIN unless (1) the card is not activated when sent, (2) certain disclosures accompany the card, and (3) the card is activated only upon the consumer's request and after verification of the consumer's identity. These latter rules currently govern the initial issuance of a card on an unsolicited basis, but not a replacement card. There is considerable merit to having card issuers provide a new offline debit card in unvalidated form when they replace an online card, and only validating the card upon the consumer's request. Requiring validation could be useful for assuring that consumers are not exposed to any additional risk or inconvenience without their consent. It is our understanding that in many cases card issuers already follow, or are planning to adopt, a security procedure in which they validate a renewal card for use only after the cardholder has expressly confirmed receiving the card and has requested validation. However, this procedure may not generally include the step of confirming the consumer's willingness to accept a debit card that is not PIN-protected. The question is whether current and evolving industry practices are sufficient, or whether a statutory requirement is needed. Given the positive steps being taken by the industry to deal with consumer concerns on a voluntary basis, we are inclined to see how things work before enacting new laws. However, the industry should be on notice that it is in everyone's best interest to assure that the public understands the new risks inherent in transactions that are not PIN-protected, and that individual consumers can make an informed choice about whether to assume that risk. The subcommittee also requested information about the tracking of a consumer's debit and credit card spending. Although both regulations -- E for debit cards, and Z for credit cards -- require card issuers to capture transaction information such as transaction date, amount, and merchant name and location, for reporting to the cardholder on the periodic statement, they are silent on the use of this information by the card issuer. However, I think we all know, from our own experience, that for credit cards, and probably also for debit cards, at least some card issuers do use this and other information about cardholders' purchasing patterns for marketing purposes. Industry witnesses can no doubt provide detailed information on this matter. The Board also has been asked to comment on the mailing of unsolicited "loan checks" to consumers. These credit products are also referred to as "loans by mail" or "live checks." The consumer need only sign and cash or deposit the check to obtain the loan. The amount of these loan checks may be thousands of dollars. Federal law does not prohibit creditors from mailing unsolicited loan checks. The TILA does mandate that full disclosure of the credit terms, such as the annual percentage rate and the payment schedule, be included with any mailing so that consumers can make informed decisions about whether to accept the loan. Therefore, the primary concern should not be disclosure, but rather the potential for theft and fraud and the consumer inconvenience of refuting a claim of liability. The unsolicited check could be intercepted in the mail by a thief who forges the consumer's name and cashes the check. The consumer's rights in the case of a forged endorsement are governed by state law, generally under the Uniform Commercial Code, which provides protection against fraud. Although the consumer would not ultimately be liable for the forged instrument, the consumer is nevertheless exposed to risk that was not anticipated and inconvenience resulting from a loan check that was not requested. H.R. 2053, the Unsolicited Loan Consumer Protection Act, introduced by Representatives Hinchey and Gonzalez, prohibits the unsolicited mailing of loan checks or other negotiable instruments. The bill also provides that if a check or other negotiable instrument is sent unsolicited, a consumer would not be liable for the debt unless the creditor could prove that the consumer received and negotiated the instrument. And whether or not the intended recipient received it, the creditor could not report any liability resulting from the unsolicited instrument to a consumer reporting agency. Within the past two years, the Board has received a dozen or so complaints about unsolicited loan checks that primarily relate to theft and fraud problems. This is not a vast number of complaints, and the issuance of unsolicited loan checks is not as prevalent as the issuance of unsolicited credit cards in the late 1960s that led to the TILA prohibition. But creditors are increasingly making use of these checks, and the question is whether they pose a significant enough problem to warrant legislation. In answering the question, it seems appropriate to balance any need for consumer protection to combat fraud and other concerns associated with unsolicited checks against unnecessary restrictions on the offering of financial products. Some consumers may appreciate the convenience of obtaining "instant credit" without having to make a formal application. In addition, the intended recipient of a loan check generally will not be held liable for the amount of a forged loan check, although that may be small comfort to an individual who must contend with proving the forgery of the check. While the Board is mindful of the appearance that consumers are exposed to risks they have not voluntarily assumed, we do not favor an outright prohibition against sending these checks. Absent some evidence of a significant problem, we are inclined to let the market work without the intervention of new legislation. This hearing provides a useful forum for the industry, consumer representatives, and others to discuss with lawmakers these important policy matters involving debit cards and loan checks, and we appreciate the opportunity to participate in the discussion.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board has approved a risk-focused consumer compliance supervision program and extended the consumer examination frequency schedule for state member banks and foreign banking organizations. Implementation of the new program will be phased in during l998. These actions will enhance the effectiveness of the Federal Reserve System's consumer compliance examination program, reduce the burden of examinations for supervised institutions, and more effectively deploy Federal Reserve System examination resources. The new frequency guidelines extend the examination cycle from l8-24 months to 36 months for state member banks having an exemplary compliance history and assets of less than $250 million. An exemplary compliance history is defined as two satisfactory or better ratings for both consumer compliance and the Community Reinvestment Act. Banks with assets greater than $250 million will be examined every 24 months, while banks with performance problems will be examined once every l2 months. The consumer exminations performed under the new progam will be conducted concurrently with examinations for fair lending laws and the CRA, both of which are covered under separate but complimentary programs that reflect the new frequency schedule. An essential component of the new examination approach is the correlation of two risk elements: regulation risk -- which involves an evaluation of the potential consequences to the consumer or the bank of noncompliance with consumer protection laws and regulations; and product risk -- where examiners will identify the potential risks associated with financial products or services relative to a bank's market position, management expertise, and business orientation. The relationships between these two risk elements will then be correlated to determine the level of review necessary to verify a bank's compliance posture. The primary advantage of this examination approach is that it targets examination resources to higher-risk areas without compromising the integrity of the examination process. The new program also places a greater emphasis on outreach and monitoring activities. The outreach components of the program will be designed to foster compliance through regular contacts with state member banks. These contacts will be conducted apart from examination and supervisory activities, and will include such items as training seminars and advisory visits. Monitoring efforts will be performed between examinations and will be designed to alert examiners to any potential deterioration in a bank's consumer compliance posture. The conclusions drawn from the monitoring process will be considered when establishing the scope, timing, and staffing of future examinations.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the applications of ANB Holding Company, Ltd., and ANB Corporation, both in Terrell, Texas, to acquire up to approximately 41 percent of the voting shares of Lakeside Bancshares, Inc., and thereby acquire its subsidiary, Lakeside National Bank, both in Rockwall, Texas. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. ANB Holding Company, Ltd., ANB Corporation Terrell, Texas Order Approving Acquisition of Shares of a Bank Holding Company ANB Holding Company, Ltd. and ANB Corporation, both in Terrell, Texas (collectively, "Applicant"), bank holding companies within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), have requested the Board's approval under section 3 of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1842) to acquire up to approximately 41 percent of the voting shares of Lakeside Bancshares, Inc. ("Bancshares"), and thereby acquire its subsidiary bank, Lakeside National Bank, both in Rockwall, Texas ("Bank"). Notice of this proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (62 Federal Register 42,130 (1997)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the proposal and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 3 of the BHC Act. Applicant is the 44th largest depository institution in Texas, controlling approximately $413 million in deposits, representing less than 1 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in the state. Bancshares is the 638th largest depository institution in Texas, controlling approximately $23.4 million in deposits, representing less than 1 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in the state. On consummation of this proposal, Applicant would become the 41st largest depository institution in Texas, controlling deposits of $436.4 million, representing less than 1 percent of the total deposits in depository institutions in the state. Competitive Considerations The BHC Act provides that the Board may not approve a proposal submitted under section 3 of the Act if the proposal would result in a monopoly or if the effect of the proposal may be to lessen competition substantially in any relevant market unless the Board finds that the anticompetitive effects of the proposed transaction are clearly outweighed in the public interest by the probable effect of the transaction in meeting the convenience and needs of the community to be served. In evaluating the competitive effects of this proposal, the Board has carefully considered Bank's contentions that consummation of this proposal would result in significantly adverse effects on the concentration of resources and competition for banking services. Bank contends that the appropriate product market for analyzing the competitive effects of this transaction is small business lending and that the appropriate geographic market for analyzing these effects is Rockwall County, Texas. The Board and the courts consistently have recognized that the appropriate product market for evaluating the competitive effects of bank mergers and acquisitions is the cluster of products (various kinds of credit) and services (such as checking accounts and trust administration) offered by banking institutions. Bank presents no facts to support an alternative product market of small business loans in this case, and the institutions to be combined are both commercial banks that offer a wide range of banking products and services. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that the appropriate product market in this case is the cluster of banking products and services. The Board and the courts have found that the relevant geographic market for analyzing the competitive effect of a proposal must reflect commercial and banking realities and should consist of the local area where the banks involved offer their services and where local customers can practicably turn for alternatives. In making a determination on the geographic market in this case, the Board has considered worker commuting patterns (as indicated by census data) and other indicia of economic integration and transmission of competitive forces among depository institutions. Census Bureau data for 1990 indicate that 56.3 percent of Rockwall County's residents commute to jobs in the adjacent Dallas County. Rockwall County is connected to Dallas County by two highways, and the community of Rockwall, where almost all of the county's banking offices are located, is approximately five miles from the Dallas County line. Rockwall and Dallas Counties also have a significant amount of common advertising media, including newspapers, radio, and television. Of the approximately 11,000 households in Rockwall County, for example, 5,023 receive the Dallas Morning News daily, and 8,304 receive the newspaper on Sundays. This newspaper prints a survey of Dallas area lenders' mortgage rates every Friday and features regular advertisements by Dallas area banks and nonbanks for both loan and deposit products. These demographic data are corroborated by the inclusion of Rockwall County in the definition of the Dallas Metropolitan Statistical Area ("MSA"). MSAs are defined by the Office of Management and Budget based on an area's population and include surrounding counties with strong economic and social ties to the central county. Rockwall County also is included within the Dallas-Ft. Worth Ranally Metropolitan Area ("RMA"). An RMA is a privately defined geographic area that is compact, with relatively high population density that is linked by commuting, retail and wholesale trade patterns. The Board previously has used RMA designations as guides in defining relevant geographic banking markets. Based on all the facts of record, and for the reasons discussed above, the Board concludes that the relevant banking market for assessing the competitive effects of this proposal is the Dallas, Texas, banking market ("Dallas banking market") which is an area approximately equivalent to the Dallas-Ft. Worth RMA and includes Rockwall County. Applicant is the 19th largest depository institution in the Dallas banking market, controlling deposits of approximately $277 million, representing less than 1 percent of the total deposits in depository institutions in the market ("market deposits"). Bank is the 79th largest depository institution in the market, controlling deposits of approximately $23.4 million, representing less than 1 percent of market deposits. On consummation of this proposal, Applicant would become the 18th largest depository institution in the Dallas banking market, controlling deposits of approximately $300.4 million, representing less than 1 percent of market deposits. The market, as measured by the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index ("HHI"), would remain moderately concentrated after consummation of this transaction, and the HHI would remain unchanged at 1444 points. Approximately 100 depository institutions would remain as competitors in the Dallas banking market. The Department of Justice has reviewed the proposal and advised the Board that consummation of the proposal would not likely have any significantly adverse competitive effects in the Dallas banking market or any other relevant banking market. In light of all the facts of record, and after carefully considering the comments of Bank, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposal would not result in any significantly adverse effects on competition or the concentration of banking resources in the Dallas banking market, or any other relevant banking market. Other Factors The Board has carefully reviewed the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of Applicant and Bancshares, and their subsidiary banks, in light of all the facts of record. The Board notes that Applicant, Bancshares and Bank are in satisfactory financial condition and would remain so after consummation of the proposal. In addition, reports of examination assessing the managerial resources of Applicant indicate this factor is consistent with approval. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that considerations related to the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of Applicant, Bancshares, and their subsidiary banks are consistent with approval, as are other supervisory factors the Board must consider. Considerations relating to the convenience and needs of the communities to be served also are consistent with approval of this application. Conclusion Based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that this application should be, and hereby is, approved. The Board's approval is specifically conditioned on compliance by Applicant with all the commitments made in connection with this application. For the purpose of this action, the commitments and conditions relied on by the Board in reaching its decision are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The proposed acquisition of Bancshares shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day following the effective date of this order, and not later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective September 29, 1997. (signed) William W. Wiles William W. Wiles Secretary of the Board Footnotes Bancshares owns 94.5 percent of the voting shares of Bank. Applicant also proposes to acquire less than 1 percent of the voting shares of Bank. Asset and deposit data are as of June 30, 1996. In this context, depository institutions include commercial banks, savings banks, and savings associations. Bank states that Applicant's substantial ownership interest in a competitor could weaken or eliminate the independent actions of a direct competitor. For purposes of the BHC Act, a company controls another company if that company owns more than 25 percent of the outstanding voting shares of another company. 12 U.S.C. § 1841(a)(2(A). In this light, the Board's analysis of the competitive effects of the proposal assumes that Bank would not compete independently with Applicant. See United States v. Philadelphia National Bank , 374 U.S. 321, 357 (1963). Accord United States v. Connecticut National Bank , 418 U.S. 656 (1974); United States v. Phillipsburg National Bank , 399 U.S. 350 (1969) (" U.S. v. Phillipsburg "). See also Chemical Banking Corporation , 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 239 (1997). See St. Joseph Valley Bank , 68 Federal Reserve Bulletin 673 (1982). The key question to be considered in making this selection "is not where the parties to the merger do business or even where they compete, but where, within the area of competitive overlap, the effect of the merger on competition will be direct and immediate." United States v. Philadelphia Nat'l Bank , 374 U.S. 321, 374 (1963); United States v. Phillipsburg Nat'l Bank , 399 U.S. 350 (1969). Bank maintains that Rockwall County is physically separated from Dallas County by a lake and that two roads do not provide sufficient access to Dallas County. Rockwall County and the Dallas area are connected by U.S. Interstate Highway 30 ("Interstate 30"), which runs south from Rockwall County to downtown Dallas, and State Highway 66, which runs west from Rockwall County to the north Dallas area. Interstate 30 has been and continues to be widened to six lanes, and in some areas to eight lanes. Traffic count data show extensive driving activity between the two counties. Bank contends that the business focus of Applicant's Rockwall County branches and Bank is local and that these banking offices only advertise their services in local newspapers. Bank also notes that its designated service area under the Community Reinvestment Act (12 U.S.C. 2901 et seq .)("CRA") is limited to Rockwall County. As discussed previously, the key question when identifying the relevant geographic market for analyzing the competitive effects of a transaction is where will the effect of the merger on competition be direct and immediate within the area of competitive overlap rather than where will the institutions actually do business. Economic and demographic factors in this case, including the availability of media sources for information on competing banking products and the widespread commuting and travel in the area, show that customers of Rockwall County banks have access to competitors of and reasonable substitutes for these banks in an area much larger than Rockwall County. The Board also has noted that a bank's delineated community under the CRA does not necessarily represent the appropriate geographic market for analyzing the competitive effects of a proposal. See Flathead Holding Company , 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 741, n.11 (1996). See St. Joseph Valley Bank , 68 Federal Reserve Bulletin at 647. The Dallas banking market is approximated by Dallas County, the southeastern quadrant of Denton County (including Denton and Lewisville), the southwest quadrant of Collin County (including McKinney and Plano), Rockwall County, the communities of Forney and Terrell in Kaufman County, Midlothian, Waxahachie and Ferris in Ellis County, and Grapevine and Arlington in Tarrant County. Market share data are as of June 30, 1996. These data are based on calculations in which the deposits of thrift institutions are included at 50 percent. The Board has previously indicated that thrift institutions have become, or have the potential to become, significant competitors of commercial banks. See Midwest Financial Group , 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 386 (1989); National City Corporation , 70 Federal Reserve Bulletin 743 (1984). Under the revised Merger Guidelines, 49 Federal Register 26,823 (June 29, 1984), a market in which the post-merger HHI is between 1000 and 1800 is considered to be moderately concentrated, and a market above 1800 is considered to be highly concentrated. The Department of Justice has informed the Board that a bank merger or acquisition generally will not be challenged (in the absence of other factors indicating anticompetitive effects) unless the post-merger HHI is at least 1800 and the merger increases the HHI by more than 200 points. The Department of Justice has stated that the higher than normal HHI thresholds for screening bank mergers for anticompetitive effects implicitly recognize the competitive effect of limited-purpose lenders and other non-depository financial entities. The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency ("OCC") and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation also have not objected to the proposal. Bank questions whether Applicant should be permitted to acquire a minority interest in Bancshares without committing to be a passive investor. The BHC Act contemplates that a bank holding company may seek to acquire less than a majority interest in another bank holding company or bank, and does not require that these less-than-majority investments be passive. To the contrary, the BHC Act defines a bank holding company as controlling any company in which the bank holding company owns a greater than 25 percent voting interest. As noted above, the Board has analyzed this proposal in light of the BHC Act's definition that the acquisition would cause Applicant to control Bancshares and Bank. The Board notes that the most recent performance evaluation of Applicant's subsidiary bank, American National Bank of Texas, Terrell, Texas ("ANBT"), under the CRA by its primary federal supervisor, the OCC, was "outstanding." Examiners found that the bank offered a number of products to assist in meeting the credit needs of its communities and stated that ANBT has an excellent record of lending to small businesses. Bank has requested a hearing on the proposal. Section 3(b) of the BHC Act does not require the Board to hold a public hearing on an application unless the appropriate supervisory authority for the bank to be acquired makes a timely written recommendation of denial of the application. In this case, the Board has not received such a recommendation from the OCC, Bank's primary federal supervisor. Under its rules, the Board may also, in its discretion, hold a public hearing or meeting on an application to clarify factual issues related to the application and to provide an opportunity for testimony, if appropriate. 12 C.F.R. 225.16(e). The Board has carefully considered Bank's request for a hearing in light of all the facts of record. In the Board's view, Bank has had ample opportunity to submit its views, and has submitted written comments that have been carefully considered by the Board in acting on this application. Bank's request fails to demonstrate why its written presentations do not adequately present its evidence, allegations and views. After a careful review of all the facts of record, moreover, the Board has concluded that Bank disputes the weight that should be accorded to, and the conclusions that the Board should draw from, the facts of record, but does not identify disputed issues of fact that are material to the Board's decision. For these reasons, and based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that a public hearing or meeting is not required or warranted to clarify the factual record in the application, or otherwise warranted in this case. Accordingly, the request for a hearing on the proposal is hereby denied. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Phillips, and Meyer.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application of The Chase Manhattan Corporation and Chase Holding Delaware Inc., both of New York, New York, to acquire all the voting shares of Chase Manhattan Bank and Trust Company, N.A., Los Angeles, California, a de novo bank. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. The Chase Manhattan Corporation Chase Holding Delaware Inc. New York, New York Order Approving the Acquisition of a Bank By order of the Board of Governors, effective September 29, 1997. (signed) William W. Wiles William W. Wiles Secretary of the Board Footnotes Asset data are as of March 31, 1997. The Chase Manhattan Trust Company of California, N.A. ("National Trust") and Chase Trust Company of California ("State Trust"), both uninsured nonbank trust companies in San Francisco, California, would consolidate with and into a newly established nationally chartered trust association under the name of Chase Trust. Chase Trust would obtain full commercial banking powers from the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency ("OCC") and deposit insurance from the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ("FDIC"), thereby becoming a "bank" for purposes of the BHC Act. Chase Trust would then acquire the Los Angeles branch of Chase-Florida as the last step of the reorganization. The OCC has approved Chase's applications to charter the new trust association, consolidate National Trust and State Trust into the new trust association, and obtain full commercial banking powers for the new trust association. Chase Trust also has filed an application with the FDIC to obtain deposit insurance. Chase made the commitments in connection with the merger of Chemical Bank FSB, Palm Beach, Florida, with and into Chase-Florida in November 1996. The Los Angeles branch was a branch of Chemical Bank FSB prior to the merger. Pub. L. No. 103-328, 108 Stat. 2338 (1994). A bank holding company's home state is the state in which the operations of the bank holding company's banking subsidiaries were principally conducted on July 1, 1966, or the date on which the company became a bank holding company, whichever is later. See 12 U.S.C. §§ 1842(d)(1)(A) and (B) and 1842(d)(2)(A) and (B). Chase is adequately capitalized and adequately managed. On consummation of the proposal, Chase and its affiliates would control less than 10 percent of the total amount of deposits of insured depository institutions in the United States and less than 30 percent of the total amount of deposits of insured depository institutions in California. In addition, all other requirements of section 3(d) of the BHC Act would be met on consummation of the proposal. The Statement of the Federal Financial Supervisory Agencies Regarding the Community Reinvestment Act provides that a CRA examination is an important and often controlling factor in the consideration of an institution's CRA record and that reports of these examinations will be given great weight in the applications process. See 54 Federal Register 13,742 and 13,745 (1989). See Chemical Banking Corporation , 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 239 (1996) ("Chemical/Chase Order"). Chemical Bank FSB also received a "satisfactory" rating from the Office of Thrift Supervision at its most recent CRA performance examination, as of March 6, 1995, prior to its merger into Chase-Florida. The following subsidiary banks of Chase have received the indicated ratings from the OCC, their primary federal supervisor, since the merger of Old Chemical and Old Chase: Texas Commerce Bank, Houston, Texas, rated "outstanding" as of September 9, 1996; Texas Commerce Bank-San Angelo, San Angelo, Texas, rated "satisfactory" as of August 8, 1996; Chase Manhattan Bank USA, N.A., Wilmington, Delaware ("Chase USA-Delaware"), rated "satisfactory" as of October 8, 1996; and Chase Manhattan Bank USA, N.A., Jericho, New York ("Chase USA-New York"), rated "satisfactory" as of September 5, 1996. Following these examinations, Chase USA-New York merged with and into Chase USA-Delaware in December 1996. See The Chase Manhattan Bank , 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 1139 (1996) ("Chase Bank/CBNJ Order"). The Chemical/Chase Order also specifically discussed the CRA performance records of Chase-Florida and Chemical FSB, as well as the subsidiary banks of Old Chase and Old Chemical operating in New York, New Jersey, Connecticut, Texas and Delaware. This supervisory information includes information developed by the Reserve Bank during its regularly scheduled examination of Chase Bank's record of CRA performance, which commenced in March 1997. The Reserve Bank's report of this examination is not publicly available at this time. Chase Trust would continue to operate the Los Angeles branch of Chase-Florida. Section 42 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. § 1831r-1), as implemented by the Joint Policy Statement Regarding Branch Closing (58 Federal Register 49,083 (1993)), requires that a bank provide the public with at least 30 days notice and the primary federal supervisor with at least 90 days notice before the date of the proposed branch closing. The bank also is required to provide reasons and other supporting data for the closure, consistent with the institution's written policy for branch closing. Two commenters also maintain that Chase Trust will not assist in meeting the credit needs of its local community. As discussed in this order, the Board has considered these comments in light of Chase's overall record of CRA performance. One commenter contends that Chase improperly failed to disclose the 18 branch closings in connection with the Chemical/Chase merger. In connection with that merger, Chase announced that it would close seven branches in LMI census tracts in New York City and provided the Board a preliminary list of branches in non-LMI areas that it expected to close. Chase previously has stated that its announcement regarding proposed branch closings in LMI census tracts did not include middle market business offices or other specialized facilities, such as private banking and private access corporate locations. As noted above, the four branches in LMI areas identified by commenter are middle market business offices. The remaining 14 branches identified by commenter are in non-LMI census tracts and, as noted in the Chemical/Chase Order, Chase's list of proposed branch closings in non-LMI census tracts was preliminary and subject to change. These data reflect all notices of proposed branch closings received by the Federal Reserve System through August 18, 1997. Consumer branches do not include limited access specialized facilities, such as private banking, middle market business offices, and private access corporate locations. One commenter contends that the preliminary branch closing information that Chase submitted in connection with the Chemical/Chase merger misled the Board because it did not categorize proposed branch closings in middle-income areas that are adjacent to LMI census tracts as closings in LMI census tracts. The branch closing information submitted by Chase was presented based on the census tract location of the branch proposed to be closed. No additional categorization was required. Moreover, Chase continues to operate a number of branches in LMI census tracts, as discussed in this order. One commenter objects to Chase Trust's pending request to be designated as a wholesale bank under the CRA regulations jointly promulgated by the federal financial supervisory agencies. See 60 Federal Register 22,156 (1995). The OCC, Chase Trust's primary federal supervisor, is responsible for acting on the requested designation, and such actions are not reviewable by the Board. See 12 C.F.R. 25.25(b). The Board's review includes 1995 and 1996 HMDA data reported by all Chase subsidiaries for the New York City Metropolitan Statistical Area ("MSA") and several other MSAs in Chase Bank's assessment area, the Los Angeles MSA, and the MSAs in the service areas of Chase's subsidiary banks in Texas and Florida. These data, for example, do not provide a basis for an independent assessment of whether an applicant who was denied credit was, in fact, creditworthy. Credit history problems and excessive debt levels relative to income--reasons most frequently cited by a credit denial--are not available from HMDA data. One commenter contends that the proposal will result in foreclosures that will adversely affect the local community. This commenter also contends generally that banking institutions, including Chase, use improper practices when foreclosing on properties. The commenter does not provide, and the record does not otherwise contain, facts to support these contentions. One commenter reiterates the contention that Chase violates the fair lending laws and HMDA through its activities involving the New York City Housing Partnership ("NYCHP"). The Board previously addressed this issue in the Chase Bank/CBNJ Order, which noted that, following discussions with the Reserve Bank, the NYCHP agreed to provide adverse action letters to applicants that are not eligible for NYCHP-sponsored programs. The Board notes that the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission recently filed suit against Chase alleging that certain restrictions contained in the long-term disability plan offered to Chase employees violate the Americans with Disabilities Act (42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq .). Private litigants also have filed an employment discrimination lawsuit in Delaware against one of Chase's subsidiary banks. Both of these lawsuits are pending adjudication, and no finding of wrongdoing on the part of Chase has been made. The Board previously has stated that its limited jurisdiction to review applications under the BHC Act does not authorize the Board to adjudicate disputes involving an applicant that arise under statutes administered and enforced by another agency in areas such as employment discrimination. The Board also retains sufficient supervisory authority to take appropriate action if a lawsuit or an examination determines that Chase is not in compliance with applicable laws and regulations. One commenter has requested that the Board hold a public hearing or meeting on the proposal. Section 3(b) of the BHC Act does not require the Board to hold a public hearing on an application unless the appropriate supervisory authority for the bank to be acquired makes a timely written recommendation of denial of the application. In this case, the Board has not received such a recommendation from the OCC, Chase Trust's primary federal supervisor. Under its rules, the Board also may, in its discretion, hold a public hearing or meeting on an application to clarify factual issues related to the proposal and to provide an opportunity for testimony, if appropriate. 12 C.F.R 225.16(e). The Board has carefully considered commenter's request for a hearing or meeting in light of all the facts of record. In the Board's view, commenter has had ample opportunity to submit views and has, in fact, provided written submissions that have been considered by the Board in acting on the proposal. The request fails to demonstrate why these written submissions do not adequately present commenter's evidence, allegations and views. After a careful review of all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that the commenter disputes the weight that should be accorded to, and the conclusions that the Board should draw from, the facts of record and does not identify disputed issues of fact that are material to the Board's decision. For these reasons, and based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that a public hearing or meeting is not required or warranted to clarify the factual record in the proposal, or otherwise warranted in this case. Accordingly, the request for a public hearing or meeting on the proposal is hereby denied. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Phillips, and Meyer.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), and the state banking departments will begin full implementation of a common risk-focused process for the examination of state-chartered community banks effective October l, l997. The process targets the activities posing the highest level of risk at each institution and enhances examiners' ability to diagnose emerging problems. Implementation of this process will provide greater consistency in examinations conducted by the Federal Reserve, the FDIC, and the states, and is expected to result in examinations that are more efficient and effective and less burdensome on institutions. Critical to the implementation of the risk-focused approach is the exercise of examiner judgment in determining the scope of the examination during the planning process. This allows examiners to customize, based on the bank's risk profile, procedures performed on-site. The Federal Reserve and the FDIC have developed examination procedure modules to assist examiners in their analysis of seven of the most important activities of community banks including loan portfolio management, securities, management and internal controls, earnings, and capital. Six supplemental modules are provided for the review of activities such as electronic banking, mortgage banking, and international banking. Both agencies have conducted extensive field testing of the modules. These modules emphasize evaluation of a bank's ability to manage the risks associated with a particular activity so that examiners can better diagnose emerging problems. The modules employ a tiered structure that permits an examiner to draw conclusions after completing a core analysis requiring a limited number of procedures. An expanded analysis involving further procedures would be performed only if the core analysis indicated more in-depth review is necessary. The modules have been automated for use on virtually all laptop computers currently in field use through a stand-alone software program called "ELVIS" (Examiner Laptop Visual Information System). ELVIS provides a documentation vehicle for work performed on an examination, as well as electronic access to the two agencies' examination manuals. Examiners at both agencies have been trained on the risk-focused examination process and the use of ELVIS. The FDIC began work on developing a risk-focused examination process in l996 as part of a Corporate Operating Plan project. When the FDIC examiners working on the project learned that the Federal Reserve had undertaken a similar effort, the two agencies decided to join in a cooperative effort. The state banking departments through the Conference of State Bank Supervisors (CSBS) provided input to the development work. Training on the risk-based examination process has included examiners from all of the 50 state banking departments. Since all three groups conduct examinations of state-chartered banks, implementation of the risk-focused approach is expected to improve the consistency of examination procedures applied to state-chartered institutions.