For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today requested comment on a proposal to amend its risk-based and Tier 1 leverage capital guidelines for state member banks and bank holding companies to address the treatment of servicing assets on both mortgage assets and financial assets other than mortgages (non-mortgages). Comment is requested by October 6, 1997 . Under this proposed rule, the amount of mortgage servicing assets (and purchased credit card relationships) includable in regulatory capital would be increased from 50 to 100 percent. In addition, all non-mortgage servicing assets would be fully deducted from Tier 1 capital. This proposed rule was developed in response to a recent Financial Accounting Standards Board accounting standard, Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 125, "Accounting for Transfers and Servicing of Financial Assets and Extinguishments of Liabilities" (FAS 125), which changed the accounting treatment for servicing assets. The proposal also is being issued by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of Thrift Supervision. The interagency notice is attached. |
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice of CoreStates Financial Corporation, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, to engage through its wholly owned subsidiary, CoreStates Securities Corporation, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, in certain nonbanking activities, including underwriting and dealing in, to a limited extent, certain municipal revenue bonds, 1-4 family mortgage-related securities, consumer receivable-related securities, and commercial paper. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. CoreStates Financial Corporation Philadelphia, Pennsylvania Order Approving a Notice to Engage in Certain Nonbanking Activities CoreStates Financial Corporation, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania ("CoreStates"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act") has requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8)) and section 225.24 of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.24) to engage in the following nonbanking activities through its wholly owned subsidiary, CoreStates Securities Corporation, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania ("Company"): (1) Underwriting and dealing in, to a limited extent, certain municipal revenue bonds (including certain unrated municipal revenue bonds), 1-4 family mortgage-related securities, consumer receivable-related securities, and commercial paper (collectively, "bank-ineligible securities"); (2) Providing financial and investment advisory services, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(6) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(6)); (3) Buying and selling all types of securities on the order of customers as a "riskless principal," pursuant to section 225.28(b)(7)(ii) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(7)(ii)); (4) Acting as agent in the private placement of all types of securities, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(7)(iii) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(7)(iii)); (5) Providing other transactional services, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(7)(v) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(7)(v)); and (6) Providing investing and trading services, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(8)(ii) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(8)(ii). In addition, CoreStates proposes that Company engage in extending credit and servicing loans, activities related to extending credit, leasing personal and real property, and management consulting and counseling activities that are related to Company's underwriting and dealing, private placement, riskless principal, and other securities activities. These activities would be conducted in accordance with the Board's Regulation Y. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (62 Federal Register 32,117 (1997)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the notice and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. CoreStates, with total consolidated assets of approximately $45.3 billion, is the 21st largest banking organization in the United States. CoreStates operates bank subsidiaries in Pennsylvania, New Jersey, and Delaware, and engages through its subsidiaries in a broad range of permissible nonbanking activities. Company is, and will continue to be, registered as a broker-dealer with the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. § 78a et seq .) and a member of the National Association of Securities Dealers, Inc. ("NASD"). Accordingly, Company is, and will continue to be, subject to the recordkeeping and reporting obligations, fiduciary standards, and other requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the SEC, and the NASD. Underwriting and Dealing in Bank-Ineligible Securities The Board has determined that, subject to the prudential framework of limitations established in previous decisions to address the potential for conflicts of interests, unsound banking practices, or other adverse effects, the proposed activities of underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities are so closely related to banking as to be a proper incident thereto within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. CoreStates has committed that Company will conduct the underwriting and dealing activities using the same methods and procedures and subject to the same prudential limitations established by the Board in the Section 20 Orders. The Board also has previously determined that conduct of the proposed activities is consistent with section 20 of the Glass-Steagall Act (12 U.S.C. § 377), provided that the company engaged in underwriting and dealing activities derives no more than 25 percent of its gross revenues from underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities over a two-year period. CoreStates has committed that Company will conduct its bank-ineligible securities underwriting and dealing activities subject to the Board's revenue limit. Other Activities Approved by Regulation As noted above, Company proposes to engage in providing credit, servicing loans, and activities related to extending credit; leasing personal or real property; providing financial and investment advisory services; providing riskless principal, private placement and other transactional services; providing investing and trading services; and providing management consulting and counseling services. The Board previously has determined by regulation that each of the proposed activities is closely related to banking for purposes of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. CoreStates and Company will conduct these activities in accordance with the limitations set forth in Regulation Y, and the Board's orders and interpretations relating to each of these activities. Proper Incident to Banking Standard To approve this notice, the Board also must consider whether performance of the proposed activities is a proper incident to banking, that is, whether the activities proposed "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public . . . that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices." As part of its evaluation of these factors, the Board considers the financial condition and managerial resources of the notificant and its subsidiaries and the effect the transaction would have on such resources. The Board has carefully examined the financial resources, management expertise, and risk management policies of CoreStates and its subsidiaries. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that financial and managerial considerations are consistent with approval. The Board expects that the de novo entry of Company into the market for the proposed services would provide added convenience to CoreStates's customers and would increase the level of competition among existing providers of these services. As noted above, CoreStates has committed that Company will conduct its bank-ineligible securities underwriting and dealing activities in accordance with the prudential framework established by the Board's Section 20 Orders. Under the framework and conditions established in this order and the Section 20 Orders, the Board concludes that Company's proposed limited conduct of underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities is not likely to result in significantly adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interest, or unsound banking practices that would outweigh the public benefits. Similarly, the Board finds no evidence that Company's riskless principal, private placement, and other nonbanking activities -- conducted under the framework and conditions established in this order and Regulation Y -- would likely result in any significant adverse effects that would outweigh the public benefits of the proposal. Accordingly, the Board has determined that performance of the proposed activities by CoreStates are a proper incident to banking for purposes of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Conclusion Based on all the facts of record, and subject to the commitments made by CoreStates, as well as the terms and conditions set forth in this order and in the Board's orders and regulations noted above, the Board has determined that the notice should be, and hereby is, approved. Approval of the proposal also is conditioned on compliance by CoreStates and Company with the commitments made in connection with the notice, the conditions referenced in this order, and the above-cited Board regulations and orders. The Board's determination also is subject to all the terms and conditions set forth in Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.25(c) (12 C.F.R. 225.7 and 225.25(c)), and to the Board's authority to require modification or termination of the activities of a bank holding company or any of its subsidiaries as the Board finds necessary to assure compliance with, and to prevent evasion of, the provisions of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders issued thereunder. In approving the proposal, the Board has relied on all the facts of record and all the representations and commitments made by CoreStates. These commitments and conditions shall be deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decisions, and may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. This transaction shall not be commenced later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective August 4, 1997. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes Sections 225.28(b)(1), (b)(2), (b)(3), and (b)(9) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(1), (b)(2), (b)(3), and (b)(9)). Asset and ranking data are as of March 31, 1997. See Citicorp , 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 473 (1987), aff'd sub nom. Securities Industry Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System , 839 F.2d 47 (2d Cir.), cert. denied , 486 U.S. 1059 (1988), as modified by Review of Restrictions on Director, Officer and Employee Interlocks, Cross-Marketing Activities, and the Purchase and Sale of Financial Assets between a Section 20 Subsidiary and an Affiliated Bank or Thrift , 61 Federal Register 57,679 (1996) (collectively, "Section 20 Orders"). In connection with its proposal, CoreStates proposes to underwrite and deal in unrated municipal revenue bonds. CoreStates has committed that Company will not underwrite unrated municipal revenue bonds until the Federal Reserve System has reviewed Company's policies and procedures with respect to such activities. In conducting this activity, Company will in each case conduct an independent credit review to determine that the securities are of investment grade quality. CoreStates also has provided other commitments previously relied on by the Board in authorizing a section 20 company to underwrite and deal in unrated municipal revenue bonds. See Letter Interpreting Section 20 Orders , 81 Federal Reserve Bulletin 198 (1995); BOK Financial Corporation , 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin 510 (1997). See Section 20 Orders. Compliance with the revenue limitation shall be calculated in accordance with the method stated in the Section 20 Orders, as modified by the Order Approving Modifications to the Section 20 Orders , 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 751 (1989) and 10 Percent Revenue Limit on Bank-Ineligible Activities of Subsidiaries of Bank Holding Companies Engaged in Underwriting and Dealing in Securities , 61 Federal Register 48,953 (1996) and Revenue Limit on Bank-Ineligible Activities of Subsidiaries of Bank Holding Companies Engaged in Underwriting and Dealing in Securities , 61 Federal Register 68,750 (1996) (collectively, "Modification Orders"). Company may provide services that are necessary incidents to the proposed underwriting and dealing activities. Unless Company receives specific approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act to conduct the activities independently, any revenues from the incidental activities must be treated as ineligible revenues subject to the Board's revenue limitation. As provided in the Section 20 Orders, no corporate reorganization of any subsidiary engaged in underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities may be consummated without prior Board approval. CoreStates has stated that Company will not engage in any additional activities or transfer assets or businesses into Company without first consulting with the Board. See 12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(1), (b)(2), (b)(3), (b)(6), (b)(7)(ii), (b)(7)(iii), (b)(7)(v), (b)(8)(ii), and (b)(9). CoreStates also proposes that Company enter into a dual-employee arrangement with a third party insurance agent to sell annuity products. CoreStates has committed that the dual-employee arrangement will be consistent with the BHC Act and the restrictions and limitations previously established by the Board on such insurance sales arrangements. See, e.g. , Letter dated December 6, 1995, from J. Virgil Mattingly, Jr., to Russell J. Bruemmer, Esq. 12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8). See 12 C.F.R. 225.24; see also The Fuji Bank, Limited , 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 94 (1989); Bayerische Vereinsbank AG , 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 155 (1987). This action was taken pursuant to the Board's Rules Regarding Delegation of Authority (12 C.F.R. 265.4(b)(1)) by a committee of Board members. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan and Governors Phillips and Meyer. Absent and noting voting: Vice Chair Rivlin and Governor Kelley.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today requested comment on a proposal to amend its Regulation D (Reserve Requirements of Depository Institutions) to allow U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks and Edge and Agreement corporations to choose whether to aggregate reserves on a nationwide basis in a single account at one Reserve Bank or to continue to have separate accounts on same-state/same-District basis as they do today. Comment is requested by September 12, 1997 . The amendments would also update and clarify the pass-through account rules in Regulation D for all institutions. These amendments would facilitate interstate banking and eliminate certain restrictions applicable to pass-through accounts. The Board's notice is attached. |
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today adopted amendments to its Regulation E, Electronic Fund Transfers, to carry out statutory amendments to the Electronic Fund Transfer Act. These changes become effective September 15, 1997. The amendments to the regulation exempt certain "needs-tested" electronic benefit transfer (EBT) programs established or administered by state or local government agencies, such as the food stamp program, from requirements of the Electronic Fund Transfer Act. The modified regulatory requirements that the Board established in its 1994 rulemaking would continue to apply to federally administered EBT programs and state and local employment-related EBT programs, such as state pension programs. Generally, EBT programs involve the issuance of access cards and personal identification numbers to recipients of government benefits so that they can obtain their benefits through automated teller machines and point-of-sale terminals. The Board's notice is attached. |
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the applications of Northwest Bancorp, MHC ("MHC"), and Northwest Bancorp, Inc., MHC's newly formed majority owned subsidiary stock bank holding company, to own all the voting shares of MHC's subsidiary bank, Northwest Savings Bank, all of Warren, Pennsylvania. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Northwest Bancorp, MHC Warren, Pennsylvania Northwest Bancorp, Inc. Warren, Pennsylvania Order Approving Formation of a Bank Holding Company and Acquisitions by Bank Holding Companies Northwest Bancorp, MHC ("MHC"), Warren, Pennsylvania, a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act") and organized in mutual form, has requested the Board's approval under section 3 of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1842) to reorganize its corporate structure by forming Northwest Bancorp, Inc. ("Bancorp"), as a majority owned subsidiary stock bank holding company that would own all the voting shares of MHC's subsidiary bank, Northwest Savings Bank ("Bank"), all of Warren, Pennsylvania. Bancorp also has requested the Board's approval to become a bank holding company section under 3 of the BHC Act. Notice of this proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (62 Federal Register 3513 (1997)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the proposal and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 3 of the BHC Act. Bank is the 19th largest depository institution in Pennsylvania, controlling approximately $1.5 billion in deposits, representing less than 1 percent of all deposits in depository institutions in the state. Based on all the facts of record, including the fact that the transaction represents a corporate reorganization to form a second-tier bank holding company, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposal would not have a significantly adverse effect on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in any relevant banking market, and that competitive considerations are consistent with approval. In every application under section 3 of the BHC Act, the Board is required to consider the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the companies and banks concerned, and the convenience and needs of the communities to be served. MHC owns approximately 69 percent of the voting shares of Bank. The remaining 31 percent of Bank's shares are owned by members of the public, including minority shareholders who serve as senior management of Bank and members of MHC's board of trustees. Shareholders of Bank would exchange their stock for voting shares of Bancorp, and would own the same percentage of shares of Bancorp as they currently own of Bank. When the Board approved the formation of MHC in 1994, the Board noted that, because MHC did not own all the voting shares of Bank, equity could be transferred from the mutual owners of the holding company to the minority shareholders of Bank at the expense of the mutual owners if MHC were the only shareholder to waive dividends from Bank. The Board concluded that such a result could present adverse considerations under the financial and managerial resources and future prospects and convenience and needs factors required to be reviewed under the BHC Act. After carefully reviewing all the facts of record, including MHC's commitments requiring Bank to retain any dividends waived, and the fulfillment of the conditions imposed by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ("FDIC") and the Pennsylvania Department of Banking, the Board concluded that these factors were consistent with approving the formation of MHC. The formation of Bancorp as a subsidiary stock company between MHC and Bank potentially raises the same adverse considerations discussed in the Northwest Order . Bancorp, for example, as a company controlled by MHC, could pay a dividend to insider minority shareholders, notwithstanding MHC's dividend waiver commitment, by issuing special classes of stock with dividend rights to the minority shareholders. In addition, insider minority shareholders could increase the value of their shares at no cost through the repurchase of MHC stock by Bancorp, or by repurchases of insider minority shareholdings at above market prices. The Board is also concerned that the preference to purchase new shares of Bank or shares of MHC that was provided to Bank's depositors by the Northwest Order could be circumvented through the sale of new shares of Bancorp. To address these concerns, MHC and Bancorp have made a number of commitments set forth in the Appendix. In particular, MHC or its subsidiaries will not issue any securities that would give the holder a right to acquire equity securities or convey an interest in the retained earnings of the issuer to a person other than MHC without the Board's approval. Bancorp also will seek the Board's approval before repurchasing any equity securities from MHC, will repurchase equity securities from shareholders other than MHC only at the current market price, and will maintain detailed records of all stock repurchases. Finally, Bank's depositors will be accorded the same preference to purchase shares that is provided by the Northwest Order for any sale, transfer or issuance of shares of Bank or Bancorp to any person other than MHC. The Board believes that these commitments permit the Board to monitor and address the issues raised when a mutual holding company owns less than all the voting shares of a savings bank through a subsidiary stock holding company. In this light, and based on all the facts of record, including consultations with federal and state banking supervisory agencies, the Board concludes the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of MHC, Bancorp, and Bank are consistent with approval, as are the convenience and needs and other supervisory factors that the Board must consider under section 3 of the BHC Act. Based on the foregoing and other facts of record, the Board has determined that the applications should be, and hereby are, approved. The Board's approval of the proposal is expressly conditioned on compliance with all the commitments made by the applicants in connection with the applications, including the commitments and conditions discussed in the order, and is conditioned on receipt by the applicants of all necessary approvals from all relevant regulators, and compliance with the requirements imposed by those regulators. For purposes of this action, the commitments and conditions relied on by the Board in reaching this decision are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. This proposal shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day after the effective date of this order or later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective August 18, 1997. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Appendix (1) MHC will not sell, transfer, or otherwise dispose of any of its shares in Bancorp, or Bank to any person (including an Employee Stock Ownership Plan) and Bancorp will not sell, transfer, or otherwise dispose of any of its shares of Bank without the prior approval of the Board. Bancorp, Bank, or any other direct or indirect subsidiary of MHC will not issue equity securities or any securities that would accord the holder the right to acquire equity securities or that would bestow upon the holder an interest in the retained earnings of the issuer to persons other than MHC, unless MHC and Bancorp seek prior approval of the Board and the Board approves the issuance; (2) In any conversion of MHC from mutual to stock form, the holding company will file an application for approval of the conversion with the Board and will comply with the rules and regulations of the Office of Thrift Supervision ("OTS") as if Bank were a savings association and MHC and Bancorp were savings and loan holding companies, respectively, except that such rules shall be administered by the Board; (3) In connection with commitments 1 and 2, MHC and Bancorp agree with the following: A. In any sale, transfer or issuance of shares of Bank or Bancorp to any person other than MHC, the depositors of Bank will be accorded the same stock purchase priorities given to depositors of a mutual savings association in connection with such association converting to stock form, unless such condition is waived by the Board. In making such sale, or transferring or issuing such shares, MHC and Bancorp and their management will comply with any fiduciary duty they owe. B. The Board will take into account the extent to which the proposed transactions conform with the provisions and purpose of the regulations of the OTS (12 C.F.R. Part 563b and 575) and the FDIC (12 C.F.R. 303.15 and 333.4), as currently in effect at the time the Board reviews the required materials related to the proposed transactions. Any nonconformity with those provisions will be closely scrutinized. Conformity with the OTS and FDIC requirements, however, will not be sufficient for Board regulatory purposes if the Board determines that the proposed transaction would pose a risk to the institution's safety and soundness, violate any law or regulations, or present a breach of fiduciary duty. (4) Bancorp commits to seek the Board's prior approval before repurchasing any equity securities from MHC. Bancorp commits that any repurchases of equity securities from shareholders other than MHC shall be at the current market price for such share repurchase. Bancorp shall maintain detailed records of all stock repurchases for review by the Board; (5) MHC and Bancorp commit not to incur debt without receiving prior approval from the Board; and (6) MHC and Bancorp commit not to pledge the stock of Bancorp in support of any borrowing without receiving prior approval from the Board. Footnotes All banking data are as of September 30, 1996. In this context, depository institutions include commercial banks, savings banks, and savings and loan associations. Bancorp would be formed through a series of transitions that would occur simultaneously. Bancorp would initially be formed as a wholly owned subsidiary of Bank. Bancorp would then charter an interim savings bank as a wholly owned subsidiary. Bank would merge with the interim savings bank and, as the surviving institution, become a wholly owned subsidiary of Bancorp. The shareholders of Bank would then exchange their Bank stock for Bancorp stock on a one-for-one basis and Bancorp would own all the voting stock of Bank. See Northwest Bancorp, MHC , 80 Federal Reserve Bulletin 1131 (1994) (" Northwest Order "). The Board noted that a waiver of dividends by MHC could reduce or impair its ability to serve as a source of strength for Bank. The Board also concluded that a decision by MHC's board of trustees to execute such a waiver, without a corresponding waiver by the minority shareholders, raised a potential conflict of interest because, as minority shareholders, board members had a financial interest in the waiver. The potential conflict was of particular concern in a company that was organized in mutual form because, unlike a stock company whose management may be replaced by its shareholders, state law did not provide a mechanism for management of a mutual holding company to be changed by its mutual owners. See Northwest Order at 1132-33. The commitments and conditions discussed in the Northwest Order are specifically incorporated by reference as commitments and conditions in connection with the Board's action on this proposal. The Office of Thrift Supervision's ("OTS") regulations require that if a stock thrift subsidiary of a mutual holding company issues stock, the thrift must first offer the stock to its depositors before offering shares to the public, including stock issuances to fund an acquisition. FDIC regulations require the FDIC to take into account the extent to which a proposal to convert a state chartered savings bank to stock form complies with the OTS regulations, including stock issuances and depositor preference rules. MHC has agreed to commitments that are consistent with the OTS's depositor preference rules and the commitments in the Northwest Order . Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Phillips, and Meyer.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application of Santa Barbara Bancorp, Santa Barbara, to acquire Citizens State Bank of Santa Paula and thereby acquire Citizens State Bank, both in Santa Paula, and all in California. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Santa Barbara Bancorp Santa Barbara, California Order Approving the Acquisition of a Bank, the Merger of Banks, and Establishment of Branches By order of the Board of Governors, effective August 21, 1997. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Appendix Branches of SB Bank to be established at Citizens Bank locations: 1. 948 East Main Street, Santa Paula, California 93060 2. 537 West Harvard Boulevard, Santa Paula, California 93060 3. 316 Central Avenue, Fillmore, California 93015 Footnotes In this context, depository institutions include commercial banks, savings banks, and savings associations. State deposit, market share, and rank data are as of June 30, 1996, and incorporate structural changes through May 1997. Market share data are based on a calculation in which the deposits of thrift institutions are included at 50 percent. The Board previously has indicated that thrift institutions have become, or have the potential to become, significant competitors of commercial banks. See WM Bancorp , 76 Federal Reserve Bulletin 788 (1990); National City Corporation , 70 Federal Reserve Bulletin 743 (1984). Thus, the Board has regularly included thrift deposits in the calculation of market share on a 50-percent weighted basis. See, e.g., First Hawaiian Inc ., 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 52 (1991). The Oxnard-Ventura banking market is approximated by the Oxnard-Ventura RMA and the towns of Fillmore, Ojai, Piru, Port Hueneme and Santa Paula, all in California. Under the revised Department of Justice Merger Guidelines, 49 Federal Register 26,823 (June 29, 1984), a market in which the post-merger HHI is between 1000 and 1800 is considered to be moderately concentrated. The Department of Justice has informed the Board that a bank merger or acquisition generally will not be challenged (in the absence of other factors indicating anticompetitive effects) unless the post-merger HHI is at least 1800 and the merger increases the HHI by more than 200 points. The Department of Justice has stated that the higher than normal HHI thresholds for, screening bank mergers for anticompetitive effects implicitly recognize the competitive effect of limited-purpose lenders and other nondepository financial entities. The Statement of the Federal Financial Supervisory Agencies Regarding the Community Reinvestment Act ("Agency CRA Statement") provides that a CRA examination is an important and often controlling factor in the consideration of an institution's CRA record, and that reports of these examinations will be given great weight in the applications process. 54 Federal Register 13,742, 13,745 (1989). Examiners noted that SB Bank offered 50 different residential mortgage loans and had made 496 mortgage loans totaling $103 million during the examination period. Examiners concluded that SB Bank's overall lending levels reflect responsiveness to the community's credit needs. SB Bank has operated in Ventura County for approximately two years and would expand its presence in the county through the acquisition of Citizens Bank. SB Bank has developed programs for LMI residents in Ventura County similar to the programs offered in Santa Barbara County. SB Bank estimates that since 1996, the bank made 14 business development loans totaling approximately $698,000 to 13 small businesses. Examiners noted that SB Bank made 13 small business loans totaling $1 million in affiliation with this non-profit small business development organization. The two branches without Spanish speaking employees are located in areas with small Hispanic populations. The Board previously has noted that federal banking law addresses branch closings by specifically requiring an insured depository institution to provide notice to the appropriate regulatory agency prior to closing a branch. See section 42 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Act (12 U.S.C. § 1831r-1), as implemented by the Joint Policy Statement Regarding Branch Closing (58 Federal Register 49,083 (1993)). The statute, however, does not authorize the federal regulators to prevent the closing of any branch. Similarly, the BHC Act and the Bank Merger Act do not make approval of a proposal contingent on an applicant's commitment to keep open all branches of the resulting institution. Instead, branch closings resulting from a proposed acquisition are reviewed insofar as they affect the general availability of bank services and offices as one of the several factors the Board considers in assessing the effect of the acquisition on the convenience and needs of the community to be served. See Westamerica Bank , 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin 614 (1997). The commenters are The California Reinvestment Committee, the Santa Clara Valley Citizens for Economic Vitality and the Board of Supervisors of Ventura County. The Board also has received submissions from commenters and SB Bank regarding information provided to the commenters by SB Bank after the close of the comment period. The comments discuss efforts by commenters to resolve issues raised in their timely comments through commitments to increase lending to affordable housing projects, small businesses, community development projects, and to increase other CRA-related activities. Although the Board has indicated in previous orders and in the Agency CRA Statement that communication by depository institutions with community groups provides a valuable method of assessing and determining how best to address the credit needs of the community, the Board concludes that the substance of the comments does not involve matters required to be considered by the Board. Neither the CRA nor the Agency CRA Statement require an insured depository institution to enter into commitments with community representatives. In reviewing an application under the BHC Act and the Bank Merger Act, the CRA and the Agency CRA Statement instead require the Board to focus on the established record of performance of the institutions involved and the programs and policies that the institutions have in place to assist in meeting the credit needs of their entire communities. In this case, the facts of record indicate that SB Bank has programs to help meet the credit needs of its community. Commenters also maintain SB Bank should establish a branch in Piru, California, to serve the unmet banking needs of the LMI residents in this small rural community. As discussed above, the SB Bank Examination found that the bank's branches were readily accessible to all segments of SB Bank's community. Moreover, SB Bank would acquire and keep open a branch of Citizens Bank located in Fillmore, California, which is approximately seven miles from Piru. The record indicates that residents in this area of California regularly drive to work in Valencia and Ventura which are located 10 miles and 33 miles, respectively, from Piru. In this light, Piru residents would continue to have reasonable access to banking services from SB Bank after consummation of the proposal. These data, for example, do not provide a basis for an independent assessment of whether an applicant who was denied credit was, in fact, creditworthy. Credit history problems and excessive debt levels relative to income -- reasons most frequently cited by a credit denial -- are not available from HMDA data. Commenters point out that examiners noted widespread violations of technical provisions of Regulation C and HMDA in the SB Examination. In considering the overall managerial record and convenience and needs factor in this case, the Board has carefully reviewed these violations in light of information regarding the type and scope of the violations, the response of SB Bank to the findings, and additional supervisory information. The Board concludes that SB Bank's response adequately addresses the issues raised by examiners at this time. If future examinations by the Reserve Bank indicate that additional steps are necessary, the Board retains sufficient supervisory authority to require corrective action. Commenters contend that SB Bank's CRA performance rating should have been less than satisfactory in light of certain remarks made by examiners in the SB Examination. Commenters also maintain that the acquisition of Citizens Bank by a bank with a lower CRA performance rating raises concerns about the possible adverse impact the acquisition will have on the community currently served by Citizens Bank. Although the SB Bank Examination noted some areas in which bank could improve its CRA performance, the examiners rated the bank's overall performance as "satisfactory." In addition, SB Bank has initiated measures that satisfactorily respond to the examiners' comments. Moreover, SB Bank's record of CRA performance indicates that the convenience and needs of the communities currently served by Citizens Bank would continue to be served after consummation of the proposal in a manner consistent with the requirements of the BHC Act, the Bank Merger Act, and the CRA. Commenters have requested that the Board hold a public hearing or meeting on this proposal. Section 3(b) of the BHC Act does not require the Board to hold a public hearing on an application unless the appropriate supervisory authority for the bank to be acquired makes a timely written recommendation of denial of the application. In this case, the Board has not received such a recommendation from any state or federal supervisory authority. In addition, neither the Bank Merger Act nor the FRA require a public meeting on an application. Under its rules, the Board also may, in its discretion, hold a public hearing or meeting on an application or notice to clarify factual issues related to the proposal and to provide an opportunity for testimony. See 12 C.F.R. 225.25(a)(2), 262.3(e), and 262.25(d). The Board has carefully considered commenters' requests for a hearing or meeting in light of all the facts of record. In the Board's view, commenters have had ample opportunity to submit views, and have, in fact, provided written submissions that have been considered by the Board in acting on this proposal. The requests fail to demonstrate why these written submissions do not adequately present commenters' allegations. After a careful review of all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that these requests fail to identify any genuine dispute about facts that are material to the Board's decision or any other basis on which a hearing or meeting would be warranted. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that a public hearing or meeting is not necessary to clarify the factual record in the proposal, and is not otherwise warranted in this case. Accordingly, the request for a public hearing or meeting on the proposal is hereby denied. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Phillips, and Meyer.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced modifications to the prudential limits or firewalls that currently apply to bank holding companies engaged in securities underwriting and dealing activities through section 20 subsidiaries. The modifications are effective October 31, l997. The Board is eliminating those restrictions that have proven to be unduly burdensome or unnecessary in light of other laws or regulations, and consolidating the remaining restrictions in a series of eight operating standards. The new operating standards will cover the following areas: Capital requirement for bank holding company and section 20 subsidiary; Internal controls; Interlocks restriction; Customer disclosure; Credit for clearing purposes; Funding of securities purchases from a section 20 affiliate; Reporting requirement; and Application of sections 23A and 23B to foreign banks. The Board has concluded that the narrower set of restrictions will be fully consistent with safety and soundness and should improve operating efficiencies at section 20 subsidiaries and increase options for their customers. The Board's notice is attached. |
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today extended the comment period from September 3, l997, to October 3, l997, on its proposal to apply sections 23A and 23B of the Federal Reserve Act to transactions between a member bank and any subsidiary that engages in activities that are impermissible for the bank itself and that Congress has not previously exempted from coverage by section 23A. The extension is granted to give the public additional time to comment on the proposal. The Board's notice is attached. FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM 12 CFR Part 250 [Miscellaneous Interpretations; Docket R-0977] Applicability of Sections 23A and 23B of the Federal Reserve Act to Transactions Between a Member Bank and its Subsidiaries AGENCY : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. ACTION : Proposed rule; Extension of comment period SUMMARY : On July 3, 1997, the Board requested comment on a proposal to apply sections 23A and 23B to transactions between a member bank and any subsidiary that engages in activities that are impermissible for the bank itself and that Congress has not previously exempted from coverage by section 23A. In response to requests for an extension of the comment period, the Secretary of the Board, acting pursuant to delegated authority, has extended the comment period from September 3, 1997, to October 3, 1997. DATES : Comments must be submitted on or before October 3, 1997 . ADDRESSES : Comments, which refer to Docket No. R-0977, may be mailed to Mr. William W. Wiles, Secretary, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 20th Street and Constitution Avenue, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20551. Comments address to Mr. Wiles also may be delivered to the Board's mail room between 8:45 a.m. and 5:15 p.m. and to the security control room outside of those hours. Both the mail room and the security control room are accessible from the courtyard entrance on 20th Street between Constitution Avenue, and C Street, N.W. Comments may be inspected in Room MP-500 between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. weekdays, except as provided in ï¿½ 261.8 of the Board's Rules Regarding Availability of Information, 12 CFR 261.8. FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT : Gregory Baer, Managing Senior Counsel (202/452-3236), Pamela G. Nardolilli, Senior Attorney (202/452-3289), or Deborah M. Awai, Senior Attorney (202/452-3594), Legal Division or Roger T. Cole, Deputy Associate Director (202/452-2618), Banking Supervision and Regulation or Molly S. Wassom, Assistant Director, Banking Supervision and Regulation (202/452-2305), Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve. For the hearing impaired only , Telecommunications Device of the Deaf (TDD), Diane Jenkins (202/452-3254). SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION : The Board is extending the comment period on the proposed rule regarding the applicability of sections 23A and 23B to certain subsidiaries published on July 15, 1997, at 62 FR 37744 to give the public additional time to comment on the proposal. By order of the Secretary of the Board, acting pursuant to delegated authority for the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August 20, 1997. (signed) William W. Wiles William W. Wiles Secretary of the Board
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced a five-hour extension of the Federal Reserve Banks' automated clearing house (ACH) "regular" billing deposit deadline. ACH operates 24 hours a day. Effective October l, l997, the "regular" processing window will begin at 3:00 a.m. Eastern Time and close at l:00 a.m. rather than 8:00 p.m. The fees assessed to Federal Reserve Bank customers during this "regular" billing period are 0.9 cents per-transaction and a file fee of $1.75 for files of transactions up to 2,500 transactions, and 0.7 cents per-transaction and a file fee of $6.75 for files of transactions over 2,500 transactions. The new "premium" hours will be between l:00 a.m. and 3:00 a.m. Eastern Time, and the transaction surcharge assessed during this period will remain 0.5 cents on each ACH item deposited with the Reserve Banks. The change will reduce fees charged to customers originating ACH transactions by approximately $2.1 million annually. This is the fourth time the Federal Reserve has reduced its ACH fees in the past twelve months. These price reductions reflect the efficiencies the Federal Reserve is realizing from its centralized ACH processing environment.