For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the applications filed by Susquehanna Bancshares, Inc., Lititz, Pennsylvania, to acquire Atcorp, Inc., Marlton, and its subsidiary bank, Equity National Bank, Atco; and Farmers Banc Corp. and its subsidiary bank, Farmers National Bank, both of Mullica Hill, all in New Jersey. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Susquehanna Bancshares, Inc. Lititz, Pennsylvania Order Approving the Acquisition of Bank Holding Companies Susquehanna Bancshares, Inc., Lititz, Pennsylvania ("Susquehanna"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 3 of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1842) to acquire Atcorp, Inc., Marlton, New Jersey ("AI"), and its subsidiary bank, Equity National Bank, Atco, New Jersey ("Equity Bank"); and Farmers Banc Corp. ("FBC") and its subsidiary bank, Farmers National Bank ("Farmers Bank"), both of Mullica Hill, New Jersey. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (61 Federal Register 60,706 (1996)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the proposal and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 3 of the BHC Act. Susquehanna, with total consolidated assets of approximately $3 billion, operates five banks and three savings associations in Pennsylvania and Maryland and engages in certain permissible nonbanking activities. Susquehanna is the 12th largest commercial banking organization in Pennsylvania, controlling approximately $1.3 billion in deposits, representing less than 1 percent of total deposits in commercial banks in the state. AI and FBC are, respectively, the 44th and 64th largest commercial banking organizations in New Jersey, controlling approximately $124 million and $72 million in deposits. The combined deposits of AI and FBC represent less than 1 percent of total deposits in commercial banking organizations in the state. Interstate Analysis Section 3(d) of the BHC Act, as amended by section 101 of the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act of 1994, allows the Board to approve an application by a bank holding company to acquire control of a bank located in a state other than the home state of such bank holding company, if certain conditions are met. For purposes of the BHC Act, Susquehanna's home state is Pennsylvania, and Susquehanna would acquire banks in New Jersey. The conditions for an interstate acquisition under section 3(d) are met in this case. In view of all the facts of record, the Board is permitted to approve the proposal under section 3(d) of the BHC Act. Competitive Considerations The BHC Act prohibits the Board from approving an application if the proposal would result in a monopoly, or would substantially lessen competition in any relevant banking market, unless the Board finds that the anticompetitive effects of the proposal are clearly outweighed in the public interest by the probable effect of the proposal in meeting the convenience and needs of the community. AI and FBC compete directly in the Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, banking market. On consummation of the proposal, Susquehanna would become the 23d largest commercial banking institution in the market, controlling deposits of approximately $195 million, representing less than 1 percent of total deposits in commercial banks or thrift institutions in the market. Based on all the facts of record, including the small increase in market concentration as measured by the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index ("HHI") and the number of competitors that would remain in the market, the Board concludes that the proposal would not have a significantly adverse effect on competition or the concentration of banking resources in the Philadelphia banking market or any other relevant banking market. By order of the Board of Governors, effective February 3, 1997. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes Susquehanna would acquire AI and FBC separately by merging each company with a shell subsidiary corporation of Susquehanna. AI and FBC would be the surviving corporations of these mergers and would become separate subsidiary bank holding companies of Susquehanna. Asset data are as of September 30, 1996. Deposit data are as of June 30, 1995. Pub. L. No. 103-328, 108 Stat. 2338 (1994). A bank holding company's home state is the state in which the operations of the bank holding company's banking subsidiaries were principally conducted on July 1, 1966, or the date on which the company became a bank holding company, whichever is later. See 12 U.S.C. § 1842(d)(1)(A) and (B) and 1842(d)(2)(A) and (B). Susquehanna is adequately capitalized and adequately managed. Equity Bank and Farmers Bank have been in existence and continuously operated for more than five years. In addition, on consummation of the proposal, Susquehanna and its affiliates would control less than 10 percent of the total amount of deposits of insured depository institutions in the United States, and less than 30 percent of the total amount of deposits of insured depository institutions in New Jersey. 12 U.S.C. § 1842(c). The Philadelphia banking market consists of Bucks, Chester, Delaware, Montgomery, and Philadelphia Counties in Pennsylvania; and Burlington, Camden, and Salem Counties, the City of Trenton, and the Mercer County townships of Ewing, Hamilton, and Lawrence in New Jersey. Market share data are based on calculations in which the deposits of thrift institutions are included at 50 percent. The Board previously has indicated that thrift institutions have become, or have the potential to become, significant competitors of commercial banks. See WM Bancorp , 76 Federal Reserve Bulletin 788 (1990); National City Corporation , 70 Federal Reserve Bulletin 743 (1984). Thus, the Board has regularly included thrift deposits in the calculation of market share on a 50-percent weighted basis. See, e.g., First Hawaiian, Inc. , 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 52 (1991). The HHI would remain unchanged at 1390 points after consummation of the proposal. Under the revised Department of Justice Merger Guidelines, 49 Federal Register 26,823 (June 29, 1984), a market in which the post-merger HHI is between 1000 and 1800 is considered to be moderately concentrated. The Justice Department has informed the Board that a bank merger or acquisition generally will not be challenged (in the absence of other factors indicating anticompetitive effects) unless the post-merger HHI is at least 1800 and the merger increases the HHI by more than 200 points. The Justice Department has stated that the higher than normal HHI thresholds for screening bank mergers for anticompetitive effects implicitly recognizes the competitive effect of limited-purpose lenders and other non-depository financial entities. The Committee is chaired by a Susquehanna corporate officer and has as its voting members the CRA officers of each affiliate. Nonvoting members of the Committee include Susquehanna's corporate directors of marketing and compliance, the manager of its CRA/HMDA support unit, and affiliate representatives involved in marketing, lending, and compliance. The Committee meets at least quarterly, and more frequently if necessary. The Committee has implemented a number of programs that support the CRA-related activities of Susquehanna subsidiary banks, including uniform formats for CRA self-assessment, CRA programs, office closing and relocation policies, and fair lending policies. The Committee also has initiated a comprehensive CRA data compilation and analytical software system and has created a CRA review task force to assist subsidiary banks in analyzing their CRA-related activities and preparing for CRA performance examinations. The Statement of the Federal Financial Supervisory Agencies Regarding the Community Reinvestment Act (54 Federal Register 13,742, 13,745 (1989)) provides that a CRA examination is an important and often controlling factor in consideration of an institution's CRA record and that reports of these examinations will be given great weight in the applications process. Susquehanna states that Spanish language mortgage loan documents also are available. During 1996, the bank made 33 loans for $1.8 million in the aggregate under this program. Since the 1994 Examination, Farmers First also has invested in a limited partnership that developed The Wagon Werks, a renovated building in Columbia, Pennsylvania, that provides housing for low-income senior citizens. As of December 31, 1996, the bank had approximately $500,000 invested in its housing-related limited partnerships. Susquehanna Bank also offers two basic checking account plans that require no minimum balance and charge low fees. At the time of the 1994 Examination, Susquehanna Bank had 2,649 such accounts, which were generally held by low-income and retired customers. As of December 31, 1996, the bank had 2,983 such accounts with an average balance of $575 per account. HMDA data for Equity Bank and Farmers Bank indicate that those banks also have higher origination rates for applicants in LMI census tracts and minority applicants than those of other lenders in the market in the aggregate. Protestant requests that the Board withhold approval of the proposal until Susquehanna develops a more appropriate plan for the New Jersey communities to be served. The Board is required under applicable law and its regulations to act on applications under the BHC Act within specified time periods. The Board notes, moreover, that Protestant's comments on Susquehanna's anticipated CRA-related activities after consummation of the proposal have been carefully considered in light of all the facts of record, including Susquehanna's preliminary plans for the institutions to be acquired, its CRA-related policies and programs, and its record of ascertaining and meeting the credit needs of its service communities. Based on this review, and for the reasons discussed above, the Board concludes that the record is sufficient for the Board to act on the proposal at this time, and that delay or denial of the proposal is not warranted. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Phillips, and Meyer. Absent and not voting: Governors Lindsey and Yellen.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice by HSBC Holdings PLC, London, United Kingdom, HSBC Holdings BV, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, and HSBC Americas, Inc., Buffalo, New York ("HSAI"), to acquire CTUS, Inc., Wilmington, Delaware, and its wholly owned subsidiary, First Federal Savings and Loan of Rochester, Rochester, New York ("First Federal"); the application by Marine Midland Bank, Buffalo, New York, a wholly owned subsidiary of HSAI, to merge First Federal with and into Marine Midland Bank; and the application by Marine Midland Bank to establish branches. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today the issuance of its Final Decision and Final Order of Prohibition and Assessment of Civil Money Penalty in the matter of Ghaith R. Pharaon, a former BCCI insider. The Board assessed a $37 million fine against Pharaon, and permanently barred him from the U.S. banking industry due to his illegal activities. The Board's final decision adopted the recommended decision of the administrative law judge who presided at a nineteen-day administrative hearing conducted in 1995 by attorneys from the Board and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. The Board found that Pharaon acted illegally as a secret nominee for BCCI when he acquired the Independence Bank of Encino, California in 1985. The Independence Bank of Encino failed in January 1992. Pharaon, who is a resident of Saudi Arabia, is the subject of criminal indictments issued by the U.S. Department of Justice and the New York County District Attorney. He participated in the Board's administrative hearing through his counsel but has not returned to the United States to personally contest federal and state criminal charges. Pharaon has the right to appeal the Board's final decision in a federal appellate court. A copy of the Board's final decision, with the accompanying order, is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the execution of a Written Agreement between the Cuyamaca Bank, Santee, California, and the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. A copy of the written agreement is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the execution of a written agreement between OmniBanc Corporation, River Rouge, Michigan, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago. The Federal Reserve Board also announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between OmniBank, a subsidiary of OmniBanc Corporation, the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, and the Michigan Financial Institution Bureau. Copies of the written agreements are attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice by The Bank of New York Company, Inc., New York, New York, to engage through BNY Capital Markets, Inc., New York, New York, in underwriting and dealing in all types of debt and equity securities on a limited basis. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. The Bank of New York Company, Inc. New York, New York Order Approving a Notice to Engage in Underwriting and Dealing in All Types of Debt and Equity Securities on a Limited Basis The Bank of New York Company, Inc., New York, New York ("Bank of New York"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8)) and section 225.23 of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.23) to expand the activities of its section 20 subsidiary, BNY Capital Markets, Inc., New York, New York ("Company"), to include underwriting and dealing in, to a limited extent, all types of debt and equity securities except ownership interests in open-end investment companies. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (62 Federal Register 1118 (1997)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the notice and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Bank of New York, with total consolidated assets of approximately $52.4 billion, is the 16th largest banking organization in the United States. Bank of New York's two subsidiary banks operate in New York, Delaware, New Jersey, and Connecticut. Company currently engages in limited underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities as permitted under section 20 of the Glass-Steagall Act (12 U.S.C. § 377). Company is, and will continue to be, a broker-dealer registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. § 78a et seq. ) and is a member of the National Association of Securities Dealers, Inc. ("NASD"). Company, therefore, is subject to the record-keeping and reporting obligations, fiduciary standards, and other requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the SEC, and the NASD. The Board previously has determined that, subject to the prudential framework of limitations established in previous decisions to address the potential for conflicts of interests, unsound banking practices, or other adverse effects ("section 20 firewalls"), the proposed activities of underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities are so closely related to banking as to be proper incidents thereto within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Bank of New York has committed that Company will conduct the proposed underwriting and dealing activities using the same methods and procedures, and subject to the same prudential limitations as those established by the Board in the Section 20 Orders and other cases. The Board also has determined that the conduct of these securities underwriting and dealing activities is consistent with section 20 of the Glass-Steagall Act (12 U.S.C. § 377), provided that the company engages in only limited underwriting and dealing activities. Effective March 6, 1997, the Board increased from 10 percent to 25 percent the amount of total revenue that a section 20 subsidiary may derive from underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities. Bank of New York has committed that Company will conduct its underwriting and dealing activities in bank-ineligible securities subject to the Board's revenue test. Under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act, the Board considers the financial and managerial resources of the notificant and its subsidiaries and the effect of the transaction on such resources. The Board has reviewed the capitalization of Bank of New York and Company in accordance with the standards set forth in the Section 20 Orders and finds the capitalization of each to be consistent with approval. With respect to Company, this determination is based on all the facts of record, including Bank of New York's projections of the volume of Company's underwriting and dealing activities in bank-ineligible securities. On the basis of all the facts of record, including the foregoing, the Board has concluded that financial and managerial considerations are consistent with approval of this notice. In order to approve this proposal, the Board also must find that the performance of the proposed activities by Bank of New York can reasonably be expected to produce benefits that would outweigh possible adverse effects under the proper incident to banking standard of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Based on the facts of record in the notice and the framework established in prior decisions, consummation of this proposal is not likely to result in any significantly adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices. The Board expects that consummation of the proposal would provide added convenience to Bank of New York's customers and would increase the level of competition among existing providers of these services. Accordingly, the Board has determined that the performance of the proposed activities by Bank of New York can reasonably be expected to produce public benefits that outweigh possible adverse effects under the proper incident to banking standard of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. For the reasons set forth in this order and in the Section 20 Orders, the Board has concluded that Bank of New York's proposal to engage through Company in the proposed activities is consistent with the Glass-Steagall Act, and that the proposed activities are so closely related to banking as to be proper incidents thereto within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act, provided that Bank of New York limits the activities of Company as specified in this order and the Section 20 Orders, as modified by the Modification Orders. On the basis of the record, the Board has determined to, and hereby does, approve this notice subject to all the terms and conditions discussed in this order and in the Section 20 Orders, as modified by the Modification Orders. The Board's approval of this proposal extends only to activities conducted within the limitations of those orders and this order, including the Board's reservation of authority to establish additional limitations to ensure that Company's activities are consistent with safety and soundness, avoidance of conflicts of interests, and other relevant considerations under the BHC Act. Underwriting and dealing in any manner other than as approved in this order and the Section 20 Orders (as modified by the Modification Orders) is not authorized for Company. Included among the conditions set forth in the Section 20 Orders is a condition that Company may not commence the proposed underwriting and dealing activities until the Board has determined that Bank of New York and Company have established policies and procedures to ensure compliance with the section 20 firewalls and the other requirements of this order and the Section 20 Orders, including computer, audit, and accounting systems, internal risk management controls, and the necessary operational and managerial infrastructure for underwriting and dealing in all types of debt and equity securities. On the basis of a recent review by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York ("Reserve Bank") and all the facts of record, the Board has determined that Bank of New York and Company have in place the managerial and operational infrastructure and other policies and procedures necessary to comply with the requirements of this order and the Section 20 Orders. Accordingly, Company may commence underwriting and dealing in all types of debt and equity securities as permitted by, and subject to the other conditions of, this order and the Section 20 Orders. The Board's determination also is subject to all the terms and conditions set forth in Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.23(g) (12 C.F.R. 225.7 and 225.23(g)), and to the Board's authority to require modification or termination of the activities of a bank holding company or any of its subsidiaries the Board finds necessary to assure compliance with, or to prevent evasion of, the provisions and purposes of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders issued thereunder. The Board's decision is specifically conditioned on compliance with all the commitments made in connection with this notice, including the commitments discussed in this order and the conditions set forth in the Board regulations and orders noted above. The commitments and conditions shall be deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision, and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. This proposal shall not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or the Reserve Bank, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective February 12, 1997. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes Asset and ranking data are as of September 30, 1996. As used in this order, "bank-ineligible securities" refers to all types of debt and equity securities that a bank may not underwrite or deal in directly under section 16 of the Glass-Steagall Act (12 U.S.C. § 24(7)). Company has authority to underwrite and deal in, to a limited extent, certain municipal revenue bonds, 1-4 family mortgage-related securities, commercial paper, and consumer-receivable-related securities. See Bank of New York Company, Inc. , 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 748 (1996). Company also is authorized to engage in a variety of other nonbanking activities. See Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce , 76 Federal Reserve Bulletin 158 (1990); J.P. Morgan & Co. Incorporated, et al. , 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 192 (1989), aff'd sub nom. Securities Industries Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System , 900 F.2d 360 (D.C. Cir. 1990); Citicorp, et al. , 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 473 (1987), aff'd sub nom. Securities Industry Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System , 839 F.2d 47 (2d Cir. 1988), cert. denied , 486 U.S. 1059 (1988) (collectively, "Section 20 Orders"). See Section 20 Orders. Compliance with the revenue limitation shall be calculated in accordance with the method stated in the Section 20 Orders, as modified by the Order Approving Modifications to the Section 20 Orders , 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 751 (1989) and 10 Percent Revenue Limit on Bank-Ineligible Activities of Subsidiaries of Bank Holding Companies Engaged in Underwriting and Dealing in Securities , 61 Federal Register 48,953 (1996) (collectively, "Modification Orders"). Revenue Limit on Bank-Ineligible Activities of Subsidiaries of Bank Holding Companies Engaged in Underwriting and Dealing in Securities , 61 Federal Register 68,750 (1996). Company also may engage in activities that are necessary incidents to the proposed underwriting and dealing activities. Unless Company receives specific approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act to conduct the activities independently, any revenues from the incidental activities must be counted as ineligible revenues subject to the Board's revenue limitation. See 12 C.F.R. 225.24. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Phillips, and Yellen. Absent and not voting: Governor Meyer.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the joint issuance with the New York State Banking Department of a Cease and Desist Order against the Asahi Bank, Ltd., Tokyo, Japan, and the Asahi Bank, Ltd. branch in New York. The Board also issued an Order of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty of $5 million against the bank and branch. Both orders were issued for misconduct by certain officers of the New York branch relating to the alleged misuse of confidential supervisory information, to the making of false statements to bank supervisory officials, and to the alleged obstruction of a formal investigation by bank supervisory officials. The Asahi Bank and branch did not admit to any allegations made against them in connection with the issuance of the orders. Copies of the orders are attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notices by The Toronto-Dominion Bank, Toronto, Canada, and its wholly owned subsidiary, Waterhouse Investor Services, Inc., New York, New York, to acquire 50 percent of the voting shares of Marketware International, Inc., Holmdel, New Jersey, and thereby develop and sell computer software that would allow brokerage customers to purchase and sell securities over the Internet by means of personal computers. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. The Toronto-Dominion Bank Toronto, Canada Waterhouse Investor Services, Inc. New York, New York Order Approving Notices to Engage in Certain Data Processing Activities The Toronto-Dominion Bank, Toronto, Canada ("TDB"), and its wholly owned subsidiary, Waterhouse Investor Services, Inc., New York, New York ("Waterhouse"), bank holding companies within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), have requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8)) and section 225.23(a) of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.23(a)) to acquire 50 percent of the voting shares of Marketware International, Inc., Holmdel, New Jersey ("Company"), and thereby engage in certain data processing activities pursuant to section 225.25(b)(7) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.25(b)(7)). Company proposes to develop and sell computer software that would allow brokerage customers to purchase and sell securities over the Internet by means of personal computers. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (62 Federal Register 1118 and 3900 (1997)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the proposal and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. TDB, with total consolidated assets of $93.5 billion, is the fifth largest commercial bank in Canada. In the United States, TDB operates a branch in New York, New York; an agency in Houston, Texas; representative offices in New York, New York, and Chicago, Illinois; and, through Waterhouse, a bank in White Plains, New York. TDB engages through its subsidiaries in a broad range of permissible nonbanking activities in the United States, including underwriting and dealing in debt and equity securities to a limited extent. TDB also engages through Waterhouse's subsidiary, Waterhouse Securities, Inc., New York, New York ("WSI"), in providing discount brokerage services pursuant to section 225.25(b)(15) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.25(b)(15)). Company proposes to develop, market, and sell computer software to WSI and other broker-dealers and financial institutions that would permit customers of those entities to purchase and sell securities over the Internet using personal computers. Company's software would be maintained on a host computer operated by a broker or the broker's service provider and would be available for use by customers after accessing the Internet through an unaffiliated Internet service provider. The software would enable customers to initiate transactions and to obtain information concerning their securities brokerage accounts. Company also would provide software maintenance and product support. The proposed activities appear to be the type of data processing and transmission activities that are permissible for bank holding companies under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act and section 225.25(b)(7) of Regulation Y. The Board previously has determined by regulation that providing data processing and data transmission services, facilities (including hardware and software), data bases or access to such operations by any technological means is closely related to banking and, therefore, permissible for bank holding companies under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act if the data involved in the proposed activity are financial, banking, or economic in nature. The Board also has approved the development and sale by bank holding companies of software designed to permit customers to conduct basic banking transactions and personal financial management on their personal computers, and software designed to process and transmit financial, banking or economic data from the customer to a financial institution over the Internet. Based on the foregoing and all other facts of record, the Board has concluded that the activities proposed by Company are closely related to banking within the meaning of the BHC Act and constitute permissible data processing and transmission services under Regulation Y. In order to approve the proposal, the Board also must determine that the proposed activities are a proper incident to banking; that is, that the proposal "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public, such as greater convenience, increased competition, or gains in efficiency, that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices." As part of its review of these factors, the Board has considered the financial and managerial resources of TDB, Waterhouse, and Company, and the effect the proposal would have on such resources. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that financial and managerial considerations are consistent with approval of the proposal. The Board expects that the proposed activities would result in benefits to consumers, broker-dealers, and financial institutions. Company's software would enable securities brokerage customers to initiate transactions and communicate with their brokers using personal computers during business and non-business hours. The software would provide broker-dealers and financial institutions with additional means of making their securities brokerage services available to the public and, thereby, could produce additional sources of transaction volume and resulting fee income. Company's entry into this market also would increase the level of competition among existing providers of these software products. In addition, there is no evidence in the record that consummation of the proposal would produce any significant adverse effects, such as decreased or unfair competition, undue concentration of resources, or conflicts of interests. The Board previously has considered the risks presented when banking services are made available over the Internet and noted that the nature of these risks is not different from those associated with more traditional banking operations. The purchase and sale of securities over the Internet presents similar risks, and Company's proposed software uses various security measures, including cryptography and a user identification system, to attempt to maintain the privacy of transactions and to protect the underlying data. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the balance of the public interest factors it is required to consider under the proper incident to banking standard of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act is favorable, and consistent with approval of the proposal. Based on the foregoing and all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the proposal should be, and hereby is, approved. Approval of the proposal is specifically conditioned on compliance by TDB, Waterhouse, and Company with all the commitments made in connection with the proposal and with the conditions referred to in this order. The Board's determination also is subject to all the conditions set forth in Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.23(g) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.7 and 225.23(g)), and to the Board's authority to require such modification or termination of the activities of a bank holding company or any of its subsidiaries as the Board finds necessary to ensure compliance with, and to prevent evasion of, the provisions of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders issued thereunder. For purposes of this action, these commitments and conditions shall be deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision, and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. This transaction shall not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective February 18, 1997. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes The remaining 50 percent of Company would be owned by two individuals, each controlling 25 percent. Asset data are as of October 31, 1996, and are based on the exchange rate between Canadian and U.S. dollars applicable on that date. For purposes of this order, "financial institution" means a bank, bank holding company, thrift institution, thrift holding company, and subsidiaries of these companies. Company's software systems would perform two functions: (a) permit retail customers to have computer access to their securities brokerage accounts, and (b) allow broker-dealers and financial institutions to integrate customer-generated electronic brokerage transactions with their back-office operations. TDB indicates that software maintenance and product support encompass: (1) enhancements to the computer software and other routine modifications related to application problems identified by Company's broker-dealer and financial institution client base; and (2) support provided to Company's client base to resolve problems encountered in software development and implementation. See 12 C.F.R. 225.25(b)(7). The Royal Bank of Canada , 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 363 (1996). See Cardinal Bancshares, Inc. , 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 674 (1996) (" Cardinal Order "). See also Citicorp , 72 Federal Reserve Bulletin 497 (1986) (stating that processing services involving on-line transactions and quotation data for financial instruments such as stocks, bonds and mutual funds are closely related to banking). See 12 C.F.R. 225.25(b)(7). TDB and Waterhouse have committed that Company will provide the proposed services in accordance with the limitations established in Regulation Y. 12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8). See 12 C.F.R. 225.24. See also The Fuji Bank, Limited , 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 94 (1989); and Bayerische Vereinsbank, AG , 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 155 (1987). See Cardinal Order , 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin at 676. In the Cardinal Order , the Board recommended that banking organizations considering whether to provide services over the Internet analyze carefully the associated risks, and evaluate carefully whether those risks were consistent with their policies relating to the security of customer information and other data. Similarly, the Board expects organizations considering whether to use Company's software to conduct a careful analysis of the risks presented in order to mitigate the possibility that such activities would result in unsound banking or financial practices. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Phillips, and Meyer.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice by Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, Toronto, Canada, to trade for its own account, for purposes other than hedging, in futures, options, and options on futures contracts based on securities indices and money market instruments. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce Toronto, Canada Order Approving a Notice to Engage in Certain Nonbanking Activities Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, Toronto, Canada ("Canadian Imperial"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8)) and section 225.23 of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.23) to engage de novo through its wholly owned subsidiary, CIBC Investment Corporation, New York, New York ("Company"), in trading for its own account, for purposes other than hedging, in futures, options, and options on futures contracts based on securities indices and money market instruments. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (62 Federal Register 1889 (1997)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the notice and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Canadian Imperial, with total consolidated assets of approximately $147.4 billion, is the second largest banking organization in Canada. In the United States, Canadian Imperial operates a branch in Chicago, Illinois; agencies in New York, New York, Los Angeles and San Francisco, California, and Atlanta, Georgia; and a representative office in Houston, Texas. Canadian Imperial also engages through its subsidiary, Wood Gundy Securities Corporation, New York, New York, in a broad range of permissible nonbanking activities in the United States, including underwriting and dealing in, to a limited extent, debt and equity securities that are not eligible to be underwritten by a member bank ("bank-ineligible securities"). Canadian Imperial proposes that Company trade for its own account, for purposes other than hedging, in options, options on futures, and futures on certain securities indices and money market instruments ("derivative contracts"). Canadian Imperial has stated that Company will not underwrite any securities, act as a dealer in any securities (including acting as a market-maker, specialist, or registered options trader on any exchange), purchase or sell securities on behalf of customers, or otherwise hold itself out to the public as being willing to buy and sell securities as principal. Company will execute its trades through affiliated or unaffiliated broker-dealers and futures commission merchants ("FCMs"). The Board previously has determined that the proposed trading activities are closely related to banking within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. In order to approve this notice, the Board also must consider whether the performance of the proposed activities is a proper incident to banking, that is, whether the activities proposed "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public . . . that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices." As part of its evaluation of these factors, the Board considers the financial condition and managerial resources of the notificant and its subsidiaries and the effect the transaction would have on such resources. Based on all the facts of record, including relevant reports of examination, the Board has concluded that financial and managerial considerations are consistent with approval of the proposal. In reviewing the proposal under the proper incident to banking standard, the Board also has considered Company's proposed risk management policies and procedures. The Board notes that Canadian Imperial has substantial experience in trading derivative contracts based on securities and securities indices. The Board also notes that Company, as a registered broker-dealer, must comply with the SEC's net capital rules. Canadian Imperial has committed that Company would conduct its proposed trading activities pursuant to the risk management policies and procedures that the Board has relied on in other cases to address the credit, market, and operational risks arising out of similar derivative contracts transactions. The Board has carefully reviewed these policies, procedures, systems, and controls. On the basis of this review, and all of the facts of record, the Board believes that Company's risk management policies, procedures, systems, and controls include the principal components of an effective system capable of monitoring and controlling the risks inherent in the proposed activities. There is no evidence in the record to indicate that Canadian Imperial's proposal would result in any undue concentration of resources or decreased or unfair competition. In addition, the Board believes that Company's conduct of the proposed trading activities could lead to greater market efficiency and increased liquidity for the derivative contracts that Company proposes to trade. Accordingly, the Board has concluded that the balance of the public interest factors it is required to consider under the proper incident to banking standard of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act is favorable and consistent with approval of this notice. Based on the foregoing, and in light of all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the notice should be, and hereby is, approved. Approval of this notice is specifically conditioned on compliance by Canadian Imperial with all the commitments made in connection with the proposal and with the conditions stated or referred to in this order. The Board's determination also is subject to all the terms and conditions set forth in Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.23(g) (12 C.F.R. 225.7 and 225.23(g)), and to the Board's authority to require modification or termination of the activities of a bank holding company or any of its subsidiaries as the Board finds necessary to assure compliance with, and to prevent evasion of, the provisions of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders issued thereunder. In approving the proposal, the Board has relied on all the facts of record and all the representations and commitments made by Canadian Imperial. These commitments and conditions shall be deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decisions, and may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. This transaction shall not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good .cause by the Board or the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective February 18, 1997. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes Asset data are as of October 31, 1996, and are based on the exchange rate applicable on that date. Ranking data are as of December 31, 1995. Certain of the derivative contracts that Company would trade are bank-ineligible securities for purposes of section 20 of the Glass-Steagall Act. See Swiss Bank Corporation , 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 685, 687 n.8 (1996). Canadian Imperial has stated that Company will be registered as a broker-dealer with the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. § 78a et seq .) and will be a member of the National Association of Securities Dealers, Inc. ("NASD"). Company will, therefore, be subject to the recordkeeping and reporting obligations and other requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the SEC, and the NASD. See Swiss Bank Corporation , 81 Federal Reserve Bulletin 185 (1995) (" Swiss Bank Order "); see also Swiss Bank Corporation , 76 Federal Reserve Bulletin 759 (1991). The Board has proposed adding the trading activities proposed by Canadian Imperial to the list of permissible activities in Regulation Y. Specifically, the Board has proposed to permit bank holding companies to trade and invest in futures, options, and similar contracts based on financial or nonfinancial assets, or an index or group of such assets -- provided a state member bank is authorized to invest in the asset underlying the contract; the contract requires cash settlement; or the contract allows assignment, offset or termination prior to delivery. See 61 Federal Register 47,242, 47,254, 47,275 (1996). 12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8). See 12 C.F.R. 225.24; see also The Fuji Bank, Limited , 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 94 (1989); Bayerische Vereinsbank AG , 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 155 (1987). See 12 C.F.R. 240.15c3-1. See Swiss Bank Order at 195 & n.57; Long-Term Credit Bank of Japan, Limited , 79 Federal Reserve Bulletin 345 (1993). Because Company would not engage in investment advisory, brokerage, and other customer activities, Company would avoid the potential for conflicts of interest in conducting the proposed trading activity. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Phillips, and Meyer.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced revisions to Regulation Y that are intended to improve the competitiveness of bank holding companies by eliminating unnecessary regulatory burden and operating restrictions, and by streamlining the application and notice process. The revisions are effective April 21, 1997 . The revisions include: a streamlined and expedited review process for bank and nonbanking proposals by well-run bank holding companies; reorganizing and expanding the regulatory list of nonbanking activities and removing a number of restrictions on those activities that are outmoded, have been superseded by Board order or are unnecessary restrictions that would not apply to insured banks that conduct the same activity; amendments to the tying restrictions, including removal of the regulatory extensions of those restrictions to bank holding companies and their nonbank subsidiaries; and other changes to eliminate unnecessary regulatory burden and to streamline and modernize Regulation Y, including changes to the provisions implementing the Change in Bank Control Act and section 914 of the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989. This final rule reflects a number of revisions in response to concerns, suggestions, and information provided by commenters. In particular, the Board has changed in several respects the streamlined procedure governing bank acquisitions and has adopted a number of measures designed to broaden and improve public notice of acquisition proposals. These changes focus on assuring that interested persons will have a meaningful opportunity to provide the Board with information regarding acquisition proposals. The Board's notice is attached. |
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application of Bank of Taiwan to retain its 12.84 percent interest in First Commercial Bank, both of Taipei, Taiwan, and thereby indirectly acquire more than 5 percent of the voting shares of FCB Taiwan California Bank, Alhambra, California. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Bank of Taiwan Taipei, Taiwan Order Approving Retention of Shares of a Bank Holding Company and Acquisition of Shares of a Bank Bank of Taiwan, Taipei, Taiwan ("BOT"), a foreign bank subject to the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 3 of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1842) to retain its ownership of 12.84 percent of the voting shares of First Commercial Bank, Taipei, Taiwan ("FCB"), and to thereby indirectly acquire more than 5 percent of the voting shares of FCB Taiwan California Bank, Alhambra, California ("Bank"), a de novo state-chartered bank. FCB separately has requested the Board's approval under section 3 of the BHC Act to acquire all the voting shares of Bank and thereby become a bank holding company. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (61 Federal Register 7,791 (1996)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the application and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 3 of the BHC Act. BOT, with total consolidated assets equivalent to $59.2 billion, is the largest commercial bank in Taiwan. BOT operates a branch in Los Angeles, California, and an agency in New York, New York. Taiwan owns all the voting shares of BOT. As noted above, BOT has filed this application in connection with FCB's proposal to establish Bank as a de novo state-chartered bank. Accordingly, the Board concludes that consummation of this proposal would not have a significantly adverse effect on competition or the concentration of banking resources in any relevant banking market. In addition, based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that convenience and needs considerations are consistent with approval of the proposal. Financial, Managerial, and Other Supervisory Considerations Under section 3 of the BHC Act, as amended by the Foreign Bank Supervision Enhancement Act of 1991, the Board may not approve an application involving a foreign bank unless the bank is "subject to comprehensive supervision or regulation on a consolidated basis by the appropriate authorities in the bank's home country." The Board previously has determined, in connection with an application by BOT under the International Banking Act (12 U.S.C. § 3101 et seq .) ("IBA"), that BOT was subject to comprehensive supervision on a consolidated basis by its home country authorities. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the requirements of section 3(c)(3)(B) of the BHC Act regarding comprehensive supervision and regulation on a consolidated basis are met in this case. The BHC Act also requires the Board to determine that the foreign bank has provided adequate assurances that it will make available to the Board such information on its operations and activities and those of its affiliates that the Board deems appropriate to determine and enforce compliance with the BHC Act and the IBA. The Board has reviewed restrictions on disclosure in jurisdictions where BOT has material operations and has communicated with relevant authorities concerning access to information. BOT has committed that, to the extent not prohibited by applicable law, it will make available to the Board such information on the operations of BOT and any of its affiliates that the Board deems necessary to determine and enforce compliance with the BHC Act, the IBA, and other applicable federal law. BOT also has committed to cooperate with the Board to obtain any waivers or exemptions that may be necessary in order to enable BOT to make any such information available to the Board. In light of these commitments and other facts of record, the Board has concluded that BOT has provided adequate assurances of access to any appropriate information that the Board may request. For these reasons, based on all the facts of record, and subject to the conditions noted below, the Board has concluded that the supervisory factors it is required to consider under section 3(c) of the BHC Act are consistent with approval. The Board also must consider the financial and managerial resources of a foreign bank that files an application under section 3 of the BHC Act. BOT must comply with minimum capital standards that conform to the Basle Capital Accord, as implemented by Taiwan. BOT's capital exceeds the minimum standards and is equivalent to the capital that would be required of a United States banking organization. Based on these and other facts of record, including confidential examination and supervisory information, the Board concludes that financial and managerial factors are consistent with approval, as are all other supervisory factors the Board must consider under section 3 of the BHC Act. Based on the foregoing and all other facts of record, including the commitments provided by BOT, the Board has determined that the application should be, and hereby is, approved. Should any restrictions on access to information on the operations or activities of BOT or any of its affiliates subsequently interfere with the Board's ability to determine the compliance by BOT or its affiliates with applicable federal statutes, the Board may require termination of any of BOT's or its affiliates' direct or indirect activities in the United States. The commitments and conditions relied on by the Board in reaching this decision, including the commitments discussed in this order, shall be deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decisions, and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. This transaction shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day following the effective date of this order, or later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective February 24, 1997. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes See First Commercial Bank , 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin __ (1997) (Order dated February 24, 1997). Asset data are as of June 30, 1996, and reflect the exchange rate then in effect. Ranking data are as of December 31, 1995. Pub. L. No. 102-242, § 201 et seq ., 105 Stat. 2286 (1991). 12 U.S.C. § 1842(c)(3)(B). As provided in Regulation Y, the Board determines whether a foreign bank is subject to consolidated home country supervision under the standards set forth in Regulation K. See 12 C.F.R. 225.13(b)(5). Regulation K provides that a foreign bank may be considered subject to consolidated supervision if the Board determines that the bank is supervised or regulated in such a manner that its home country supervisor receives sufficient information on the worldwide operations of the foreign bank, including the relationship of the bank and its affiliates, to assess the foreign bank's overall financial condition and compliance with law and regulation. See 12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)(1)(ii). See Bank of Taiwan , 79 Federal Reserve Bulletin 541 (1993). Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Phillips, and Meyer.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application of First Commercial Bank, Taipei, Taiwan, to acquire all the voting shares of FCB Taiwan California Bank, Alhambra, California, and thereby become a bank holding company. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. First Commercial Bank Taipei, Taiwan Order Approving the Formation of a Bank Holding Company First Commercial Bank, Taipei, Taiwan ("FCB"), a foreign bank subject to the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 3 of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1842) to become a bank holding company by acquiring all the voting shares of FCB Taiwan California Bank, Alhambra, California ("Bank"), a de novo state-chartered bank. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (60 Federal Register 45,485 (1995)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the application and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 3 of the BHC Act. FCB, with total consolidated assets equivalent to $33 billion, is the fourth largest commercial bank in Taiwan. FCB operates a branch in Los Angeles, California, and an agency in New York, New York. Taiwan directly and indirectly owns or controls approximately 71 percent of the voting shares of FCB. FCB proposes to establish Bank as a de novo state-chartered bank. Accordingly, the Board concludes that consummation of this proposal would not have a significantly adverse effect on competition or the concentration of banking resources in any relevant banking market. In addition, based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that convenience and needs considerations are consistent with approval of the proposal. Financial, Managerial, and Other Supervisory Considerations Under section 3 of the BHC Act, as amended by the Foreign Bank Supervision Enhancement Act of 1991, the Board may not approve an application involving a foreign bank unless the bank is "subject to comprehensive supervision or regulation on a consolidated basis by the appropriate authorities in the bank's home country." The Board previously has determined, in applications under the International Banking Act (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 3101 et seq .) ("IBA"), that certain Taiwan banks were subject to comprehensive supervision on a consolidated basis by their home country authorities. In this case, the Board has determined that FCB is supervised on substantially the same terms and conditions as those other Taiwan banks. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that FCB is subject to comprehensive supervision and regulation on a consolidated basis by its home country supervisors. The BHC Act also requires the Board to determine that the foreign bank has provided adequate assurances that it will make available to the Board such information on its operations and activities and those of its affiliates that the Board deems appropriate to determine and enforce compliance with the BHC Act and the IBA. The Board has reviewed restrictions on disclosure in jurisdictions where FCB has material operations and has communicated with relevant authorities concerning access to information. FCB has committed that, to the extent not prohibited by applicable law, it will make available to the Board such information on the operations of FCB and any of its affiliates that the Board deems necessary to determine and enforce compliance with the BHC Act, the IBA, and other applicable federal law. FCB also has committed to cooperate with the Board to obtain any waivers or exemptions that may be necessary in order to enable FCB to make any such information available to the Board. In light of these commitments and other facts of record, the Board has concluded that FCB has provided adequate assurances of access to any appropriate information that the Board may request. For these reasons, based on all the facts of record, and subject to the conditions noted below, the Board has concluded that the supervisory factors it is required to consider under section 3(c) of the BHC Act are consistent with approval. The Board also must consider the financial and managerial resources of a foreign bank that files an application under section 3 of the BHC Act. FCB must comply with minimum capital standards that conform to the Basle Capital Accord, as implemented by Taiwan. FCB's capital exceeds the minimum standards and is equivalent to the capital that would be required of a United States banking organization. Based on these and other facts of record, including confidential examination and supervisory information, the Board concludes that financial and managerial factors are consistent with approval, as are all other supervisory factors the Board must consider under section 3 of the BHC Act. Based on the foregoing and all other facts of record, including the commitments provided by FCB, the Board has determined that the application should be, and hereby is, approved. Should any restrictions on access to information on the operations or activities of FCB or any of its affiliates subsequently interfere with the Board's ability to determine the compliance by FCB or its affiliates with applicable federal statutes, the Board may require termination of any of FCB's or its affiliates' direct or indirect activities in the United States. The commitments and conditions relied on by the Board in reaching this decision, including the commitments discussed in this order, shall be deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decisions, and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. This transaction shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day following the effective date of this order, or later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective February 24, 1997. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes Bank of Taiwan, Taipei, Taiwan ("BOT"), controls 12.84 percent of the voting shares of FCB. BOT operates a branch in Los Angeles, California, and an agency in New York, New York, and is subject to the BHC Act in the same manner and to the same extent as a bank holding company. See 12 U.S.C. § 3106(a). Accordingly, BOT also has requested the Board's approval to acquire more than 5 percent of the voting shares of a bank holding company and a bank upon consummation of the proposal. See Bank of Taiwan , 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin __ (1997) (Order dated February 24, 1997). Asset data are as of June 30, 1996, and reflect the exchange rate then in effect. Ranking data are as of December 31, 1995. The Taiwan authorities directly own 51 percent of FCB's shares and control another 20 percent of the bank's shares through other banks that are controlled by Taiwan. The California State Banking Department and the Federal Deposit Insurance Company have approved Bank's applications for a charter and federal deposit insurance, respectively. Pub. L. No. 102-242, § 201 et seq. , 105 Stat. 2286 (1991) 12 U.S.C. § 1842(c)(3)(B). As provided in Regulation Y, the Board determines whether a foreign bank is subject to consolidated home country supervision under the standards set forth in Regulation K. See 12 C.F.R. 225.13(b)(5). Regulation K provides that a foreign bank may be considered subject to consolidated supervision if the Board determines that the bank is supervised or regulated in such a manner that its home country supervisor receives sufficient information on the worldwide operations of the foreign bank, including the relationship of the bank and its affiliates, to assess the foreign bank's overall financial condition and compliance with law and regulation. See 12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)(1)(ii). See Taiwan Business Bank , 81 Federal Reserve Bulletin 746 (1995); The Farmers Bank of China , 81 Federal Reserve Bulletin 620 (1995); Chiao Tung Bank , 79 Federal Reserve Bulletin 543 (1993); Bank of Taiwan , 79 Federal Reserve Bulletin 541 (1993); United World Chinese Commercial Bank , 79 Federal Reserve Bulletin 146 (1993); and Taipei Bank , 79 Federal Reserve Bulletin 143 (1993). Because Taiwan will control Bank, transactions between Bank and other companies controlled by Taiwan will be subject to section 23A and section 23B of the Federal Reserve Act. 12 U.S.C. § 371c, 371c-1. FCB and Bank have committed that Bank will adopt and maintain appropriate internal control procedures and operational safeguards to assure that all transactions with, or for the benefit of, an affiliate are in compliance with the requirements of sections 23A and 23B of the Federal Reserve Act. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Phillips, and Meyer.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today its approval of the application of Land Bank of Taiwan, Taipei, Taiwan, to establish a branch office in Los Angeles, California. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Land Bank of Taiwan Taipei, Taiwan Order Approving Establishment of a Branch Land Bank of Taiwan ("Bank"), Taipei, Taiwan, a foreign bank within the meaning of the International Banking Act ("IBA"), has applied under section 7(d) of the IBA (12 U.S.C. § 3105(d)) to establish a state-licensed branch in Los Angeles, California. The Foreign Bank Supervision Enhancement Act of 1991 ("FBSEA"), which amended the IBA, provides that a foreign bank must obtain the approval of the Board to establish a branch in the United States. Notice of the application, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published in a newspaper of general circulation in Los Angeles, California ( Los Angeles Times , July 4, 1995). The time for filing comments has expired, and all comments have been considered. Bank, with assets equivalent to approximately $41.0 billion, is the third largest bank in Taiwan. Bank is wholly owned by Taiwan through its agent, the Ministry of Finance ("Ministry"). Bank operates 82 branches throughout Taiwan. In addition, Bank operates eight domestic representative offices and an offshore banking unit in Taiwan. Bank has no subsidiaries. Bank's primary purpose for establishing the proposed branch is to provide banking services to existing clients operating in Los Angeles, California, and to facilitate international trade between the United States and Asia. Bank does not engage directly or indirectly in any nonbanking activities in the United States, and, after establishing the proposed branch, would be a qualifying foreign banking organization within the meaning of Regulation K (12 C.F.R. 211.23(b)). Bank has received approval to establish the proposed branch from the Taiwan authorities. The California State Banking Department also has approved Bank's application to establish the proposed branch. In order to approve an application by a foreign bank to establish a branch in the United States, the IBA and Regulation K require the Board to determine that the foreign bank applicant engages directly in the business of banking outside of the United States, and has furnished to the Board the information it needs to assess the application adequately. The Board must also determine that the foreign bank is subject to comprehensive supervision or regulation on a consolidated basis by its home country supervisor (12 U.S.C. § 3105(d)(2); 12 C.F.R. 211.24). The Board may also take into account additional standards as set forth in the IBA and Regulation K (12 U.S.C. § 3105(d)(3)-(4); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)). As noted above, Bank engages directly in the business of banking outside the United States. Bank also has provided the Board with the information necessary to assess the application through submissions that address the relevant issues. Regulation K provides that a foreign bank will be considered to be subject to comprehensive supervision or regulation on a consolidated basis if the Board determines that the bank is supervised and regulated in such a manner that its home country supervisor receives sufficient information on the foreign bank's worldwide operations, including the relationship of the foreign bank to any affiliate, to assess the overall financial condition of the foreign bank and its compliance with law and regulation (12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)(1)). With respect to the issue of supervision by home country authorities, the Board has considered the following information. Bank is supervised and regulated by the Ministry and the Taiwan Central Bank ("Central Bank"), which share responsibility for the supervision of banks in Taiwan. The Banking Law of Taiwan grants the Ministry overall authority for the regulation and supervision of banks in Taiwan, including Bank. The Ministry has delegated the authority to the Central Bank to act as the primary examiner of banks in Taiwan, in which capacity the Central Bank conducts mandatory annual examinations. The Board previously has determined, in connection with applications involving other banks in Taiwan, that these banks were subject to home country supervision on a consolidated basis. Bank is supervised by the Ministry and the Central Bank on substantially the same terms and conditions as such other banks. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that Bank is subject to comprehensive supervision and regulation on a consolidated basis by its home country supervisors. The Board has also taken into account the additional standards set forth in section 7 of the IBA ( see 12 U.S.C. § 3105(d)(3)-(4); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)(2)). As noted above, Bank has received the consent of its home country authorities to establish the proposed state-licensed branch. Bank must comply with the minimum capital standards of the Basle Accord, as implemented by Taiwan. Bank's capital exceeds these minimum standards and can be considered equivalent to capital that would be required of a U.S. banking organization. Managerial and other financial resources of Bank are also considered consistent with approval, and Bank appears to have the experience and capacity to support the proposed branch. Bank has established controls and procedures for the proposed branch in order to ensure compliance with U.S. law, as well as controls and procedures for its worldwide operations generally. The Board has reviewed the restrictions on disclosure in relevant jurisdictions in which Bank operates and has communicated with relevant authorities about access to information. Bank has committed that it will make available to the Board such information on the operations of Bank and any affiliate of Bank that the Board deems necessary to determine and enforce compliance with the IBA, the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956, as amended, and other applicable federal law. To the extent that the provision of such information is prohibited or impeded by law, Bank has committed to cooperate with the Board to obtain any consents or waivers that might be required from third parties in connection with disclosure of such information. In addition, subject to certain conditions, the Ministry and the Central Bank may share information on Bank's operations with other supervisors, including the Board. In light of these commitments and other facts of record, and subject to the condition described below, the Board concludes that Bank has provided adequate assurances of access to any necessary information the Board may request. On the basis of all the facts of record, and subject to the commitments made by Bank, and the terms and conditions set forth in this order, the Board has determined that Bank's application to establish a state-licensed branch should be, and hereby is, approved. If any restrictions on access to information on the operations or activities of Bank and any affiliates subsequently interfere with the Board's ability to determine the safety and soundness of Bank's U.S. operations or the compliance by Bank or its affiliates with applicable federal statutes, the Board may require termination of any of Bank's direct or indirect activities in the United States. Approval of the application also is specifically conditioned on compliance by Bank with the commitments made in connection with this application, and with the conditions in this order. The commitments and conditions referred to above are conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its decision, and may be enforced in proceedings under 12 U.S.C. § 1818 or 12 U.S.C. § 1847 against Bank, its offices, and its affiliates. By order of the Board of Governors, effective February 24, 1997. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes All data are as of September 30, 1996, unless otherwise noted. In assessing this standard, the Board considers, among other factors, the extent to which the home country supervisors: (i) ensure that the bank has adequate procedures for monitoring and controlling its activities worldwide; (ii) obtain information on the condition of the bank and its subsidiaries and offices through regular examination reports, audit reports, or otherwise; (iii) obtain information on the dealings with and relationship between the bank and its affiliates, both foreign and domestic; (iv) receive from the bank financial reports that are consolidated on a worldwide basis, or comparable information that permits analysis of the bank's financial condition on a worldwide consolidated basis; (v) evaluate prudential standards, such as capital adequacy and risk asset exposure, on a worldwide basis. These are indicia of comprehensive, consolidated supervision. No single factor is essential and other elements may inform the Board's determination. This authority permits the Ministry, among other things, to issue licenses, limit activities and expansion, conduct examinations, set minimum capital and liquidity ratios, limit credit extensions, restrict director interlocks, define qualifications for management, and take enforcement actions. See Taipei Bank , 79 Federal Reserve Bulletin 143 (1993); United World Chinese Commercial Bank , 79 Federal Reserve Bulletin 146 (1993); Bank of Taiwan , 79 Federal Reserve Bulletin 541 (1993); Chiao Tung Bank , 79 Federal Reserve Bulletin 543 (1993); The Farmers Bank of China , 81 Federal Reserve Bulletin 620 (1995); Taiwan Business Bank , 81 Federal Reserve Bulletin 746 (1995). The Board's authority to approve the establishment of the proposed office parallels the continuing authority of the State of California to license offices of a foreign bank. The Board's approval of the application does not supplant the authority of the State of California and the California State Banking Department ("Department") to license the proposed office of Bank in accordance with any terms or conditions that the Department may impose. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Phillips, and Meyer.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application of Union Planters Corporation, Memphis, Tennessee, to acquire at least 19 percent and up to 100 percent of the voting shares of First National Bank, Pontotoc, Mississippi. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Union Planters Corporation Memphis, Tennessee Order Approving Acquisition of a Bank Union Planters Corporation, Memphis, Tennessee ("Union Planters"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 3 of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1842) to acquire at least 19 percent and up to 100 percent of the voting shares of First National Bank, Pontotoc, Mississippi ("Bank"). Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (61 Federal Register 69,096 (1996)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the proposal and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 3 of the BHC Act. Union Planters, controlling assets of $11.2 billion, operates depository institutions in Tennessee, Alabama, Arkansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Mississippi, and Missouri. Union Planters is the third largest commercial banking organization in Mississippi, controlling deposits of $2.1 billion, representing approximately 9.7 percent of total deposits in commercial banking organizations in the state. Bank is the 30th largest commercial banking organization in Mississippi, controlling deposits of $115.2 million, representing less than 1 percent of total deposits in commercial banking organizations in the state. On consummation of this proposal, Union Planters would remain the third largest commercial banking organization in the state, and would control deposits of $2.2 billion, representing approximately 10.2 percent of total deposits in commercial banking organizations in the state. Section 3(d) of the BHC Act, as amended by section 101 of the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act of 1994, allows the Board to approve an application by a bank holding company to acquire control of a bank located in a state other than the home state of such bank holding company, if certain conditions are met. For purposes of the BHC Act, the home state of Union Planters is Tennessee, and Union Planters proposes to acquire a bank in Mississippi. The conditions for an interstate acquisition enumerated in section 3(d) are met in this case. In view of all the facts of record, the Board is permitted to approve the proposal under section 3(d) of the BHC Act. Competitive Considerations The BHC Act prohibits the Board from approving an application under section 3 of the BHC Act if the proposal would result in a monopoly or substantially lessen competition in any relevant banking market, unless the Board finds that the anticompetitive effects of the proposal are clearly outweighed in the public interest by the probable effect of the proposal in meeting the convenience and needs of the community to be served. Union Planters and Bank do not compete with each other in any relevant banking market. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that consummation of this proposal would not result in any significantly adverse effect on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in any relevant banking market. Other Factors Under the BHC Act The BHC Act also requires the Board to consider the financial and managerial resources of the companies and banks involved, the convenience and needs of the communities to be served, and certain other supervisory factors. A. Supervisory Factors The Board has carefully considered the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of Union Planters and Bank, and other supervisory factors in light of all the facts of record. The facts include comments from the management of Bank opposing the acquisition by Union Planters of at least 19 percent of Bank's voting shares. In cases similar to this one, the Board has indicated that the BHC Act contemplates proposals that would allow a bank holding company to acquire less than a majority of the voting shares of a bank or bank holding company. Union Planters proposes to become the largest shareholder of Bank and has the capacity to serve as a source of managerial and financial strength to Bank. Union Planters contends, moreover, that the acquisition of at least 19 percent of Bank's voting shares is a first step in acquiring control of Bank. The Board has considered the financial and managerial resources of Bank in light of relevant reports of examination, and other supervisory information. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that the financial and managerial resources of the organizations involved in this proposal are consistent with approval, as are the other supervisory factors that the Board is required to consider under section 3 of the BHC Act. B. Convenience and Needs Factor The Board also has carefully considered the effect of the proposed acquisition on the convenience and needs of the community to be served in light of all the facts of record. As part of that review, the Board has considered comments opposing the proposal from Bank's management and a number of local residents who commended the products and services offered by Bank and objected to the acquisition of a locally owned bank. In reviewing the convenience and needs considerations in the proposal, the Board notes that Union Planters provides a full range of financial services through its banking and nonbanking subsidiaries, including credit card services, housing-related loans from its mortgage subsidiary, discount brokerage and trust services, large credit limits, and an extensive ATM network. Union Planters has stated that if it acquires Bank, it would offer these services, some of which are not available through Bank, in communities currently served by Bank. Union Planters also states that if Bank were merged into a Union Planters subsidiary bank, Union Planters anticipates that operational decisions would continue to be made by local management, and that Union Planters has no current intention to alter the pricing of loans or deposits or discontinue other services provided by Bank. The Board also has long held that consideration of the convenience and needs factor includes a review of the records of the relevant depository institutions under the Community Reinvestment Act (12 U.S.C. § 2901 et seq .) ("CRA"). As provided in the CRA, the Board evaluates this factor in light of examinations by the primary federal supervisor of the CRA performance records of the relevant institutions. An institution's most recent CRA performance evaluation is a particularly important consideration in the applications process because it represents a detailed on-site evaluation of the institution's overall record of performance under the CRA by its primary federal supervisor. All of Union Planters's subsidiary banks that have been examined for CRA performance received "satisfactory" or better ratings from their primary federal supervisor in their most recent performance examinations. In particular, Union Planters's five subsidiary banks in Mississippi received "satisfactory" ratings in their most recent examinations for CRA performance. Bank also received a "satisfactory" rating from its primary federal supervisor, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency ("OCC"), at its most recent examination for CRA performance. The Board has also considered the CRA-related activities of Union Planters Bank of Northeast Mississippi, New Albany, Mississippi ("UP Northeast"), a relatively small Union Planters subsidiary that serves communities near Bank. OCC examiners concluded that ascertainment efforts by UP Northeast, though limited, were generally effective in identifying credit needs within the community. The examiners particularly noted the bank's ascertainment efforts that resulted in the creation of a low-income, first-time homebuyers program to assist in addressing housing-related credit needs. Examiners also found that UP Northeast's overall CRA-related lending efforts were sufficient to address affirmatively a significant portion of identified community credit needs through a number of products. The bank's geographic distribution of loans, applications and declinations were considered by examiners to be reasonable, and its community delineation did not exclude low- and moderate-income neighborhoods. There was no evidence of practices that were intended to discourage potential applicants, and UP Northeast was found to be in compliance with the substantive provisions of fair lending laws. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that convenience and needs considerations are consistent with approval. In light of the foregoing and all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the application should be, and hereby is, approved. The Board's approval of the proposal is conditioned on compliance by Union Planters with the commitments made in connection with the application and with the conditions stated or referenced in this order. The commitments and conditions relied on by the Board in reaching this decision shall be deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision, and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The acquisition shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day following the effective date of this order, or later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective February 24, 1997. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes Union Planters has contracted to purchase at least 19 percent of Bank's voting shares and intends to acquire all the bank's voting stock. Union Planters also has requested approval to acquire voting shares of Bank's proposed parent holding company, Pontotoc Bancshares, Pontotoc, Mississippi, which currently is seeking the Board's approval to become a bank holding company. All asset data are as of March 31, 1996. All deposit data are as of June 30, 1995, adjusted to reflect acquisitions approved and mergers consummated through December 31, 1996. Pub. L. No. 103-328, 108 Stat. 2338 (1994). A bank holding company's home state is that state in which the operations of the bank holding company's banking subsidiaries were principally conducted on July 1, 1966, or the date on which the company became a bank holding company, whichever is later. 12 U.S.C. §§ 1842(d)(1)(A) and (B) and 1842(d)(2)(A) and (B). Union Planters is adequately capitalized and adequately managed. Bank has been in existence and continuously operated for more than five years, as required by Mississippi law. Miss. Code Ann. § 81-7-19(2) (1995). On consummation, Union Planters and its affiliates would control less than 10 percent of the total amount of deposits of insured depository institutions in the United States, and less than 25 percent of the total deposits of all offices located in Mississippi of commercial banks, savings banks, savings and loan associations, and credit unions, as required by state law. See Miss. Code Ann. § 81-7-19(4) (1995). Bank's management contends that Union Planters' proposed approximately 19 percent interest would make Bank less attractive to prospective purchasers thereby lowering the price of the bank's stock. The Board is required to review proposals under the BHC Act in light of all the facts of record and the statutory factors specified in section 3 of the Act. Courts have concluded that issues relating only to the price received by shareholders for their voting securities, as raised by the comments in this case, do not relate to a factor required to be considered under the BHC Act. See Western Bancshares v. Board of Governors , 480 F.2d 749 (10th Cir. 1973). Management also maintains that the Union Planters application is incomplete because it fails to describe how Union Planters would acquire the remaining voting shares of Bank. The Board concludes that the facts of record, including information on the financial and managerial resources of Union Planters, are sufficient for the Board to make a determination regarding the statutory factors in the BHC Act, and that these factors do not require the Board to review Union Planters' strategy for acquiring additional voting shares of Bank. See Hudson Financial Associates , 72 Federal Reserve Bulletin 150 (1986); City Holding Company , 71 Federal Reserve Bulletin 575 (1985). Mississippi law requires a bank holding company to acquire, within six months of acquiring an interest in a bank in Mississippi, sufficient voting shares to lawfully vote to merge the acquired institution with a subsidiary of the bank holding company, even if such merger does not occur. If an acquiring institution is unable to fulfill the requirement within the statutory time period or extension of the time period granted by the Mississippi Commissioner of Banking and Consumer Finance, the acquiring institution must reduce its interest to below 5 percent of the acquired institution's voting shares. See Miss. Code. Ann. § 81-7-19(3) (1995). Several commenters stated that community banks acquired by Union Planters stopped providing personalized customer services. The Statement of the Federal Financial Supervisory Agencies Regarding the Community Reinvestment Act (54 Federal Register 13,742 and 13,745 (1989)) provides that a CRA examination is an important and often controlling factor in the consideration of an institution's CRA record and that reports of these examinations will be given great weight in the applications process. UP Northeast has deposits of approximately $270 million and is located 25 miles from Bank. Union Planters indicates that a merger of Bank and UP Northeast would be likely if Union Planters acquires voting shares sufficient to require the merger. UP Northeast received a "satisfactory" CRA performance rating from the OCC as of September 1994. UP Northeast was named First National Bank of New Albany at the time of the examination and changed its name in 1995. Some commenters requested that the Board hold a public meeting or hearing on this application. Section 3(b) of the BHC Act does not require the Board to hold a public hearing or meeting on an application unless the appropriate supervisory authority for the bank to be acquired makes a timely written recommendation of denial of the proposal. No supervisory agency has recommended denial of the proposal. Under the Board's Rules of Procedure, the Board may, in its discretion, hold a public hearing or meeting on an application to clarify factual issues relating to the application and to provide an opportunity for testimony, if appropriate. 12 C.F.R. 262.3(e) and 262.25(d). Commenters have had an ample opportunity to present their views, and have submitted substantial written comments that have been carefully considered by the Board. Those comments fail to demonstrate why the written submissions do not adequately present the commenters' views and what, if any, additional matters would be addressed at a hearing or meeting. For these reasons, and based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that a public meeting or hearing is not required or warranted to clarify the factual record in the proposal or otherwise warranted in this case. Accordingly, commenters' requests for a public meeting or hearing on the proposal are denied. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Phillips, and Meyer.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today published its annual update to the official staff commentary to Regulation Z, Truth in Lending. The revisions are effective October 1, 1997 , and compliance is optional prior to that date. The revisions provide guidance on the treatment of some fees paid in connection with mortgage loans and tolerances for accuracy in disclosing the finance charge and other costs. They also discuss such issues as the treatment of debt cancellation agreements and duties of creditors that provide periodic statements electronically. A copy of the Board's notice is attached. |