For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice of The Sanwa Bank Limited, Osaka, Japan, to acquire through its wholly owned subsidiary, Sanwa Business Credit Corporation, Chicago, Illinois, all the shares of Morcroft Capital Corporation, Fairfield, New Jersey, and thereby engage in providing financing and leasing services pursuant to Regulation Y. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. The Sanwa Bank Limited Osaka, Japan Order Approving Notice to Engage in Nonbanking Activities The Sanwa Bank Limited, Osaka, Japan ("Notificant"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8)) and section 225.24(a) of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.24(a)) to acquire through its wholly owned subsidiary, Sanwa Business Credit Corporation, Chicago, Illinois, all the shares of Morcroft Capital Corporation, Fairfield, New Jersey ("Morcroft"), and thereby engage in providing financing and leasing services pursuant to sections 225.28(b)(1) and (b)(3) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(1) and (b)(3)). Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (62 Federal Register 52,339 (1997)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the notice and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Notificant, with total consolidated assets of approximately $446.9 billion, is the fourth largest banking organization in Japan, and the sixth largest banking organization in the world. In the United States, Notificant controls Sanwa Bank California, San Francisco, California. In addition, Notificant operates branches in New York, New York; Chicago, Illinois; and San Francisco and Los Angeles, California; agencies in Atlanta, Georgia; and Dallas, Texas; and representative offices in Boston, Massachusetts; Cleveland, Ohio; and Houston, Texas. Notificant also engages in a number of nonbanking activities in the United States. The Board previously has determined by regulation that financing and leasing activities are closely related to banking and permissible for bank holding companies under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Notificant has committed to conduct these activities subject to the limitations set forth in Regulation Y. In order to approve the proposal, the Board also must find that the performance of the proposed activities by Notificant "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public . . . that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices." 12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8). As part of its evaluation of these factors, the Board considers the financial resources of the notificant and its subsidiaries and the effect of the transaction on those resources. Notificant has submitted a comprehensive business plan demonstrating that the proposed transaction would not involve significant risk or a significant expansion of Notificant's operations in the United States, but rather a filling out of existing lines of business. The proposed financial investment would be relatively small and would be funded by an existing U.S. subsidiary that has a track record of successfully and prudently managing similar activities. Accordingly, this acquisition would not require substantial funding from Notificant. The most recently reported capital ratios of Notificant meet the relevant risk-based capital standards established under the Basle Accord, and the proposed transaction is not expected to have any significant effect on the capital of the consolidated organization. The Board also has considered recent financial statements and other available information, including pro forma financial statements and the condition of the U.S. operations of Notificant. Based on these and other facts of record, including information regarding the risk management system of Sanwa Business Credit Corporation, the Board has determined that financial considerations are consistent with approval of the proposal. In addition, based on relevant supervisory information, and considering the size of the acquisition and activities proposed, managerial considerations are consistent with approval. The Board also has carefully considered the competitive effects of the proposed acquisition of Morcroft. Sanwa currently engages in the activities conducted by Morcroft. The Board notes that the markets for lending and leasing services are unconcentrated and that there are numerous providers of the services. Consummation of the proposal would have a de minimis effect on competition, and the Board has determined that the proposal would not have a significantly adverse effect on competition in any relevant market. The Board expects that the proposed transaction would give Notificant an increased ability to serve the needs of its customers and would allow Notificant to provide existing and new customers with a broader range of products and services at lower costs. The Board also expects that combining the expertise of Notificant and Morcroft would allow Notificant to be a more effective competitor. Based on the foregoing and all the other facts of record, including the commitments made by Notificant, the Board has determined that the performance of the proposed activities by Notificant can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public that would outweigh any possible adverse effects under the proper incident to banking standard of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Conclusion Based on all the facts of record, including all the commitments and representations made by Notificant, and subject to all the terms and conditions set forth in this order, the Board has determined that the notice should be, and hereby is, approved. This determination is subject to all the conditions set forth in the Board's Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.25(g) (12 C.F.R. 225.7 and 225.25(g)), and to the Board's authority to require modification or termination of the activities of a bank holding company or any of its subsidiaries as the Board finds necessary to assure compliance with, or to prevent evasion of, the provisions and purposes of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders issued thereunder. The Board's decision is specifically conditioned on compliance with all the commitments and representations made in the notice, including the commitments and conditions discussed in this order. The commitments, representations, and conditions relied on in reaching this decision shall be deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision, and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. This proposal shall not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective December 1, 1997. (signed) William W. Wiles William W. Wiles Secretary of the Board Footnotes Asset data are as of March 31, 1997. Foreign ranking data are as of December 31, 1996. See 12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(1) and (b)(3). See 12 C.F.R. 225.26; The Fuji Bank, Limited, 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 94 (1989); Bayerishe Vereinbank AG, 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 155 (1987). Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Phillips, Ferguson, and Gramlich. Absent and not voting: Governor Meyer.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today published proposed revisions to the official staff commentary to Regulation Z, Truth in Lending, which applies and interprets the requirements of the regulation. Comment is requested by January 20, 1998 . The proposed revisions address: increased rates for credit card accounts caused by late payments or exceeding credit limits; guidance on "same-as-cash" transactions in open-end plans; and guidance for determining whether credit is an open-end plan or a closed-end transaction. In addition, the proposed update to the commentary discusses issues such as the treatment of annuity costs in reverse mortgage transactions and transaction fees imposed on checking accounts with overdraft protection. A copy of the Board's notice is attached. |
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today requested comment on a proposed amendment to its Appraisal Regulation for bank holding companies to exempt any transaction involving the underwriting or dealing of mortgage-backed securities from the Board's appraisal requirements. Comment is requested by January 8, 1998 . The proposed amendment would permit a bank holding company or a nonbank subsidiary of a bank holding company with the authority to underwrite or deal in mortgage-backed securities to do so without demonstrating that the loans underlying the securities are supported by appraisals at origination that meet the Board's appraisal requirements. As the proposal notes, the Board believes the public rating or due diligence that the market requires for mortgage-backed securities provides information that is at least as sufficient for assessing risks as provided by new appraisals for the underlying loans. Additionally, the Board is delegating to the Director of the Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation the Board's existing authority to determine for an individual transaction that the services of an appraiser are not necessary in order to protect federal financial and public policy interests in real estate-related financial transactions or to protect the safety and soundness of the institution. This delegation of authority is effective December 9, 1997, and is intended to aid in the efficient processing of requests for individual exemptions from the Board's appraisal regulation. The Board's notices are attached. Proposed rule: | Delegation of authority: |
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice of J.P. Morgan & Co., Inc., New York, New York, to acquire approximately 45 percent of the shares of American Century Companies, Inc., Kansas City, Missouri, and thereby engage in certain nonbanking activities. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. J.P. Morgan & Co., Inc. New York, New York Order Approving Notice to Engage in Certain Nonbanking Activities J.P. Morgan & Co., Inc., New York, New York ("Morgan"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8)) and section 225.24 of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.24) to acquire approximately 45 percent of the shares of American Century Companies, Inc., Kansas City, Missouri ("American Century"). Morgan thereby would engage in the following nonbanking activities: Providing financial and investment advisory services, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(6) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(6)); Providing securities brokerage and other transactional services, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(7)(i) and (v) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(7)(i) and (v)); and Providing certain administrative services for open-end investment companies or mutual funds. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (62 Federal Register 55,403 (1997)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the notice and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Morgan, with total consolidated assets of approximately $250.4 billion, is the fourth largest commercial banking organization in the United States. Morgan engages, directly and through its nonbanking subsidiaries, in a broad range of permissible nonbanking activities in the United States. American Century provides services to no-load mutual funds. It conducts its activities through three subsidiaries: American Century Investment Management, Inc. ("ACIM"), which provides investment advisory and administrative services to open-end investment companies; American Century Services Corporation ("ACSC"), which provides transfer agency services to mutual funds advised by ACIM ("Funds"); and American Century Investment Services, Inc. ("ACIS"), a broker-dealer. ACIM is an investment advisor registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") under the Investment Advisers Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. § 80b-1 et seq. ) ("Advisers Act"), subject to the recordkeeping and reporting obligations, fiduciary standards, and other requirements of the Advisers Act and the SEC. ACIS is registered with the SEC as a broker-dealer under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. § 78a et seq. ), and is subject to the recordkeeping and reporting obligations, fiduciary standards, and other requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 and the SEC. Activities Previously Approved by the Board The Board previously has determined by regulation that providing investment advisory and securities brokerage and transactional services is closely related to banking and permissible for bank holding companies under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. The Board also previously has determined that providing administrative services to mutual funds is closely related to banking within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Morgan proposes to provide investment advisory, brokerage and transactional, and administrative services through American Century that previously have been approved by the Board, and Morgan has committed that the proposed activities will be conducted in compliance with Regulation Y and subject to the prudential and other limitations established by the Board. Glass-Steagall Act Under the Glass-Steagall Act, a company that owns a member bank may not control "through stock ownership or in any other manner" a company that engages principally in distributing, underwriting, or issuing securities. The Board has found that this provision prohibits affiliates of banks from sponsoring, organizing, or controlling a mutual fund. The Board previously has determined, however, that the Glass-Steagall Act does not prohibit a bank holding company from providing advisory and administrative services to a mutual fund. American Century provides administrative, advisory, brokerage, and other services to the Funds. Morgan proposes that American Century would continue to provide these services to the Funds. As noted above, however, distribution activities of the Funds would be the responsibility of an independent distributor, which would enter into contractual agreements with the Funds to serve as "principal underwriter" of the Funds. The independent distributor also would continue to be responsible for supervising sales as the "principal" underwriter for purposes of the federal securities laws. Morgan also proposes to have certain director and officer interlocks with the Funds. Morgan contemplates that up to two of the nine directors of the Funds would be employees, officers, or directors of Morgan or its subsidiaries, including American Century. In addition, Morgan proposes that a limited number of employees of Morgan or its subsidiaries, including American Century, would serve as junior-level officers of the Funds. The Board previously has authorized a bank holding company and its nonbank subsidiaries to have limited director and officer interlocks with mutual funds that the bank holding company advises and administers. The Board found that the funds would be controlled by the independent directors. The Board noted that the independent directors would be responsible for the selection and review of the investment advisor, underwriter, and other major contractors with the fund. In this case, Morgan has stated that the number of its directors and employees who would serve as directors of any fund would not comprise more than two of nine directors (less than 25 percent) of these mutual funds. Any director of the funds who also serves as an officer or employee of Morgan would be an "interested person" under the 1940 Act and, therefore, would be required to abstain from voting on the investment advisory and other major contracts of the Funds. The director and officer interlocks proposed by Morgan would not appear to affect the independence of the other directors on the boards of directors for the funds. Moreover, the fact that American Century may be the primary broker for these funds, much like a bank proprietary fund, would not require a different conclusion under the Glass-Steagall Act. The independent members of the board of directors would continue to have authority to review brokerage, advisory, administrative and other major contracts and would retain authority to change the system for distribution of fund shares. Based on the foregoing, the Board concludes that control of the Funds would rest with the independent members of the boards of directors of the Funds and that the proposed interlocks between the Funds and Morgan, American Century, and their subsidiaries would not compromise the independence of the boards of the Funds or permit Morgan or American Century to control the Funds. Thus, the Board concludes that the proposal is consistent with the Glass-Steagall Act. Proper Incident to Banking Test In order to approve the proposal, the Board also must find that the performance of the proposed activities by Morgan "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public . . . that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices." As part of its review of these factors, the Board considers the financial and managerial resources of the notificant and its subsidiaries and the effect of the transaction on those resources. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that financial and managerial considerations are consistent with approval of the proposal. The Board expects that the activities in which Morgan proposes to engage through American Century would provide added convenience to both American Century's and Morgan's customers by offering them an expanded range of products and services. The proposed acquisition also would provide Morgan with further access to U.S. markets for its advisory services and products. There are numerous providers of the proposed services and, therefore, consummation of the proposal would not significantly decrease competition in any relevant market. In addition, the Board previously has determined that the provision of advisory and administrative services to mutual funds within certain parameters is not likely to result in the types of subtle hazards at which the Glass-Steagall Act is aimed. There is no evidence in the record, moreover, that consummation of this proposal, subject to the limitations noted above, would result in any significantly adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices that are not outweighed by the benefits of the proposal. On the basis of the foregoing and all the other facts of record, including the commitments made by Morgan, the Board has determined that performance of the proposed activities by Morgan reasonably can be expected to produce benefits to the public that would outweigh any possible adverse effects under the proper incident to banking standard of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Conclusion Based on all the facts of record, including all the commitments and representations made by Morgan, and subject to all of the terms and conditions set forth in this order, the Board has determined that the notice should be, and hereby is, approved. This determination is subject to all the conditions set forth in the Board's Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.23(g), and to the Board's authority to require modification or termination of the activities of a bank holding company or any of its subsidiaries as the Board finds necessary to assure compliance with, or to prevent evasion of, the provisions and purposes of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders issued thereunder. The Board's decision is specifically conditioned on compliance with all the commitments and representations made in the notice, including the commitments and conditions discussed in this order. The commitments, representations, and conditions relied on in reaching this decision shall be deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision, and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The proposal shall not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective December 8, 1997. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Appendix List of Administrative Services Maintaining and preserving the records of the Funds, including financial and corporate records. Computing net asset value, dividends, performance data, and financial information regarding the Funds. Furnishing statistical and research data to the Funds. Preparing and filing with the SEC and state securities regulators registration statements, notices, reports, and other materials required to be filed under applicable laws. Preparing reports and other informational materials regarding the Funds, including prospectuses, proxies, and other shareholder communications. Providing legal and other regulatory advice to the Funds. Providing office facilities and clerical support for the Funds. Developing and implementing procedures for monitoring compliance with regulatory requirements and compliance with the Funds' investment objectives, policies, and restrictions as established by the board of directors of the Funds. Providing routine fund accounting services and liaison with outside auditors. Preparing and filing tax returns, and monitoring tax compliance. Reviewing and arranging for payment of Fund expenses. Providing communication and coordination services with regard to the Funds' investment advisors, transfer agent, custodian, distributor, and other service organizations that render distribution, recordkeeping, or shareholder communication services. Reviewing and providing advice to the distributor, the Funds, and investment advisors regarding sales literature and marketing plans for the Funds. Providing information to the distributor's personnel concerning performance and administration of the Funds. Providing marketing support with respect to sales of the Funds through financial intermediaries. Participating in seminars, meetings, and conference designed to present information concerning the Funds. Assisting in the development of additional Funds. Providing reports to the board of directors of the Funds. Providing telephone shareholder services through a toll-free number. Footnotes Asset and ranking data are as of June 30, 1997. Following consummation of the proposal, ACIS would cease to act as a distributor for the Funds. Distribution activities would be the responsibility of a distributor independent of both Morgan and American Century. ACIS would continue to act as a broker for the Funds, and the Funds may be sold primarily to customers of Morgan and American Century. See 12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(6), (b)(7)(i) and (7)(v). See Bankers Trust New York Corporation, 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin 780 (1997) ("BTNY"); Commerzbank AG, 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin 679 (1997) ( "Commerzbank" ). See BTNY. The administrative services that Morgan would provide to the Funds through American Century or Morgan's other subsidiaries include computing the fund's financial data, maintaining and preserving the records of the fund, providing office facilities and clerical support for the fund, and preparing and filing tax returns for the Funds. American Century also provides telephone services to shareholders through a toll-free number. The proposed administrative services are listed in the Appendix. 12 U.S.C. §§ 221a and 377. See 12 C.F.R. 225.125. In particular, the Board has determined that the Glass-Steagall Act does not prohibit a bank holding company from providing both investment advisory and administrative services to a proprietary mutual fund, whose shares are sold primarily to customers of the bank holding company. See, e.g., Barclays PLC, 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 158 (1996). As defined under the Investment Company Act of 1940 ("1940 Act"), a principal underwriter is any underwriter who, as principal, purchases from a mutual fund any security for distribution, or who as agent for such fund sells or has the right to sell the fund's securities to a dealer and/or to the public. 15 U.S.C. § 80a-2(a)(29). An independent distributor, or intermediaries other than Morgan or American Century, would enter into any sales agreements with financial intermediaries to sell shares of the Funds. The independent distributor would be responsible for placing all advertisements and would have legal responsibility under the rules of the National Association of Securities Dealers ("NASD") for the form and use of all advertising and sales literature prepared by American Century or Morgan, and also would be responsible for filing these materials with the NASD or the SEC. Morgan states that no more than three officers or employees of American Century would serve as secretary, treasurer, or vice president of the Funds. In addition, American Century employees would serve as assistant secretaries, assistant treasurers, or assistant vice-presidents of the Funds. These employees would have no policy-making authority at the Funds and would not be responsible for policy-making functions. See BTNY; Commerzbank. In Commerzbank, for example, the Board allowed Commerzbank officers and employees to serve as chairman of the 4-member board of trustees and junior level officers of the mutual funds. In BTNY, the Board permitted two officers of BTNY to serve as directors of the funds, with one director serving as chairman of the boards of the funds, and a limited number of BTNY employees serving as junior-level officers of the funds. In each case, a majority of the board of directors was comprised of individuals that were unrelated to the bank holding company. Under the 1940 Act, at least 40 percent of the board of directors of a mutual fund must be individuals who are not affiliated with the mutual fund, investment advisor, or any other major contractor to the fund. The 1940 Act and related regulatory provisions require that independent directors annually review and approve the mutual fund's investment advisory contract and any plan of distribution or related agreement. 12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8). 12 C.F.R. 225.26. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan and Governors Kelley, Phillips, Meyer, Ferguson, and Gramlich. Absent and not voting: Vice Chair Rivlin.
For immediate release An educational initiative designed to inform the public of their rights under new disclosure requirements for vehicle leasing was announced today by the Federal Reserve Board. The vehicle leasing disclosures are part of the Board's Regulation M, which governs disclosures for leases to individuals of $25,000 or less. Central to the government-industry campaign is a brochure to explain new disclosures that will be required in all vehicle leasing transactions beginning January 1. The announcement of the new program was made at a special press briefing held by the Board. Also represented at the briefing were the Federal Trade Commission, the Office of the Florida Attorney General, the National Automobile Dealers Association, and the Association of Consumer Vehicle Lessors. The brochure, Keys to Vehicle Leasing , provides consumers with an overview of the most common type of vehicle lease used by the automotive industry, a closed-end lease. Under this type of lease agreement, consumers may return the automobile, pay any end-of-lease costs, and walk away. The brochure compares common facets of both buying and leasing a vehicle so that an individual can make a more informed decision. Within the text of the brochure, a copy of a closed-end lease is included so that consumers can become more familiar with the document. In addition, the brochure stipulates the leasing terms that a dealer must disclose to the consumer. For example, lessors are required to tell individuals about: fees, taxes, and insurance requirements standards for wear and use, maintenance responsibilities, and warranties early termination charges, security interests, and late payment charges the consumer's option to purchase the car. Other government agencies and organizations taking part in the educational effort are: American Advertising Federation American Automobile Manufacturers Association American Financial Services Association and the AFSA Education Foundation Arizona Attorney General Association of International Automobile Manufacturers Consumer Action Consumer Bankers Association Cooperative Extension System National Vehicle Leasing Association Copies of the brochure are available free of charge by contacting the Federal Reserve Board's Publications Services, Mail Stop 127, Washington, DC 20551 (202-452-3244) or any of the 12 Federal Reserve Banks. It is also available on the Board's Web site:
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the proposal by NationsBank Corporation and NB Holdings Corporation, both of Charlotte, North Carolina, to merge with Barnett Banks, Inc., Jacksonville, Florida, and thereby acquire Barnett's bank and nonbank subsidiaries. The Board's approval is conditioned on the divestiture by NationsBank of sixty-seven branches in twelve markets in Florida and Georgia. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced publication of revised regulations under the Equal Credit Opportunity Act, Regulation B, to implement legislation creating a legal privilege for the results of "self-tests" that creditors voluntarily conduct to determine the level of their compliance with the Act. The Department of Housing and Urban Development is issuing a substantially similar regulation under the Fair Housing Act. The revisions are effective January 30, 1998. The self-testing privilege applies only if the creditor takes appropriate corrective action to address possible discrimination found in the self-test. |
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application of First of Waverly Corporation, Waverly, Iowa, to acquire Schrage, Ltd., and indirectly acquire Farmers State Bank, both of Plainfield, Iowa. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. First of Waverly Corporation Waverly, Iowa Order Approving Acquisition of a Bank Holding Company First of Waverly Corporation, Waverly, Iowa ("Waverly"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act") has requested the Board's approval under section 3 of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1842) to acquire Schrage, Ltd. ("Schrage"), and thereby indirectly acquire Farmers State Bank ("Bank"), both of Plainfield, Iowa. Notice of this proposal, affording interested person an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (62 Federal Register 60,512 (1997)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the proposal and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 3 of the BHC Act. Waverly is the 90th largest depository institution in Iowa, controlling approximately $77.8 million in deposits, representing less than 1 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in the state. Schrage is the 290th largest depository institution in Iowa, controlling approximately $23.2 million in deposits, representing less than 1 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in the state. On consummation of this proposal, Waverly would become the 65th largest depository institution in Iowa, controlling deposits of $101 million, representing less than 1 percent of the total deposits in depository institutions in the state. Competitive Considerations The BHC Act prohibits the Board from approving an application under section 3 of the BHC Act if the proposal would result in a monopoly or if the effect of the proposal may be substantially to lessen competition in any relevant market, unless the Board finds that the anticompetitive effects of the proposal are clearly outweighed in the public interest by the probable effect of the proposal in meeting the convenience and needs of the community to be served. Waverly and Bank compete in the Bremer County, Iowa, banking market. Waverly is the second largest depository institution in the market, controlling deposits of $77.8 million, representing 22.1 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in the market ("market deposits"). Bank is the sixth largest depository institution in the market, controlling deposits of $23.2 million, representing 6.6 percent of market deposits. On consummation of this proposal, Waverly would become the largest depository institution in the market, controlling deposits of $101 million, representing 28.7 percent of market deposits. Concentration in the Bremer County banking market, as measured by the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index ("HHI") under the Department of Justice Merger Guidelines ("DOJ Guidelines"), would increase by 294 points to 1850. The effect of the proposal on market concentration as measured by the HHI is relatively small. In addition, some mitigating considerations presented in the case offset this marginal effect on competition. Eight depository institution competitors would remain in the banking market after consummation of the proposal. Four of these competitors, not including Bank, would each have a market share of more than 9 percent, and the second largest competitor in the market would have a market share of more than 24 percent. Although the Bremer County banking market is a relatively small and slow-growing rural banking market, the Board notes that there has been actual recent de novo entry into the market by an insured deposit-taking institution. As in other cases, the Board sought comments from the Justice Department and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ("FDIC") on the competitive effects of the proposal. The Justice Department has advised the Board that consummation of the proposal would not be likely to have any significantly adverse competitive effects in the Bremer County banking market or in any other relevant banking market. The FDIC did not object to consummation of the proposal or indicate it would have any significantly adverse competitive effects in the Bremer County banking market or any other relevant market. Based on these and all the other facts of record, and for the reasons discussed in this order, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposal would not result in any significantly adverse effects on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in any other relevant banking market. Other Considerations The BHC Act also requires the Board to consider the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the companies and banks involved in the proposal, the convenience and needs of the community to be served, and certain supervisory factors. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of Waverly, Schrage, and their subsidiary banks are consistent with approval, as are other supervisory factors the Board must consider under section 3 of the BHC Act. In addition, considerations relating to the convenience and needs of the communities to be served also are consistent with approval of this application. Conclusion Based on the foregoing, and in light of all the facts of record, the Board has determined that this application should be, and hereby is, approved. The Board's approval is specifically conditioned on compliance by Waverly with all the commitments made in connection with this application. The commitments relied on by the Board in reaching this decision are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The proposed acquisition of Schrage shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day following the effective date of this order, and not later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective December 15, 1997. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes All deposit data are as of June 30, 1996. 12 U.S.C. § 1842(c). The Bremer County banking market consists of Bremer County (excluding Jackson and Jefferson Townships) and Butler and Shell Rock Townships in Butler County. All market data are as of June 30, 1996. In this context, depository institutions include commercial banks, savings banks, and savings associations. Market share data before consummation are based on calculations in which the deposit of thrift institutions are included at 50 percent. The Board previously has indicated that thrift institutions have become, or have the potential to become, significant competitors of commercial banks. See Midwest Financial Group, 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 386 (1989); National City Corporation, 70 Federal Reserve Bulletin 743 (1984). Thus, the Board has regularly included thrift deposits in the calculation of market share on a 50-percent weighted basis. See e.g., First Hawaiian, Inc. , 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 52 (1991). Under the revised DOJ Guidelines, 49 Federal Register 26,823 (June 29, 1984), a market in which the post-merger HHI is above 1800 is considered highly concentrated. The U.S. Department of Justice ("Justice Department") has informed the Board that a bank merger or acquisition generally will not be challenged (in the absence of other factors indicating anticompetitive effects) unless the post-merger HHI is at least 1800 and the merger increases the HHI by more than 200 points. The Justice Department has stated that the higher than normal HHI thresholds for screening bank mergers for anticompetitive effects implicitly recognize the competitive effect of limited-purpose lenders and other non-depository financial entities. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Phillips, Meyer, Ferguson, and Gramlich. Absent and not voting: Governor Kelley.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of an Order to Cease and Desist against Patti Colbourn, a former managing director, trader and institution-affiliated party of the Chemical Bank, New York, New York, presently doing business as the Chase Manhattan Bank, that is a member of the Federal Reserve System. Ms. Colbourn, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order as a result of her alleged participation in unsafe and unsound practices in the course of her activities as a trader of mortgage-backed securities for Chemical. A copy of the order is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice of Lloyds TSB Group plc, London, England, to retain its indirect ownership of IAI Holdings, Inc., Minneapolis, Minnesota, and thereby engage in certain nonbanking activities. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Lloyds TSB Group plc Lloyds Bank Plc London, England Order Approving Notice to Engage in Nonbanking Activities Lloyds TSB Group plc, London, England ("Notificant"), a foreign banking organization subject to the provisions of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8)) and section 225.24 of the Board's Regulation Y (12 CFR 225.24) to retain its indirect ownership of IAI Holdings, Inc., Minneapolis, Minnesota, and thereby engage in the following nonbanking activities in the United States: providing investment and financial advisory services under section 225.28(b)(6) of Regulation Y, including serving as investment adviser to open-end investment companies ("mutual funds") and providing investment advice with respect to foreign exchange and futures contracts and options on futures contracts; providing securities brokerage services, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(7)(i) of Regulation Y; providing foreign exchange transactional services pursuant to section 225.28(b)(7)(v) of Regulation Y; performing functions or activities that may be performed by a trust company pursuant to section 225.28(b)(5) of Regulation Y; and providing administrative services to mutual funds. Notice of this proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (62 Federal Register 11,455 (1997)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the notice and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Notificant, with total consolidated assets of approximately $267 billion, acquired all the voting shares of Lloyds Bank Plc, London, England ("Lloyds Bank"), on December 28, 1995, and thereby became a foreign banking organization subject to the BHC Act. Notificant operates a branch in New York, New York, and an agency in Miami, Florida. Notificant controlled IAI Holdings and IAI International, Ltd. prior to its acquisition of Lloyds Bank and has filed this notice to obtain the Board's approval to retain its interest in these entities. IAI, IAI Ventures, and IAI International are registered as investment advisers with the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") under the Investment Advisers Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. § 80b-1 et seq.). Accordingly, IAI, IAI Ventures, and IAI International are subject to the recordkeeping and reporting obligations, fiduciary standards, and other requirements of the Investment Advisers Act and the SEC. IAI-Securities is registered with the SEC as a broker-dealer under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. § 78a et seq. ). IAI Trust is a limited purpose trust company organized under the laws of Minnesota. IAI provides investment advice to institutions, pension and profit sharing plans, municipalities, and individuals. IAI also provides investment advisory and administrative services to 25 mutual funds ("Funds"), including the 19 mutual funds that form the IAI family of mutual funds ("IAI Funds"). Each of the Funds advised and administered by IAI is registered with the SEC under the Investment Company Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. § 80a-1 et seq. ) ("1940 Act"). Unlike most mutual funds, the IAI Funds do not have a "principal underwriter" for purposes of the 1940 Act. A broker-dealer that is not affiliated with Notificant or IAI serves as the principal underwriter and distributor of the other six Funds that are advised and administered by IAI. As noted above, the Board previously has determined by regulation that investment advisory, securities brokerage, foreign exchange execution, and trust activities are closely related to banking for purposes of the BHC Act. Notificant would conduct these activities in accordance with the limitations set forth in Regulation Y. Notificant also proposes that IAI provide the administrative services listed in Appendix B to mutual funds that are advised by IAI. The Board previously has determined that mutual fund administrative services are closely related to banking within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Glass-Steagall Act Under the Glass-Steagall Act, a company that owns a member bank may not control "through stock ownership or in any other manner" a company that engages principally in the distribution, underwriting, public sale, or issuance of securities. The Board has long held that the Glass-Steagall Act prohibits a bank holding company from sponsoring, organizing, or controlling a mutual fund, or engaging in the underwriting, public sale, or distribution of the shares of any investment company. The Board previously has determined, however, that the Glass-Steagall Act does not prohibit a bank holding company from providing advisory and administrative services to a mutual fund. Notificant's proposal differs from the proposals previously approved by the Board in one material respect. Unlike in previous cases, the IAI Funds do not have an independent third party distributor that serves as the funds' principal underwriter for purposes of the 1940 Act. Notificant has stated that this structure allows the IAI Funds to lower their operating costs and thereby makes the funds more appealing to cost-conscious investors. In addition, Notificant has stated that the IAI Funds do not engage in general advertising and, therefore, do not need a distributor to market their shares. The Board has not previously considered a proposal whereby a bank holding company would provide advisory and administrative services to mutual funds that were not distributed by an independent third-party. The Board has long held that the distribution of mutual fund shares is an activity covered by the Glass-Steagall Act. Although the specific services provided by mutual fund distributors vary widely from fund to fund, a distributor generally enters into a distribution agreement with a fund to act as agent for the fund in selling shares to the public and to serve as the fund's "principal underwriter" for purposes of the 1940 Act. The distributor generally fulfills its responsibility for selling the mutual fund shares by entering into selling agreements with broker-dealers or other financial intermediaries under which the intermediaries purchase fund shares from the distributor and sell those shares to their customers. In this manner, the distributor controls the sales channels through which shares of the fund are sold to the public. A mutual fund distributor also typically promotes the fund through advertising and is responsible for filing advertisements with the National Association of Securities Dealers ("NASD") or the SEC. The IAI Funds have not contracted with an independent broker-dealer to serve as the funds' distributor or principal underwriter for purposes of the 1940 Act. Instead, the IAI Funds would enter directly into selling agreements with various brokers and would rely on independent sources for advertising. The IAI Funds have hired an individual (who will not also be an employee of Notificant) who would be responsible for initiating contact with broker-dealers and other financial intermediaries regarding the sale of Fund shares, and for negotiating any broker selling agreements on behalf of the Funds. In addition, in the event the IAI Funds determine to change strategies and begin advertising, this individual would be responsible for placing, reviewing, and filing with regulators, advertisements on behalf of the Funds. As the investment advisor and administrator, Notificant proposes to provide assistance to the Funds in these matters. Notificant maintains that the services that it proposes to provide to the IAI Funds are permissible for bank holding companies and would not constitute the distribution of the funds' shares. Notificant has committed that IAI will not act as an underwriter of shares of the IAI Funds for purposes of the Securities Act of 1933, or as the funds' principal underwriter for purposes of the 1940 Act. Notificant has committed that neither Notificant, IAI, nor any affiliate of Notificant will enter into a distribution agreement with the IAI Funds, purchase shares of the funds as principal, or be identified as the funds' distributor in Fund prospectuses or sales material. In addition, Notificant has committed that neither Notificant, nor IAI, nor any other affiliate will engage in any activity that would cause it to be considered a broker of shares of the IAI Funds under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. Thus, neither Notificant nor IAI would receive any transaction-based compensation in connection with the sale of shares of the IAI Funds, or enter into any selling agreement with the funds. Notificant has committed that the Marketing Officer will not be an employee, officer, or director of Notificant or any of its affiliates. Furthermore, Notificant has committed that the Marketing Officer will report directly to the boards of directors of the IAI Funds, which will be entirely independent from Notificant, and will not report to any officer that is affiliated with Notificant. Notificant also has committed that the independent boards of directors of the IAI Funds will have sole responsibility for all decisions regarding the employment, termination, and compensation of the Marketing Officer and will approve each selling agreement negotiated by the Marketing Officer, both initially and annually thereafter. In light of the foregoing, the commitments provided by Notificant and the specific facts of this case, the Board concludes that the proposed operational structure of the IAI Funds would be consistent with the Glass-Steagall Act. Proper Incident to Banking Test In order to approve the notice, the Board also must find that the performance of the proposed activities by Notificant "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public . . . that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices." As part of the Board's evaluation of these factors, the Board considers the financial and managerial resources of the notificant and its subsidiaries and the effect the transaction would have on such resources. The Board notes that Notificant's capital ratios meet applicable risk-based capital standards under the Basle Accord and are equivalent to the capital levels that would be required of a U.S. banking organization. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that financial and managerial considerations are consistent with approval. The Board expects that consummation of the proposal can reasonably be expected to provide added convenience and services to Notificant's customers by offering them an expanded range of investment products and management expertise. The Board previously has determined that the provision of administrative services to mutual funds within the parameters established by the Board is not likely to result in the types of subtle hazards at which the Glass-Steagall Act is aimed or in any other adverse effects. Notificant also would be required to comply with the Board's interpretive rule on Investment Adviser Activities, which was designed to mitigate potential conflicts of interests and the potential for customer confusion associated with the proposed activities. There are numerous providers of the proposed nonbanking services, and there is no evidence in the record to indicate that consummation of this proposal is likely to result in significantly adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices, that would outweigh the public benefits of the proposal. Based on all the facts of record, the Board finds that the public benefits of Notificant's proposed activities outweigh any adverse effects, and, therefore, that the activities are a proper incident to banking for purposes of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Based on the foregoing and all the facts of record, including the commitments discussed in this order and all other commitments and representations made by Notificant in connection with this notice, and subject to the terms and conditions set forth in this order, the Board has determined that the notice should be, and hereby is, approved. The Board's determination is subject to all the conditions set forth in Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.25(c) of Regulation Y (12 CFR 225.7 and 225.25(c)), and to the Board's authority to require modification or termination of the activities of a bank holding company or any of its subsidiaries as the Board finds necessary to assure compliance with, and to prevent evasion of, the provisions of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders issued thereunder. The Board's decision is specifically conditioned on Notificant's compliance with the commitments and representations made in connection with this notice, including the commitments and conditions discussed in this order. The commitments, representations, and conditions relied on in reaching this decision shall be deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision and may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. This transaction shall not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective December 18, 1997. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Appendix A Nonbanking Subsidiaries and Activities: Investment Advisers, Inc. ("IAI"), Minneapolis, Minnesota, which would engage in: (a) acting as an investment or financial advisor, including serving as investment adviser to investment companies registered under the Investment Company Act of 1940, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(6) of Regulation Y (12 CFR 225.28(b)(6)); (b) providing the administrative services described in Appendix B to mutual funds, including mutual funds advised by IAI; (c) providing securities brokerage services, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(7)(i) of Regulation Y (12 CFR 225.28(b)(7)(i)); and (d) providing to customers as agent transactional services with respect to foreign exchange transactions, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(7)(v) of Regulation Y (12 CFR 225.28(b)(7)(v); IAI Securities, Inc., Minneapolis, Minnesota, which would engage in providing securities brokerage services, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(7)(i) of Regulation Y (12 CFR 225.28(b)(7)(i)); IAI Ventures, Inc. and Itasca Ventures, LLC, both in Minneapolis, Minnesota, which would engage in acting as an investment or financial advisor, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(6) of Regulation Y (12 CFR 225.28(b)(6)); IAI Trust Company, Minneapolis, Minnesota, which would engage in performing functions or activities that may be performed by a trust company, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(5) of Regulation Y (12 CFR 225.28(b)(5)); and IAI International Ltd., London, England, which would engage in (a) acting as an investment or financial advisor, including serving as investment adviser to investment companies registered under the Investment Company Act of 1940, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(6) of Regulation Y (12 CFR 225.28(b)(6)); and (b) providing to customers as agent transactional services with respect to foreign exchange transactions, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(7)(v) of Regulation Y (12 CFR 225.28(b)(7)(v). Appendix B List of Administrative Services Maintaining and preserving the records of the funds, including financial and corporate records; Computing dividends, performance data and financial information regarding the funds; Furnishing statistical and research data; Preparing and filing with the SEC and state securities regulators registration statements, notices, reports and other material required to be filed under applicable laws; Preparing reports and other informational materials regarding the funds including proxies and other shareholder communications and reviewing prospectuses; Providing legal and regulatory advice to the fund in connection with its other administrative functions; Providing office facilities and clerical support for the funds; Developing and implementing procedures for monitoring compliance with regulatory requirements and compliance with the funds' investment objectives, policies, and restrictions as established by the funds' boards; Providing routine fund accounting services and liaison with outside auditors; Preparing and filing tax returns; Reviewing and arranging for payment of fund expenses; Providing communication and coordination services with regard to the funds' investment adviser, transfer agent, custodian, and other service organizations that render recordkeeping or shareholder communication services; Reviewing and providing advice to the distributor and the funds regarding sales literature and marketing plans to assure regulatory compliance; Providing information concerning the funds' performance and administration to the broker-dealers that sell shares of the funds to the public; Participating in seminars, meetings, and conferences designed to present information to brokers and investment companies, but not in connection with the sale of shares of the funds to the public, concerning the operations of the funds, including administrative services provided by IAI to the funds; Assisting existing funds in the development of additional portfolios; Providing reports to the fund's board with regard to its activities; and Providing telephone shareholder services through a toll-free number. Footnotes IAI Holdings's principal subsidiaries are Investment Advisers, Inc. ("IAI"); IAI Securities, Inc. ("IAI-Securities"); IAI Ventures, Inc.; and IAI Trust Company, all in Minneapolis, Minnesota. Notificant also indirectly owns all the shares of IAI International Ltd., a United Kingdom company that engages in certain nonbanking activities in the United States. A list of the nonbanking activities to be engaged in by IAI Holdings and IAI International is provided in Appendix A. All asset data are as of June 30, 1997, and use exchange rates then in effect. Prior to this acquisition, Notificant was known as TSB Group plc. Notificant and Lloyds Bank committed that they would keep their respective U.S. businesses separate following the merger until Notificant received Board approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act to retain the United States nonbanking operations of the combined entity. See Letter from Jonathan M. Weld and Timothy J. Byrne, Sherman & Stearling, to Kathleen M. O'Day, Associate General Counsel of the Board, dated November 6, 1995. As of August 1, 1996, IAI had approximately $15 billion in assets under management. IAI International serves as sub-adviser to certain of the mutual funds advised by IAI. The Funds are sold through a variety of sales channels, including broker-dealers and 401(k) plans, and are not marketed primarily to customers of Lloyds Bank. Accordingly, the Funds are not proprietary mutual funds. The 1940 Act defines a "principal underwriter" of a mutual fund's securities as "any underwriter who as principal purchases from [the mutual fund], or pursuant to contract has the right (whether absolute or conditional) from time to time to purchase from [the mutual fund], any such security for distribution, or who as agent for such company sells or has the right to sell any such security to a dealer or to the public or both." 15 U.S.C. § 80a-2(a)(29). The term does not include a dealer who purchases shares of a mutual fund through a principal underwriter that acts as agent for the mutual fund. Id. See 12 CFR 225.28(b)(5), (6), (7)(i), and (7)(v). See The Chase Manhattan Corporation, 81 Federal Reserve Bulletin 883 (1995); Mellon Bank Corporation, 79 Federal Reserve Bulletin 626 (1993) ( "Mellon" ). The administrative services would include providing telephone services to shareholders through a toll-free 800 number. Notificant has stated that telephone service operators would not solicit callers to purchase shares in particular mutual funds or make outgoing calls to solicit investors. Upon the request of a caller, the service operators may provide historical performance information concerning a Fund or general information concerning a Fund's investment objectives. 12 U.S.C. §§ 221a and 377. See 12 CFR 225.125. See 12 CFR 225.28(b)(6)(i); Mellon. The Board also has determined that the Glass-Steagall Act does not prohibit a bank holding company from controlling a closed-end investment company if that company is not frequently engaged in the issuance, sale, or distribution of securities. See 12 CFR 225.125. A closed-end investment company that is controlled by a bank holding company must conform its activities to the requirements of section 4 of the BHC Act. Accordingly, if Notificant sponsors, organizes, or controls any closed-end fund, Notificant must limit such fund's investments to less than 5 percent of the voting shares of any issuer. The IAI Funds are pure "no-load" funds which do not impose a sales charge or a Rule 12b-1 distribution fee. Notificant has indicated that the IAI Funds rely on articles and performance information regularly published by independent sources to inform potential investors about the funds. Notificant has stated, furthermore, that the development of mutual fund "supermarkets" provides the IAI Funds with readily available sales channels, thereby diminishing the need for the funds to hire a distributor to establish and maintain distribution channels for the funds. See 12 CFR 225.125. As noted above, the IAI Funds currently do not engage in general advertising or marketing activities. However, IAI prepares a quarterly newsletter and other sales material regarding the IAI Funds and maintains an "IAI Funds" home page on the internet. Notificant has stated that any sales materials prepared by IAI, including the information posted on the internet site, will be reviewed by the Marketing Officer of the IAI Funds for compliance with federal securities laws and will be filed by the Marketing Officer on behalf of the funds with the NASD or SEC. The Board previously has permitted bank holding companies to prepare advertising and marketing materials for funds that are advised and administered by the bank holding company, provided that the funds' distributor remained responsible for placing all advertisements and filing the materials with the NASD or SEC. See Commerzbank. The pension plan for IAI employees currently holds shares of the IAI Funds, which are attributed to Notificant under section 2(g)(2) of the BHC Act. Notificant has committed that the IAI pension plan, together with Notificant and its affiliates, will not acquire more than 5 percent of the shares of any Fund, and that any such ownership interest in the Funds will not be used in any way in marketing or selling the Funds. See Mellon. Because the IAI Funds do not have a distributor, independent broker-dealers that wish to sell shares of the funds would enter into selling agreements directly with, and would acquire shares directly from, the IAI Funds. Such activity could cause the broker-dealers to be considered "underwriters" of fund shares for purposes of the Securities Act of 1933. See 15 U.S.C. § 77b(11). As noted above, Notificant has committed that it will not act as a broker of shares of the IAI Funds or enter into selling agreements with the funds. Notificant proposes that officers or employees of IAI serve as president, treasurer, secretary, assistant treasurer, and assistant secretary of the IAI Funds. Notwithstanding the fact that the IAI Funds would not employ an independent third party distributor, this case is consistent with prior Board decisions prohibiting bank holding company control of mutual funds. Notificant does not propose to have any director interlocks with the Funds, including the IAI Funds. The Board previously has found that a bank holding company may, consistent with the Glass-Steagall Act and the BHC Act, have certain officer and director interlocks with mutual funds that the bank holding company advises and administers. See Bankers Trust New York Corporation, 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin 780 (1997); Commerzbank AG, 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin 678 (1997); The Governor and Company of the Bank of Ireland, 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 1129 (1996). The Board previously has stated that the Glass-Steagall Act also prohibits a bank holding company from sponsoring or organizing a mutual fund. See 12 CFR 225.125. Notificant has committed that it will not provide the seed money for any mutual funds established in the future. In addition, Notificant has committed that the completely independent board of directors of the Funds will serve as the board of directors of any newly established fund that is advised and administered by IAI and that is not distributed by an independent third party. 12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8). See 12 CFR 225.26; see also The Fuji Bank, Limited, 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 94 (1989); Bayerische Vereinsbank AG, 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 155 (1987). Under the interpretive rule on Investment Adviser Activities, a bank holding company and its bank and nonbank subsidiaries should not purchase in their sole discretion, in a fiduciary capacity securities of any investment company for which the bank holding company acts as investment adviser unless the purchase is specifically authorized by the terms of the instrument creating the fiduciary relationship, by court order, or by the law of the jurisdiction under which the trust is administered. The interpretive rule also prohibits a bank holding company from acting as investment adviser to any investment company that has either the same name as the bank holding company or any of its subsidiary banks, or a name that includes the word "bank." See 12 CFR 225.125. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Phillips, Ferguson, and Gramlich. Absent and not voting: Governor Meyer.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice filed by Star Banc Corporation, Cincinnati, Ohio, to merge with Great Financial Corporation and thereby acquire its wholly owned subsidiary savings association, Great Financial Bank, F.S.B., Louisville, Kentucky. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Star Banc Corporation Cincinnati, Ohio Order Approving the Acquisition of a Savings Association By order of the Board of Governors, effective December 18, 1997. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes Star also has requested the Board's approval of an option to purchase up to 19.9 percent of the voting shares of Great Financial under certain circumstances. The option would expire on consummation of the proposed merger with Great Financial. Asset data are as of June 30, 1997. Deposit data are as of June 30, 1996. In this context, depository institutions include commercial banks, savings banks, and savings associations. 12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(4). Thrift engages through a subsidiary in the sale of certain insurance products and annuities that are not permissible for a bank holding company under the BHC Act. Star has committed that it will conform the insurance and annuity activities of Thrift to the requirements of section 4 of the BHC Act within two years after consummation of the proposal and that Thrift will cease selling any new insurance policies or annuities immediately on consummation of the proposal. Star also has committed to conform all real estate activities of Thrift to the requirements of section 4 of the BHC Act within two years after consummation of the proposal. 12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8). The Marion County, Kentucky, banking market is defined as Marion County, Kentucky. Market data are as of June 30, 1996. Market share data before consummation are based on calculations in which the deposits of thrift institutions are included at 50 percent. The Board previously has indicated that thrift institutions have become, or have the potential to become, significant competitors of commercial banks. See WM Bancorp, 76 Federal Reserve Bulletin 788 (1990); National City Corporation, 70 Federal Reserve Bulletin 743 (1984). Because the deposits of Thrift would be acquired by a commercial banking organization under the proposal, Thrift's deposits are included at 100 percent in the calculation of the pro forma market share. See Norwest Corporation, 78 Federal Reserve Bulletin 452 (1992); First Banks, Inc. , 76 Federal Reserve Bulletin 669 (1990). Under the revised Department of Justice Merger Guidelines (49 Federal Register 26,823 (June 29, 1984), a market in which the post-merger HHI is above 1800 is considered to be highly concentrated. The Department of Justice has informed the Board, however, that a bank merger or acquisition in a highly concentrated market generally will not be challenged (in the absence of other factors indicating anticompetitive effects) unless the merger increases the HHI by more than 200 points. The Department of Justice has stated that the higher than normal HHI thresholds for screening bank mergers for anticompetitive effects implicitly recognize the competitive effect of limited-purpose lenders and other non-depository financial entities. See 12 C.F.R. 225.26. See Banc One Corporation, 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin 602 (1997). These commenters included the City of Cleveland, Ohio, the Urban League of Greater Cincinnati, the Ohio Capital Corporation for Housing, the Ohio Tri-State Hispanic Chamber of Commerce, the City of Covington, Kentucky, and Catholic Social Services of Northern Kentucky. These commenters are the Ohio Community Reinvestment Project, Columbus, Ohio, and the Metropolitan Housing Coalition, Louisville, Kentucky. This commenter also stated that the bank, compared to other depository institutions, paid less interest on accounts in which the interest is used to fund legal services for the poor and charged higher fees for basic banking services, which particularly affect LMI customers. Star maintains that its deposit products are competitive with those offered by other depository institutions and that it offers affordable deposit products and basic banking services. The Board also has considered these comments in light of evaluations by examiners of the bank's record of providing banking services to its communities and of complying with fair lending laws. This commenter also alleged, in general, that affordable housing loans diminish when a local depository institution is acquired by a larger out-of-state banking organization. As explained above, the Board has carefully reviewed Star Bank's record of assisting to meet the credit needs of the communities it serves, including in Kentucky. The CRA requires that every bank operating in more than one state, including such a bank owned by an out-of-state parent holding company, be regularly examined and rated on its performance in helping to meet the credit needs of its community on a state-by-state basis. Star Bank's activities in Kentucky have been and would continue to be reviewed by its primary federal regulator, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency ("OCC"), in its performance examinations and by the Board in future applications by Star to acquire a depository facility under the BHC Act. The Statement of the Federal Financial Supervisory Agencies Regarding the Community Reinvestment Act provides that a CRA examination is an important and often controlling factor in the consideration of an institution's CRA record and that reports of these examinations will be given great weight in the applications process. 54 Federal Register 13,742 and 13,745 (1989). See 12 C.F.R. Part 25. The federal financial supervisory agencies jointly promulgated new regulations to implement the CRA in 1995. See 60 Federal Register 22,156 (May 4, 1995). Although the revised regulations did not become effective for large retail banks like Star Bank until July 1, 1997, Star Bank requested that the 1996 Examination be conducted under the revised regulations. Star Bank also was rated "outstanding" for CRA performance at its two previous examinations in 1992 and 1994. The ratings for performance under the lending, investment, and services tests are: "outstanding," "high satisfactory," "low satisfactory," "needs to improve," and "substantial noncompliance." Under the revised CRA regulations, the lending test is weighted more heavily than the investment and service tests in determining a bank's overall CRA performance rating. Section 110 of the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act of 1994 (Pub. L. No. 103-328, 108 Stat. 2338 (1994)) amended the CRA to require that the federal financial supervisory agencies separately rate the CRA performance record in each state and in each multistate metropolitan area where an interstate banking organization maintains a branch. 12 U.S.C. § 2906(d). Star Bank designated 11 assessment areas in Ohio that include Cleveland, Columbus, Dayton, Highland County, and Preble County. Star Bank designated three assessment areas within its Cincinnati service area. The first area is the Cincinnati region, which includes Hamilton County and portions of Clermont and Warren Counties, all in Ohio. The second assessment area is the Indiana South-Eastern region, and the major city in the region is Lawrenceburg, Indiana. The remaining assessment area is the Kentucky-Northern region, which contains the cities of Covington and Newport, Kentucky. Also included in the Cincinnati MSA is Pendleton County, Kentucky, which Star Bank included in its Central Kentucky region. The assessment area includes Carroll and Marion Counties, both in Kentucky. The assessment area includes Fayette and Wayne Counties and a portion of Randolph County, all in Indiana. The Cincinnati MSA contains 74 of the bank's branches and accounts for 37 percent of the bank's deposits. Star Bank received "outstanding" ratings under the lending and investment tests and a "high satisfactory" rating under the investment test in the Cincinnati MSA. In two separate projects in Cleveland, the bank loaned $7.3 million to nonprofit developers to build and rehabilitate affordable housing. The CDF assists in financing affordable housing by originating below market-rate loans to nonprofit and for-profit developers in the Cincinnati area, which includes Hamilton, Warren, Butler, and Clermont Counties in Ohio and Boone, Campbell, and Kenton Counties in Kentucky. Star Bank originated 20 loans under the SBA 504 loan program in 1995, totaling $7.2 million, and 19 SBA 504 loans, totaling $4.6 million, through July 1996. In the SBA 7A loan program, Star Bank originated 97 loans in 1995, totaling $17.8 million, and 36 SBA 7A loans, totaling $5.6 million through June 1996. This program provides direct loans of less than $200,000 to businesses in Ohio that will create new jobs. Star Bank's assessment area in Kentucky outside the Cincinnati MSA consists of whole counties, and the bank's CRA examiners determined that it did not arbitrarily exclude any LMI areas and conformed to the requirements of the CRA. The data, for example, do not provide a basis for an independent assessment of whether an applicant who was denied credit was, in fact, creditworthy. Credit history problems and excessive debt levels relative to income (reasons most frequently cited in a credit denial) are not available from HMDA data. Eligibility for the HAP loan program is based on income and the number of household members. The program permits higher debt-to-income ratios and a 3 percent minimum down payment that can be in the form of a gift from a relative or a grant from a nonprofit organization. The program also does not require private mortgage insurance. Commenters criticized Star for failing to enter into a binding written agreement with their organizations. The Board has stated that, although communications between depository institutions and community groups are a valuable method of assessing the credit needs of the community, the CRA does not mandate a depository organization to enter into an agreement with any organization. See Chemical Banking Corporation, 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 239 (1996). Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Phillips, Ferguson, and Gramlich. Absent and not voting: Governor Meyer.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the proposal by SunTrust Banks, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia, to acquire all the voting shares of Equitable Securities Corporation and its nonbanking subsidiaries, and thereby engage in several securities-related activities, including underwriting and dealing in, to a limited extent, all types of debt and equity securities. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. SunTrust Banks, Inc. Atlanta, Georgia Order Approving Notice to Engage in Nonbanking Activities SunTrust Banks, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia ("SunTrust"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8)) and section 225.24 of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.24) to acquire all the voting securities of Equitable Securities Corporation ("Company") and its nonbanking subsidiaries, Equitable Trust Company, and Equitable Asset Management, Inc. ("EAM"), all in Nashville, Tennessee, and thereby engage in the following nonbanking activities: underwriting and dealing in, to a limited extent, all types of debt and equity securities ("bank-ineligible securities") other than interests in open-end investment companies; p extending credit and servicing loans, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(1) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(1)); arranging commercial real estate equity financing, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(2)(ii) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(2)(ii)); providing leasing services, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(3) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(3)); performing functions or activities that may be performed by a trust company, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(5) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(3)); providing financial and investment advisory services, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(6) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(6)); providing securities brokerage, riskless principal, private placement and other transactional services, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(7)(i), (ii), (iii) and (v) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(7)(i), (ii), (iii) and (v)); and underwriting and dealing in government obligations and money market instruments in which state member banks may underwrite and deal under 12 U.S.C. §§ 335 and 24(7) ("bank-eligible securities"), and engaging in investing and trading activities, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(8)(i) and (ii) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(8)(i) and (ii)). Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (62 Federal Register 60,713 (1997)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the proposal and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. SunTrust, with total consolidated assets of $55.4 billion, is the 19th largest banking organization in the United States. SunTrust controls 28 subsidiary banks that operate in Georgia, Alabama, Florida, and Tennessee, and engages in a broad range of permissible nonbanking activities. Company, with consolidated assets of $52.6 million, engages directly and through its affiliates in a broad range of investment advisory, securities brokerage, securities underwriting, and other activities. SunTrust proposes to merge Company with SunTrust Capital Markets, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia ("STCM"), a subsidiary of SunTrust engaged in securities-related activities, including underwriting and dealing in, to a limited extent, municipal revenue bonds, 1-4 family mortgage-related securities, consumer receivable-related securities, and commercial paper, with Company surviving the merger. Company is, and will continue to be, a broker-dealer registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") under the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934 ("1934 Act") (15 U.S.C. § 78a et seq. ), an investment advisor registered with the SEC under the Investment Advisers Act of 1940 ("1940 Act") (15 U.S.C. § 80b-1 et seq.), and a member of the National Association of Securities Dealers ("NASD"). Accordingly, Company is, and will remain, subject to the recordkeeping and reporting obligations, fiduciary standards, and other requirements of the 1934 Act, the 1940 Act, the SEC, and the NASD. Underwriting and Dealing Activities The Board has determined -- subject to the framework of prudential limitations to address the potential for conflicts of interests, unsound banking practices, or other adverse effects -- that the proposed activities of underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities are so closely related to banking as to be a proper incident thereto within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. The Board also has determined that the conduct of the proposed activities is consistent with section 20 of the Glass-Steagall Act (12 U.S.C. § 377), provided that the company engaged in underwriting and dealing activities derives no more than 25 percent of its gross revenues from underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities over a two-year period. SunTrust has committed that Company will conduct its bank-ineligible securities underwriting and dealing activities subject to the Board's 25 percent revenue limit. As a condition of this order, SunTrust is required to conduct its bank-ineligible securities activities subject to the Operating Standards for section 20 subsidiaries ("Operating Standards"). Mutual Fund Activities Under the Glass-Steagall Act, a company that owns a member bank may not control "through stock ownership or in any other manner" a company that engages principally in distributing, underwriting, or issuing securities. The Board has found that this provision prohibits affiliates of banks from sponsoring, organizing, or controlling a mutual fund. Company currently provides advisory services to mutual funds, including its proprietary family of mutual funds, the ESC Strategic Funds (the "Funds"). After consummation of the proposal, Company would cease to act as distributor for the Funds. Administrative services would be provided to the Funds and the Funds would be distributed by a distributor that is independent of both SunTrust and Company. This distributor would enter into contractual agreements with the Funds to serve as "principal underwriter" of the Funds. The independent distributor also would be responsible for supervising sales as the "principal" underwriter for purposes of the federal securities laws. SunTrust also proposes to have certain director and officer interlocks with the Funds. In particular, SunTrust proposes that an officer of Company serve as chairman of the Funds' four-member board of directors. SunTrust also proposes that an officer of Company serve as a junior-level officer of the Funds. The Board previously has authorized a bank holding company to have director and officer interlocks with mutual funds that the bank holding company advises. The Board does not believe that the proposed interlocks between Company and the Funds in this case would compromise the independence of the board of directors of the Funds or result in the control of the Funds by SunTrust or Company. Other Activities Approved by Regulation The Board previously has determined by regulation that credit and credit-related activities; commercial real estate equity; leasing; trust company; financial and investment advisory; securities brokerage, riskless principal, private placement, and other transactional activities; and bank-eligible underwriting and dealing activities are closely related to banking within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. SunTrust has committed to conduct each of these activities in accordance with Regulation Y and relevant Board interpretations and orders. Proper Incident to Banking Standard In order to approve the proposal, the Board also must determine that the proposed activities are a proper incident to banking, that is, that the proposed transaction "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public . . . that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices." As a part of its evaluation of these factors, the Board considers the financial condition and managerial resources of the notificant and its subsidiaries and the effect the transaction would have on such resources. In considering the financial resources of the notificant, the Board has reviewed the capitalization of SunTrust and STCM in accordance with the standards set forth in the Section 20 Orders. The Board finds the capitalization of each to be consistent with approval of the proposal. The Board's determination is based on all the facts of record, including SunTrust's projections of the volume of Company's underwriting and dealing activities in bank-ineligible securities. The Board also has reviewed the managerial resources of each of the entities involved in the proposal. The Board has reviewed these resources in light of relevant reports of examination, the results of a recent infrastructure review of STCM and Company, and the Board's supervisory experience with SunTrust and STCM. The Board also has considered that SunTrust has established policies and procedures to ensure compliance with this order and the Section 20 Orders, including computer, audit, and accounting systems, internal risk management controls, and the necessary operational and managerial infrastructure. On the basis of these and all the facts of record, including the commitments provided in this case and the proposed managerial structure and risk management systems of Company, the Board has concluded that financial and managerial considerations are consistent with approval of the notice. The Board has carefully considered the competitive effects of the proposed acquisition. The record reflects that there are few overlaps in the services provided by STCM and Company: STCM specializes in corporate and municipal finance, while Company's business has been focused primarily on equity research, underwriting, sales, and trading, particularly initial public offerings. To the extent that STCM and Company offer different types of products, the proposed acquisition would result in no loss of competition. In those markets in which the product offerings of STCM and Company do overlap, there are numerous existing and potential competitors. Consummation of the proposal, therefore, would have a de minimis effect on competition in the markets for these services, and the Board has concluded that the proposal would not result in any significantly adverse competitive effects in any relevant market. The Board expects that the proposed acquisition would provide added convenience to customers of both SunTrust and Company. The proposed acquisition would allow SunTrust to expand the range of products and services available to its customers and those of Company. In particular, SunTrust believes that the proposed transaction would give emerging and rapidly growing companies improved access to capital and financing, thereby allowing them to expand and create new jobs. Under the framework and conditions established in this order and the Section 20 Orders, and based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that Company's proposed underwriting and dealing activities in bank-ineligible securities are not likely to result in significantly adverse effects that would outweigh the public benefits. Similarly, the Board finds no evidence that Company's proposed riskless principal, private placement, and other nonbanking activities -- conducted under the framework and conditions established in this order and Regulation Y -- would likely result in any significantly adverse effects that would outweigh the public benefits of the proposal. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that consummation of the proposal by SunTrust can reasonably be expected to produce public benefits that outweigh any adverse effects of the proposal. Accordingly, the Board has determined that performance of the proposed activities by SunTrust is a proper incident to banking for purposes of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Conclusion On the basis of all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the notice should be, and hereby is, approved, subject to all the terms and conditions in this order and the Section 20 Orders, as modified by the Modification Orders. The Board's approval of the proposal extends only to activities conducted within the limitations of those orders and this order, including the Board's reservation of authority to establish additional limitations to ensure that Company's activities are consistent with safety and soundness, avoiding conflicts of interests, and other relevant considerations under the BHC Act. Underwriting and dealing in any manner other than as approved in this order and the Section 20 Orders, as modified by the Modification Orders, is not within the scope of the Board's approval and is not authorized for Company. The Board's determination also is subject to all the terms and conditions set forth in Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.25(c) (12 C.F.R. 225.7 and 225.25(c)), and to the Board's authority to require modification or termination of the activities of a bank holding company or any of its subsidiaries as the Board finds necessary to assure compliance with and to prevent evasion of the provisions of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders issued thereunder. The Board's decision specifically is conditioned on SunTrust's compliance with all the Operating Standards and commitments made in connection with this notice, including the commitments discussed in this order and the conditions set forth in the Board regulations and orders noted above. The commitments and conditions shall be deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decisions, and may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. This transaction shall not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective December 18, 1997. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes Asset and ranking data are as of September 30, 1997. Company also currently engages in certain insurance activities and controls several limited partnerships that invest in debt and equity securities. SunTrust has committed to conform the activities, investments, and relationships of Company and its subsidiaries to those permissible for bank holding companies under section 4 of the BHC Act within two years of acquiring Company. SunTrust also has committed that Company will cease, within two years of consummation of the proposal, the sale of variable annuities. See SunTrust Banks, Inc. , 80 Federal Reserve Bulletin 938 (1994). EAM also is an investment advisor registered with the SEC under the 1940 Act. See J.P. Morgan & Co. Incorporated, et al. , 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 192 (1989), aff'd sub nom. Securities Industries Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 900 F.2d 360 (D.C. Cir. 1990); Citicorp, et al. , 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 473 (1987), aff'd sub nom. Securities Industry Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 839 F.2d 47 (2d Cir. 1988), cert. denied, 486 U.S. 1059 (1988); as modified by Review of Restrictions on Director, Officer and Employee Interlocks, Cross-Marketing Activities, and the Purchase and Sale of Financial Assets Between a Section 20 Subsidiary and an Affiliated Bank or Thrift, 61 Federal Register 57,679 (1996), and Amendments to Restrictions in the Board's Section 20 Orders, 62 Federal Register 45,295 (1997) (collectively, the "Section 20 Orders"). Compliance with the revenue limitation shall be calculated in accordance with the method stated in the Section 20 Orders, as modified by the Order Approving Modifications to the Section 20 Orders, 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 751 (1989), and 10 Percent Revenue Limit on Bank-Ineligible Activities of Subsidiaries of Bank Holding Companies Engaged in Underwriting and Dealing in Securities, 61 Federal Register 48,953 (1996), and Revenue Limit on Bank-Ineligible Activities of Subsidiaries of Bank Holding Companies Engaged in Underwriting and Dealing in Securities, 61 Federal Register 68,750 (1996) (collectively, "Modification Orders"). Company may provide services that are necessary incidents to the proposed underwriting and dealing activities. Unless Company receives specific approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act to conduct the activities independently, Company must treat any revenues from the incidental activities as ineligible revenues subject to the Board's revenue limitation. 12 C.F.R. 225.200. See 12 U.S.C. §§ 221a and 377. As defined under the 1940 Act, a principal underwriter is any underwriter who, as a principal, purchases from a mutual fund any security for distribution, or who as agent for such fund sells or has the right to sell the fund's securities to a dealer and/or to the public. 15 U.S.C. § 80a-2(a)(29). An independent distributor, or intermediaries other than SunTrust or Company, would enter into any sales agreements with financial intermediaries to sell shares of the Funds. The independent distributor would be responsible for placing all advertisements and would have legal responsibility under the rules of NASD for the form and use of all advertising and sales literature prepared by SunTrust or Company and also would be responsible for filing these materials with the NASD or SEC. This officer would have no policy-making authority at the Funds and would not be responsible for policy-making functions. See Bankers Trust New York Corporation, 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin 780 (1997); Commerzbank AG, 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin 679 (1997). See 12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(1), (2)(i)(ii); (3), (5), (6), (7)(i), (7)(ii), (7)(iii), (7)(v), (8)(i) and (8)(ii). See 12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8). See 12 C.F.R. 225.26. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Phillips, Ferguson, and Gramlich. Absent and not voting: Governor Meyer.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today issued an interim rule and requested public comment on amendments to reduce regulatory burden in risk-based capital guidelines that apply to banking organizations with significant trading activities. The action was issued jointly with the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. The interim rule is effective December 31, 1997. Comment is requested by March 2, 1998. The amendments eliminate the requirement that when an institution measures specific market risk using its internal model, the total capital charge for specific risk must equal at least 50 percent of the standard specific risk capital charge. The amendments implement a revision to the Basle Accord that permits such treatment for an institution whose internal model adequately measures specific risk. The rule will reduce regulatory burden for institutions with qualifying internal models because they will no longer be required to calculate a standard specific risk capital charge. The interagency notice is attached. |
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board is requesting public comment on whether U.S. companies operating in the government debt market of the Netherlands have the same competitive opportunities as Dutch companies in that market. Comments must be received by February 27, 1998. The Primary Dealers Act of 1988 provides that the Federal Reserve may not designate a foreign person as a primary dealer if that person's home country does not grant to U.S. companies the same competitive opportunities in the underwriting and distribution of government debt instruments issued by the country as the country accords to domestic companies. The Board's notice is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced adoption of final amendments to reduce regulatory distinctions between broker-dealers, banks, and other lenders and implement changes to the Board's securities credit regulations. The amendments to Regulations G, T, U and X reflect changes to the Board's statutory authority under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended by the National Securities Markets Improvement Act of 1996, as well as amendments designed to simplify the regulations and reduce burden. They do not change the margin requirements for stocks and convertible bonds. The amendments provide for merging Regulation G into Regulation U, thereby eliminating Regulation G. The Board also will discontinue publication of its quarterly list of over-the-counter (OTC) market stocks that are subject to its margin regulations for broker-dealers effective January 1, 1999, and for other lenders effective April 1, 1998. The final amendments are effective April 1, 1998. Compliance with Regulation T is optional until July 1, 1998. The Board also announced an advance notice of proposed rulemaking and requested public comment to amend Regulations T, U, and X. Comment is requested by April 1, 1998. Comment is sought on all aspects of these regulations, including issues stemming from the consolidation of Regulation G into Regulation U. The Board's notices are attached. Final rule: | Proposed rule: |