Testimony of Governor Susan M. Phillips FASB proposals for derivatives and risk management Before the Subcommittee on Capital Markets, Securities and Government Sponsored Enterprises of the Committee on Banking and Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives October 1, 1997 I welcome this opportunity to discuss the Federal Reserve Board's views on proposed accounting standards for derivatives and risk management activities issued by the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB). In approaching this complex matter, it should be acknowledged up front that most responsible observers and market participants share an interest in improved accounting standards and disclosure of information that is useful and relevant to the broad range of users of financial statements. Thus, the desirability of meaningful disclosure is not the issue. All would agree, I think, that enhanced financial disclosure and market transparency can lead to more efficient financial markets, more accurate pricing of risks, and more effective market discipline. With respect to financial disclosures, the interests of most firm managers, investors, and other market participants are essentially the same. Market participants can benefit from enhanced disclosure by being in a better position to understand the financial condition of their counterparties and competitors. Investors have an obvious interest in being able to make meaningful assessments of a firm's performance, underlying trends, and income-producing potential. Sound, well-managed firms can benefit if better disclosure enables them to obtain funds at risk premiums that accurately reflect their lower risk profiles. Inadequate financial disclosures, on the other hand, could penalize well-managed firms if market participants are unable to assess their fundamental financial strength. While most market participants favor sound accounting standards and meaningful disclosure, a key question is how to ensure that accounting practices and techniques reflect, and are consistent with, how a business is run, that is, its overall business strategy. Indeed, accounting methodology should measure the results of a business purpose or strategy, and not be an end in itself. For example, in the case of a company that actively trades financial instruments or other products to profit from short-term price movements, such as a securities firm, reporting trading positions at fair values appropriately measures the success or failure of that business strategy, and market participants expect this reporting treatment. However, for many other types of businesses, such as a manufacturer or a lender that funds loans with liabilities of equal maturity, market value accounting in the primary financial statements may not accurately reflect business strategies or appropriately measure the firm's underlying performance and condition. In these cases, although information about fair value can be useful in supplemental disclosures, it is questionable whether there is widespread demand for market value accounting to become the basis for the preparation of the primary financial statements. Although the needs of financial statement users may vary, a critical function of financial statements is to reflect in a meaningful way underlying trends in the financial performance and condition of the firm. The application of market value accounting to business strategies where it is not appropriate, and particularly when applied on a piecemeal basis, may lead to increased volatility or fluctuation in reported results and actually obscure underlying trends or developments affecting a firm's condition and performance. Requiring companies to adopt market value accounting where it is not consistent with their business strategies can cause them to incur significant costs to provide information that may not reflect in a meaningful way their underlying circumstances or trends in their performance. Moreover, from the standpoint of financial statement analysts and other users, having to make adjustments to remove the effects of this accounting volatility from income statements and balance sheets--volatility that is not consistent with a firm's risk positions--can also impose significant costs without offsetting benefits. These problems can be minimized by placing market values in meaningful supplemental disclosures rather than by forcing their use in the primary financial statements. Such an approach would give analysts the information they need, without imposing the broader costs of having to reverse or back out the effects of artificial volatility from the primary financial statements. Of course, financial statements and supplemental disclosures must be accurate and not misrepresent a firm's financial circumstances--a problem that can be minimized when financial reports are subject to thorough review by management and external auditors. Federal Reserve's Experience The Federal Reserve Board has a long-standing interest in the quality of financial reporting. This arises from our role as the nation's central bank, and as the supervisor of bank holding companies, state member banks, and the U.S. operations of foreign banking organizations (FBOs). The Federal Reserve and other bank supervisors are responsible for assessing the safety and soundness of the institutions they regulate. In this regard, the Federal Reserve relies on off-site monitoring, on-site supervision, capital and other regulatory requirements, and policies that encourage sound risk management practices. We believe that market discipline--supported by appropriate accounting standards and public disclosure--complement these supervisory efforts by fostering healthy financial institutions and efficient capital markets. In the course of supervising financial institutions, the Federal Reserve has developed considerable familiarity with financial instruments, both derivative and non-derivative, that are characterized by a wide range of complexity and risk. We have learned that in supervising trading and derivatives activities it is the underlying characteristics of a financial instrument--and how it contributes to the overall risk profile of the firm--that are important, not the instrument's name. Two instruments that differ in name only may have entirely different treatment under existing legal and accounting frameworks, even though the economic risks (including market, credit, liquidity, operational, and reputational risks) they embody are identical. Financial engineering can certainly create derivative instruments that combine risks in complex ways. But the same engineers can create cash instruments that appear simple and traditional, but may have greater risk than many instruments labeled "derivative." Indeed, placing financial instruments in regulatory or accounting pigeonholes without regard to their true risks and economic functions can create disincentives for prudent risk management. The Federal Reserve is increasingly emphasizing the need for institutions to manage the aggregate or portfolio risks of banking and de-emphasizing a focus on specific instruments. Risk should be measured and managed comprehensively. That is, an institution should manage the dynamics of its portfolio rather than manage specific instruments. A focus on individual transactions can ignore the interaction of the specified instrument with other instruments. Although portfolio theory is widely appreciated by bankers and regulators, putting its principles into practice in banking has not been easy. For example, past banking crises have, in part, reflected a failure by some institutions to recognize and limit concentrations of risk within their portfolios. The Federal Reserve is increasingly recognizing the need for supervisory and regulatory policies to be more "incentive-compatible," in that they encourage sound risk management within an institution. Furthermore, supervisory and regulatory policies are placing increasing emphasis on minimizing burden by using internal risk measurement systems, and by reinforcing supervisory objectives through market forces. We believe that market discipline--supported by appropriate accounting standards and public disclosure--complements our supervisory efforts by fostering strong financial institutions and efficient capital markets. We believe this approach is more constructive than rote adherence to rules and regulations that may not be consistent with the firm's own risk management systems. Consistent with these policies, the Federal Reserve and other banking supervisors have explored regulatory approaches that encourage more use of market-value-based measures in risk management approaches. For example, beginning next year, internationally active banks meeting certain criteria for risk management will calculate the amount of capital necessary to support the market risk of their trading activities using their own internal value-at-risk (VaR) measures. A significant effort that could increase supervisory reliance on market discipline in the future is the Federal Reserve's so-called "pre-commitment" approach to determining capital for market risk. It seeks to provide banks with stronger regulatory and market incentives to improve all aspects of market risk management. Other initiatives have improved the focus of our supervision policies and examination practices on institutions' risk profiles and risk management activities in ways that emphasize sound practices and strong internal controls. Moreover, the Federal Reserve has called for improved U.S. accounting and disclosure standards and has had a key role in sponsoring major international initiatives to encourage improved disclosures by the largest banks and securities firms of their trading and derivatives activities. For example, our 1995 and 1996 analyses of the derivatives disclosure by the top ten U.S. dealer banks were used as models for the joint reports by the Basle Committee on Banking Supervision and the International Organization of Securities Commissions, which covered a sample of the largest banks and securities firms in the G-10 countries. These studies revealed major differences in disclosure among the participating countries and highlighted the greater level of disclosure by U.S. dealer banks. In addition, a representative of the Federal Reserve chaired an international working group of the Euro-currency Standing Committee that in 1994 recommended improvements to disclosure by financial intermediaries of the credit and market risks of their trading activities. The Federal Reserve and the other federal banking agencies also developed improvements in derivatives disclosure standards for regulatory reports that are similar to disclosure requirements issued at the same time by FASB in Statement No. 119, "Disclosure about Derivative Financial Instruments and Fair Value of Financial Instruments." Specific Issues Raised by the Derivatives Proposal We share several objectives with the FASB for improving financial reporting. For example, we both support the fundamental objectives of promoting clear and understandable financial reports that increase the transparency of companies' activities. We also share the view that accounting and disclosure standards which faithfully represent financial condition and performance can improve investor and counterparty decisions, thus improving market discipline on banking organizations and other companies. Further, we also agree that current accounting and disclosure standards for derivatives--as well as for other financial instruments--should be improved. We recognize the difficult task that FASB has in developing a standard that is acceptable to its many constituents. In this regard, we understand that FASB has considered and rejected a number of approaches to hedge accounting for derivatives because particular problems were identified with each approach. We also believe that the approach of reporting all financial instruments at fair value in the primary set of financial instruments, while having some theoretical appeal at least for some types of firms, is not an appropriate solution in the near term. In this regard, fair value estimation techniques are not yet sufficiently robust for exclusive reliance in financial statements. For example, difficult valuation issues arise for highly illiquid instruments for which fair value is based on models rather than observed prices, core deposits with varying durations, and the liabilities of a firm whose credit quality has weakened. Furthermore, fair value estimates can be highly subjective, and little guidance is available for measuring fair values in the financial statements. Another difficult issue relates to whether fair value is the most relevant measurement for commercial banks and other firms that are in the business of holding illiquid loans and other assets for the long term. The success or failure of such a strategy is not measured by evaluating such loans on the basis of a price that indicates value in the context of immediate delivery. In this regard, an appropriate value for many bank loans and off-balance-sheet commitments--the one that reflects the nature of a bank's business--is the original acquisition price adjusted for the expectation of performance at maturity. Given the many difficulties of FASB's task, it is not surprising that their proposal raises a number of complex issues. For example, the proposal is likely to lead to increased volatility in income and stockholders equity by companies that manage risk with derivatives. This volatility could be artificial due to the piecemeal approach of marking certain risk positions to fair value, but not all positions contributing to the risk. As a result, there could be accounting volatility that bears little relation to an institution's overall risk position. Supervisors and analysts will have to strip out the artificially created volatility to assess the true performance of the firm. On the other hand, companies that do not manage their risks, or manage their risks solely through cash instruments that are not covered by the standard, would not reflect similar volatility. A simple example might illustrate this concern. Assume a company's activities consist solely of lending long term at fixed rates and funding these loans with variable-rate deposits. I think we can all agree that this company has a significant exposure to interest rate risk. If the company does not manage its risk with derivatives, it would not be affected by the derivatives accounting proposal and would not report any volatility from fair value changes in its financial statements. If, however, the company has a strategy to use derivatives to reduce its interest rate risk and move it closer to a match-funded position, the company may report greater volatility in income and stockholders' equity--a result not consistent with its reduced risk exposure. For example, if the company specified under the framework set forth in the FASB proposal that the derivatives are "cash flow" hedges of variable rate liabilities, the company would have volatility in equity or earnings based on the specifically linked effectiveness tests set forth by the proposal. Thus, the firm in using derivatives reduces its economic volatility, yet increases its accounting volatility. More important, by taking a transaction level approach to hedging, the proposal would not describe well the efforts of more sophisticated market participants to hedge their risks on a comprehensive, portfolio basis. Thus, these firms would effectively be required to keep different sets of books, and their financial reporting may not be consistent with the derivatives' intended use. This leads me to conclude that the proposal could discourage or constrain prudent risk management practices that rely on derivatives. Furthermore, it may not improve transparency of financial information. The proposal also introduces into the financial statements an untested method for reporting loans, deposits, and other assets and liabilities being hedged. These assets and liabilities would be valued at a "hybrid" historical cost and fair value amount on the balance sheet when they are hedged with derivatives that are designated as fair value hedges. For example, generally, the historical cost values of these assets and liabilities would be adjusted for changes in fair value related to the risk being hedged. However, certain other changes in fair value would not be recognized (such as those that arise from other risks, that are the results of an ineffective hedge, or that do not offset a gain or loss on the hedging instrument). These hybrid amounts could differ significantly from--and potentially exceed--fair values. They may also be difficult to verify by auditors and examiners, thus reducing the reliability of amounts reported in the financial statements. The proposed approach is complex, which may increase related developmental systems costs. In this regard, the proposal may cause significant systems changes for institutions that hedge with derivatives. At the same time institutions are making these systems changes, they need to upgrade their systems to address Year 2000 issues. The cost of systems changes arising from the derivatives proposal should be evaluated along with other costs and benefits arising from the proposal. This is particularly important since the derivatives proposal is intended by the FASB to be an interim treatment, and its long-term goal is to measure all financial instruments at fair value. Indeed, the FASB already has under way a project that is evaluating issues related to that goal.
Testimony of Theodore Allison Assistant to the Board for Federal Reserve System Affairs New-design $50 notes and quality assurance Before the Subcommittee on Domestic and International Monetary Policy of the Committee on Banking and Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives October 1, 1997 Thank you for the opportunity to report on the Federal Reserve's plans for dealing with some new-design $50 notes that were imperfectly printed. My statement will address three matters: our view of the quality and quantity of $50 notes currently being produced by the Bureau of Engraving and Printing, the options we are looking into for handling the imperfect notes, and steps we are taking jointly with the Bureau of Engraving and Printing to better ensure that we are both satisfied with notes produced by the Bureau in the future. Background Before turning to those matters, I want to emphasize that the Federal Reserve takes very seriously its stewardship of the Nation's currency. Our objective is to issue notes--new and previously circulated--that meet high standards of quality and security. Indeed, we believe that high quality reinforces security. In general, security features in currency notes are most effective in deterring counterfeiting, and therefore in inspiring confidence in genuine notes, when circulating notes are of consistently high quality and when the public is well informed about the characteristics of genuine notes. In the present circumstances, as a new series of notes is being introduced containing security features that are new to the public, and as we seek to inform the public about the new features, new-design notes put into circulation should be held to a particularly high standard of quality. Despite an admirable history of producing, and delivering to the Federal Reserve, notes of consistently acceptable visual quality, earlier this year the Bureau of Engraving and Printing produced some $50 notes that the Federal Reserve believes fall short of the required standard of quality for notes containing new security features. Specifically, a portion of new-design $50 notes produced before September 8, 1997, have an apparent absence of ink in one or more of the concentric fine lines surrounding the portrait of President Grant. ( with acceptable and unacceptable print quality in the fine line area are attached to this statement.) The educational information prepared for the public identifies these concentric fine lines as one of several new security features that should be present, in the form intended, in a genuine note. Consequently, we do not plan to issue those notes. Current Production at the Bureau of Engraving and Printing Since September 8, 1997, the Bureau of Engraving and Printing has used both improved printing plates and an improved examination system for $50 notes, with good results. Based on an inspection of notes at all of the 13 Federal Reserve offices to which new $50 notes of the type produced since September 8 had been shipped, the Federal Reserve is satisfied that those notes are suitable for circulation. Moreover, the Bureau is producing the higher quality $50s in quantities that will enable all Federal Reserve Banks and branches to have an adequate inventory of those notes by next week. Consequently, the production of the imperfectly printed notes has not materially interfered with the planned introduction of new-design $50 notes. Nor, I might add, has it had any significant impact on the Federal Reserve's note-issuing operations. Disposition of the Inventory of Imperfectly Printed Notes Disposition of the notes that the Federal Reserve considers unissuable will, of course, entail some cost. A total of 217.6 million $50 notes was produced before September 8, some portion of which appear not to be of issuable quality. Of these, 59.5 million were shipped to Federal Reserve Banks and branches, and 158.1 million are being held at the Bureau of Engraving and Printing. The unissuable notes occur more or less randomly throughout the 217 million notes. If all 217 million notes were destroyed and replaced with additional newly printed notes, the cost to the Federal Reserve would be about $7.6 million -- roughly $360 thousand to destroy the notes now being held at the Reserve Banks and the Bureau of Engraving and Printing and to ship replacement notes to the Reserve Banks, and $7.2 million to produce replacement notes. If that were to happen, the $7.6 million cost would be reflected in a correspondingly lower payment of Federal Reserve earnings to the Treasury. Blanket destruction and replacement may not be the only option, however. The Federal Reserve is looking into the feasibility of obtaining the equipment needed to examine these notes, one by one on our high-speed note processing machines, and to recover the notes of issuable quality. We believe that it should be possible to do that. Whether it would be feasible will depend on the costs involved and the quantity of issuable-quality notes that would be recovered. At this time, we do not have good estimates of either of those magnitudes but we hope to have them before the end of this year. Consequently, $7.6 million should be viewed as an upper limit on the cost of this matter, with the possibility that the actual cost will be lower. Steps to Ensure the Production of Mutually Acceptable Notes in the Future In order to ensure that the Federal Reserve and the Bureau of Engraving and Printing not find themselves in the future in the position of having notes produced and shipped which are not of mutually acceptable quality, we have taken several important steps. The Federal Reserve and Bureau of Engraving and Printing have jointly established print-quality standards for a new electronic examination system now being used at the Bureau to inspect all $50 and $100 notes and to review those standards regularly. This examination system promises to provide a more consistent level of printing quality calibrated more closely to the Federal Reserve's needs. In addition, the Federal Reserve has agreed to work with the Bureau before and during production of new-design $20 notes, as well as the other lower denominations, to establish mutually acceptable quality standards and to monitor production. These steps should help to safeguard the security and efficiency of our currency system.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notices of Barnett Banks, Inc., Jacksonville, Florida; BB&T Corporation, Winston-Salem, North Carolina; Central Fidelity Banks, Inc., Richmond, Virginia; Crestar Financial Corporation, Richmond, Virginia; First Citizens Bancshares, Raleigh, North Carolina; First American Corporation, Nashville, Tennessee; First Union Corporation, Charlotte, North Carolina; First Virginia Banks, Inc., Falls Church, Virginia; Jefferson Bancshares, Charlottesville, Virginia; NationsBank Corporation, Charlotte, North Carolina; Riggs National Corporation, Washington, D.C.; Signet Banking Corporation, Richmond, Virginia; SunTrust Banks, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia; Synovus Financial Corp., Columbus, Georgia; and Wachovia Corporation, Winston-Salem, North Carolina, to acquire indirectly Monetary Transfer System, L.L.C., St. Louis, Missouri, through Honor Technologies, Inc., Maitland, Florida, and thereby engage in providing certain data processing services pursuant to Regulation Y. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Barnett Banks, Inc. Jacksonville, Florida BB&T Corporation Winston-Salem, North Carolina Central Fidelity Banks, Inc. Richmond, Virginia Crestar Financial Corporation Richmond, Virginia First American Corporation Nashville, Tennessee First Citizens BancShares, Inc. Raleigh, North Carolina First Union Corporation Charlotte, North Carolina First Virginia Banks, Inc. Falls Church, Virginia Jefferson Bankshares, Inc. Charlottesville, Virginia NationsBank Corporation Charlotte, North Carolina Riggs National Corporation Washington, D.C. Signet Banking Corporation Richmond, Virginia SunTrust Banks, Inc. Atlanta, Georgia Synovus Financial Corporation Columbus, Georgia Wachovia Corporation Winston-Salem, North Carolina Order Approving Notices to Conduct Certain Data Processing and Other Nonbanking Activities Barnett Banks, Inc., Jacksonville, Florida; BB&T Corporation, Winston-Salem, North Carolina; Central Fidelity Banks, Inc., Richmond, Virginia; Crestar Financial Corporation, Richmond, Virginia; First Citizens Bancshares, Raleigh, North Carolina; First American Corporation, Nashville, Tennessee; First Union Corporation, Charlotte, North Carolina; First Virginia Banks, Inc., Falls Church, Virginia; Jefferson Bancshares, Charlottesville, Virginia; NationsBank Corporation, Charlotte, North Carolina; Riggs National Corporation, Washington, D.C.; Signet Banking Corporation, Richmond, Virginia; SunTrust Banks, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia; Synovus Financial Corp., Columbus, Georgia; and Wachovia Corporation, Winston-Salem, North Carolina (collectively, "Notificants"), bank holding companies within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), have requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. ยง 1843(c)(8)) and section 225.24 of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.24) to acquire indirectly Monetary Transfer System, L.L.C., St. Louis, Missouri ("MTS"), through Honor Technologies, Inc., Maitland, Florida ("HTI"), and thereby engage in providing data processing services pursuant to section 225.28(b)(14) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(14)). Notificants are bank holding companies that would control more than 5 percent of any class of voting shares of HTI following consummation of the proposed transaction. Currently, HTI operates an electronic funds transfer ("EFT") network under the tradenames HONOR and MOST, and MTS operates an EFT network under the tradename BANKMATE. These EFT networks provide data processing and data transmission services to banks and retail merchants who are members of their branded automated teller machine ("ATM") and point of sale ("POS") networks. HTI would engage through MTS in certain nonbanking activities related to the operation of ATM and POS networks, including various data processing services, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(14) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(14)). Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (62 Federal Register 44,130 (1997)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the notice and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. As in other cases, the Board also sought comments from the Department of Justice on the competitive effects of this proposal. The Department of Justice indicated that it had no objection to consummation of the proposed transaction. Notificants are large commercial banking organizations with headquarters in Georgia, Florida, North Carolina, Tennessee, Virginia, and Washington, D.C. Notificants each engage directly and through subsidiaries in a broad range of banking and permissible nonbanking activities in the United States. Section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act provides that a bank holding company may, with Board approval, engage in any activity that the Board determines to be "so closely related to banking or managing and controlling banks as to be a proper incident thereto." The Board previously has determined that all the activities proposed in these notices are closely related to banking within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Notificants would conduct the proposed activities in accordance with Regulation Y and previous Board decisions. The Board also must consider whether the performance of the proposed activities by Notificants through MTS "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public . . . that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices." As part of this review under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act, the Board considers the financial and managerial resources of Notificants and their subsidiaries, and any company to be acquired, and the effect of the proposal on those resources. Based on all the facts of record, including reports of examination and other supervisory information, the Board concludes that financial and managerial considerations are consistent with approval of the proposal. In addition, there is no evidence in the record that the proposal would result in conflicts of interests or unsound banking practices. Competitive Considerations This proposal would result in the acquisition by HTI of a network operating primarily in Arkansas, Illinois, Kansas, Kentucky, Missouri, Oklahoma, and Tennessee (the "Midwest Region"). HTI currently operates a large EFT network in a multistate area in the northeastern and southeastern United States (the "Southeast Region"). A number of other large networks would continue to operate in the Southeast Region and the Midwest Region and elsewhere throughout the United States. The area of effective competition has been defined by reference to the line of commerce, or product market, and a geographic market. The Board has carefully considered the relevant product and geographic markets in which to analyze the competitive effects of this proposal in light of all the facts of record, including information provided by Notificants, the geographic scope of and services provided by existing ATM networks, and other providers of EFT services. The Board previously has identified three distinct products that may be offered by ATM networks: Network access (access to an ATM network identified by a common trademark or logo displayed on ATMs and ATM cards); Network services (the switching and gateway functions for the network); and ATM processing (the data processing and telecommunications facilities used to operate, monitor, and support a bank's ATMs). HONOR provides all three services to its network members. BANKMATE provides only network access directly; network services and ATM processing are provided to members of BANKMATE through the current owner of MTS, MasterCard International. HTI is not acquiring from the network services or processing services that support the BANKMATE network. Accordingly, the relevant product market in which to examine the competitive effects of this proposal is the network access market. The Board previously has determined that the geographic market for network access is an area significantly larger than local banking markets and has considered the market area of an ATM network to consist of regions comprising several states. The HONOR network operates primarily in Florida, Virginia, and Maryland, with operations in 30 other states. The BANKMATE network operates primarily in the Midwest Region, and is the predominate regional EFT network in Kansas and Missouri. HONOR and BANKMATE ATM service areas overlap in Arkansas, Illinois, Kentucky, Missouri, and Tennessee. There are a number of considerations, however, that mitigate any decrease in existing or potential competition resulting from this proposal. Changes in market concentration, for example, would not be significant. Specifically, in those states where HONOR and BANKMATE overlap, either one or both of the networks has only limited operations in terms of the number of ATMs and financial institution members participating in the network. In addition, in Missouri, where BANKMATE is the leading network and where HONOR has limited operations, a number of other networks are represented and offer alternatives to BANKMATE, including several large regional networks. Similarly, in Tennessee, where HONOR is a leading network and where BANKMATE has a presence, several other regional networks are represented. In addition, several other large regional networks operate in areas adjacent to BANKMATE's network. The Board believes that these regional networks would provide competitive constraints on the BANKMATE network, and that their existence may become increasingly significant as multistate banking organizations continue to expand geographically. Moreover, smaller networks and third-party processors will continue to operate EFT networks within the Midwest Region, and to provide both direct and potential competition for the BANKMATE network. Finally, national networks offer an alternative to regional networks for some financial institutions in the Midwest Region, and national networks appear to be increasing their competitive pressure on regional networks. In addition, the Board has considered HONOR's operating rules, as well as the plans of Notificants to implement these rules for the member institutions in the BANKMATE network. HONOR's operating rules permit all depository institutions to participate in the HONOR network on a nondiscriminatory basis, to join other regional networks and to co-brand their cards and ATM terminals. The Board also notes that national network transactions initiated at a terminal in the HONOR network are not required to be routed through HTI's switch. HONOR's rules, moreover, permit the use of third-party processors and unbranded subswitching of transactions subject only to a royalty fee established to compensate HONOR for the use of its brand. The proposal, therefore, would provide services to depository affiliates of the Notificants and of other shareholders of HTI, as well as to unaffiliated financial institutions, under operating rules that promote open access to the network. Smaller financial institutions would have the opportunity to provide their customers with greater access to their deposit accounts and thereby could compete with larger, multistate organizations for retail deposit funds without substantial investments in their own proprietary ATM networks. In addition, the HONOR operating rules would promote competition between the HTI networks and alternative providers of EFT-related services, including national ATM and POS networks, other regional networks, and third-party providers of EFT switching and processing services, thereby encouraging price and other competition for the services provided by HTI. Moreover, there is no evidence in the record that this proposal would reduce competition among Notificants, the other shareholders of HTI, and other banking organizations as providers of banking products and services. In particular, HTI's operating rules do not set prices that a member institution must charge its retail customers for ATM or POS transactions. In this light, and based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that the proposal would not result in adverse effects such as undue concentration of resources or unfair competition. For those reasons, and based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposal would not have a significantly adverse effect on competition in any relevant market. Public Benefits Section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act requires that, in order to approve a proposal, the Board must determine that the public benefits that could reasonably be expected from the proposal would outweigh potential adverse effects. This is a balancing process that takes into account the extent of the potential for adverse effects, which, for the reasons indicated above, the Board does not believe to be significant in this case. Consumers would benefit from the added account availability and convenience resulting from consummation of this proposal. In particular, an ATM network with a larger number of financial institution members and available ATMs has greater value to network cardholders, because they would have broader and more convenient access to their deposit accounts. In this case, the geographic markets served by HONOR would expand to include the Midwest Region, and, accordingly, the benefits to consumers in these areas would be enhanced, particularly as consumers travel increasingly and business activity continues to grow. In addition, HTI would offer services through MTS to all financial institutions, and smaller financial institutions would have the opportunity to provide their customers with greater access to their deposit accounts. Membership in the BANKMATE network would thereby enable smaller financial institutions to compete with larger, multistate organizations to retain deposit funds without the necessity of making substantial investments in branch systems or their own proprietary ATM networks. Consummation of this proposal would also result in other public benefits. The proposal is expected to produce economies of scale, for example, and to reduce average costs for the combined networks. In addition, the Board expects that a portion of these cost savings would be passed on to member financial institutions, and to consumers, in the form of lower fees. The record also indicates that BANKMATE members would benefit from the expanded research and development programs of the HONOR network, and resulting new products. In addition, BANKMATE members would have access to a broader array of products and services that are currently being offered by HONOR, or that will be in the future, including mini-statement and prepaid phone card dispensing services and home banking services. Additionally, there are public benefits to be derived from permitting capital markets to operate so that bank holding companies can make potentially profitable investments in nonbanking companies when those investments are consistent, as in this case, with the relevant considerations under the BHC Act, and from permitting banking organizations to allocate their resources in the manner they believe is most efficient. For the foregoing reasons, and after careful consideration of all the facts of record, the Board has determined that consummation of this proposal can reasonably be expected to produce public benefits that would outweigh any possible adverse effects under the proper incident to banking standard of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Conclusion Based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the notices should be, and hereby are, approved. The Board's approval is specifically conditioned on Notificants' compliance with the commitments made in connection with these notices and the conditions referred to in this order. The Board's determination also is subject to all the terms and conditions set forth in Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.25(g) (12 C.F.R. 225.7 and 225.25(g)), and to the Board's authority to require modification or termination of the activities of a bank holding company or any of its subsidiaries the Board finds necessary to assure compliance with, or to prevent evasion of, the provisions and purposes of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders issued thereunder. For purposes of this action, the commitments and conditions shall be deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision, and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. This proposal shall not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta or the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective Octover 6, 1997. (signed) Barbara R. Lowrey Barbara R. Lowrey Associate Secretary of the Board Appendix Asset and Deposit Data as of June 30, 1997. Barnett Banks, Inc. , with approximately $44.7 billion in total consolidated assets, is the 23rd largest commercial banking organization in the United States, controlling $33.8 billion in deposits. Barnett Banks operates subsidiary banks in Florida and Georgia. BB&T Corporation , with approximately $23.0 billion in total consolidated assets, is the 35th largest commercial banking organization in the United States, controlling $15.4 billion in deposits. BB&T Corporation operates subsidiary banks in North Carolina, South Carolina, and Virginia. Central Fidelity Banks, Inc. , with approximately $10.7 billion in total consolidated assets, is the 59th largest commercial banking organization in the United States, controlling $8.1 billion in deposits. Central Fidelity Banks operates subsidiary banks in Virginia. Crestar Financial Corporation , with approximately $22.9 billion in total consolidated assets, is the 36th largest commercial banking organization in the United States, controlling $15.9 billion in deposits. Crestar Financial Corporation operates subsidiary banks in Virginia. First American Corporation , with approximately $10.4 billion in total consolidated assets, is the 60th largest commercial banking organization in the United States, controlling $7.4 billion in deposits. First American Corporation operates subsidiary banks in Tennessee and Kentucky. First Citizens BancShares, Inc. , with approximately $8.4 billion in total consolidated assets, is the 65th largest commercial banking organization in the United States, controlling $7.1 billion in deposits. First Citizens BancShares operates subsidiary banks in North Carolina, West Virginia, and Virginia. First Union Corporation , with approximately $142.9 billion in total consolidated assets, is the sixth largest commercial banking organization in the United States, controlling $91.7 billion in deposits. First Union operates subsidiary banks in North Carolina, Florida, Georgia, South Carolina, Tennessee, Virginia, Maryland, Delaware, Pennsylvania, New Jersey, New York, Connecticut, and Washington, D.C. First Virginia Banks, Inc. , with approximately $9.1 billion in total consolidated assets, is the 64th largest commercial banking organization in the United States, controlling $7.7 billion in deposits. First Virginia Bank operates subsidiary banks in Virginia, Maryland, and Tennessee. Jefferson Bankshares, Inc. , with approximately $2.2 billion in total consolidated assets, is the 145th largest commercial banking organization in the United States, controlling $1.9 billion in deposits. Jefferson Bankshares operates subsidiary banks in Virginia. NationsBank Corporation , with approximately $240.4 billion in total consolidated assets, is the fifth largest commercial banking organization in the United States, controlling $126.3 billion in deposits. NationsBank Corporation operates subsidiary banks in North Carolina, Texas, Tennessee, Oklahoma, New Mexico, Arkansas, Missouri, Iowa, Kentucky, and Delaware. Riggs National Corporation , with approximately $5.4 billion in total consolidated assets, is the 90th largest commercial banking organization in the United States, controlling $3.6 billion in deposits. Riggs National Corporation operates subsidiary banks in Virginia and Washington, D.C. Signet Banking Corporation , with approximately $11.9 billion in total consolidated assets, is the 56th largest commercial banking organization in the United States, controlling $8.2 billion in deposits. Signet Banking Corporation operates subsidiary banks in Maryland, Virginia, and Washington, D.C. SunTrust Banks, Inc. , with approximately $55.4 billion in total consolidated assets, is the 18th largest commercial banking organization in the United States, controlling $34.6 billion in deposits. SunTrust Banks operates subsidiary banks in Georgia, Florida, Tennessee, and Alabama. Synovus Financial Corporation , with approximately $9.2 billion in total consolidated assets, is the 62nd largest commercial banking organization in the United States, controlling $7.5 billion in deposits. Synovus Financial Corporation operates subsidiary banks in Georgia, South Carolina, Alabama, and Florida. Wachovia Corporation , with approximately $48.5 billion in total consolidated assets, is the 21st largest commercial banking organization in the United States, controlling $27.8 billion in deposits. Wachovia Corporation operates subsidiary banks in North Carolina and Delaware. Footnotes As a result of recently proposed mergers and acquisitions involving HTI shareholders, the interests of BB&T Corporation; Central Fidelity Banks, Inc.; First American Corporation; First Citizens Bancshares; First Virginia Banks, Inc.; Jefferson Bancshares; Riggs National Corporation; Signet Banking Corporation; SunTrust Banks, Inc.; and Synovus Financial Corp., each will increase to more than 5 percent of HTI's class A voting shares. Accordingly, each of these bank holding companies has requested the Board's approval to acquire more than 5 percent of any class of HTI's voting shares, and thereby engage through HTI in providing certain data processing and management consulting services, pursuant to sections 225.28(b)(14) and 225.28(b)(9) of Regulation Y. The Board previously has determined that the activities conducted by HTI are closely related to banking within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. See Barnett Banks, Inc., et al. , 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin 131 (1996) (" Honor/Most Order "), 12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(14), and 12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(9). These bank holding companies would conduct the proposed activities in accordance with Regulation Y and previous Board decisions. In general, an ATM network is an arrangement whereby more than one ATM and more than one depository institution (or the depository records of such institutions) are connected by electronic or telecommunications means to one or more computers, processors, or switches for the purposes of providing ATM services to retail customers of the institutions. POS terminals are generally located in the establishments of merchants. They accept ATM or similar cards and, using the ATM network or a parallel POS-only network, provide access to the cardholder's account to transfer funds to the merchant's account. Asset and deposit information for each of the Notificants is set forth in the Appendix. See 12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(14); Bank of New York Company, Inc., et al. , 80 Federal Reserve Bulletin 1107 (1994) (" Bank of New York Order "); Banc One Corporation, et al. , 81 Federal Reserve Bulletin 492 (1995) ("EPS Order"); and Honor/Most Order . The Board notes that ATM activities must be conducted in accordance with applicable federal and state laws, including applicable branching laws. See 12 U.S.C. ยง 1843(c)(8). See 12 C.F.R. 225.26. HTI operates the second largest EFT network in the United States, and MTS operates the tenth largest EFT network. See EPS Order. MasterCard International would continue to provide network and processing services to BANKMATE members during a transitional period, not to exceed one year. The record indicates that MasterCard International would continue to provide these services to its affiliates and their members, but does not intend to enter the market to provide these services to nonaffiliated entities. In considering network access for POS transactions, the Board notes that there are a number of competitors in the market, including two large national networks that have grown substantially in recent years nationwide (VisaCheck and MasterMoney). See EPS Order. HONOR has five members in Missouri, and HONOR ATM terminals in Missouri account for less than 1 percent of the total ATMs in the state. BANKMATE has one member in Tennessee, and BANKMATE ATM terminals account for less than 1 percent of the total ATMs in the state. The record indicates that banking organizations tend to transport regional ATM networks as they expand into new geographic areas See Honor/Most Order . See Honor/Most Order at p. 133. The Board previously has determined that ATM network operating rules are an important consideration is assessing the competitive impact of a proposal under the section 4(c)(8) factors. See Bank of New York Order , EPS Order . In addition, HTI's corporate structure ensures that its board of directors will represent a wide range of interest and that HTI policy will not be dominated by the organizations with the largest shareholdings. The members of the Company's board of directors will be appointed by HTI's Class A shareholders, which are all financial institutions. The Class A shareholders consist of both net issuers and net acquirers of network transactions, vary in asset size of the organization, and are geographically diverse. See Honor/Most Order . "Subswitching" refers to the switching of transactions between members of the same regional network without accessing that network, and, therefore, without paying the network's switch fee. Generally, this is accomplished by routing the transaction through a third-party processor that provides ATM processing services for both network members. See Honor/Most Order at pp. 132-133. See Honor/Most Order at p. 132. See Honor/Most Order at p. 134. Notificants expect that any BANKMATE processing that is transferred to HTI facilities would result in economies of scale with respect to computer facilities, operations personnel, programming staff, and other support services, and is likely to reduce costs of operation of the BANKMATE network. See McAndrews, "Retail Pricing of ATM Network Services," Working Paper No. 96-4, April 1996, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia (indicating that network fees and consumer prices are lower in larger EFT networks). Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley and Phillips. Absent and not voting: Governor Meyer.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application by Centura Bank, Rocky Mount, North Carolina, to acquire five branches of NationsBank, N.A., Charlotte, North Carolina, and to establish branches at those locations of NationsBank, N.A. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Centura Bank Rocky Mount, North Carolina Order Approving Acquisition and Establishment of Bank Branches Centura Bank, a state member bank in Rocky Mount, North Carolina ("Centura"), has requested the Board's approval under section 18(c) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. ยง 1828(c)) (the "Bank Merger Act") to acquire five branches of NationsBank, N.A., Charlotte, North Carolina ("NationsBank NC"). Centura also has applied under section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. ยง 321) to establish branches at the locations of the NationsBank NC branches to be acquired. Notice of the applications, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been given in accordance with the Bank Merger Act and the Board's Rules of Procedure (12 C.F.R. 262.3(b)). As required by the Bank Merger Act, reports on the competitive effects of the merger were requested from the United States Attorney General, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency ("OCC"), and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ("FDIC"). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the applications and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in the Bank Merger Act and section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act. Centura is a subsidiary of Centura Banks, Inc., Rocky Mount, North Carolina, which is the sixth largest commercial banking organization in North Carolina, controlling $4.6 billion of deposits, representing 6 percent of total deposits in commercial banking organizations in the state. The five branches of NationsBank NC to be acquired control deposits of $98.7 million, representing less than 1 percent of deposits in the state. On consummation of the proposal, Centura Banks, Inc., would remain the sixth largest commercial banking organization in North Carolina, controlling $4.7 billion of deposits, representing 6 percent of total deposits in commercial banking organizations in the state. Competitive Considerations The Bank Merger Act provides that the Board may not approve an application if the effect of the acquisition is to create a monopoly or substantially to lessen competition in any section of the country unless the Board finds that the anticompetitive effects of the proposal are clearly outweighed in the public interest by the probable effect of the proposal in meeting the convenience and needs of the community. In evaluating the competitive factors in this case, the Board has carefully considered the comments of individuals ("commenters") who maintain that the proposal would create a monopoly for banking services in the town of Hertford in Perquimans County, North Carolina. The Board and the courts have found that the relevant geographic market for analyzing the competitive effect of a proposal must reflect commercial and banking realities and should consist of the local area where the banks involved offer their services and where local customers can practicably turn for alternatives. In making a determination on the geographic market in this case, the Board has considered worker commuting patterns (as indicated by census data) and other indicia of economic integration and transmission of competitive forces among depository institutions. Perquimans County is a small county in the northeast corner of North Carolina. Census Bureau data for 1990 indicate that 58 percent of the workers who reside in Perquimans County work outside the county and that 27 percent of Perquimans County residents commute to Elizabeth City in the adjacent county of Pasquotank County, North Carolina. Elizabeth City is approximately 15 miles from Hertford and has a population of approximately 19,700. Hertford, which has a population of approximately 2244, is connected to Elizabeth City by U.S. Highway 17. In addition to having the area's major employers, Elizabeth City has a shopping mall, hospital, and movie theaters. Perquimans County has none of these facilities. Elizabeth City also has the area's only daily newspaper and radio station, thereby providing the primary advertisement media for Perquimans County residents. Based on all the facts of record, and for the reasons discussed above, the Board concludes that the relevant banking market for assessing the competitive effects of this proposal includes Perquimans and Pasquotank Counties, in addition to Camden County ("Tri-County banking market"). Centura is the second largest depository institution in the Tri-County banking market, controlling deposits of approximately $89 million, representing approximately 19 percent of the total deposits in depository institutions in the market ("market deposits"). The NationsBank NC branch to be acquired is the seventh largest depository institution in the banking market, controlling deposits of approximately $17 million, representing approximately 4 percent of market deposits. On consummation of the proposal, Centura would remain the second largest depository institution in the Tri-County banking market, controlling deposits of approximately $106 million, representing approximately 23 percent of market deposits. The market, as measured by the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index ("HHI"), would remain moderately concentrated after consummation of the transaction, and the HHI would increase 145 points to 1765. Eight other depository institutions would remain as competitors in the Tri-County banking market. Centura and NationsBank NC also compete in the Jacksonville, Raleigh, Statesville and Wilmington banking markets, all in North Carolina. See Appendix B. Numerous competitors would remain in each market; in each market, the branch to be acquired is small in relation to the total market deposits; and consummation of the transaction would not alter relevant measures of market concentration. The Department of Justice has reviewed the proposal and advised the Board that consummation of the proposal would not likely have any significantly adverse competitive effects in these banking markets or any relevant banking market. In light of all the facts of record, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposal would not result in any significantly adverse effects on competition or the concentration of banking resources in the Tri-County banking market or any other relevant banking market. Other Considerations The Board has carefully considered the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of Centura and NationsBank NC in light of all the facts of record. The facts of record include supervisory reports of examination assessing the financial and managerial resources of the organizations and financial information provided by Centura. The Board notes that Centura is in satisfactory financial condition and would remain so after consummation of the proposal. In addition, reports of examination assessing the managerial resources of Centura indicate this factor is consistent with approval. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that considerations related to the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the institutions involved are consistent with approval. Considerations relating to the convenience and needs of the communities to be served also are consistent with approval of this application, as are the factors required to be considered under the Federal Reserve Act. Conclusion Based on the foregoing and all the facts of record, the Board has determined that this application should be, and hereby is, approved. The Board's approval of the proposal is specifically conditioned on compliance by Centura with all the commitments made in connection with this application. For purposes of this action, the commitments and conditions relied on in reaching this decision are both conditions imposed in writing by the Board and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The proposed acquisition of the NationsBank NC branches shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day following the effective date of this order, or later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective October 6, 1997. (signed) Barbara R. Lowrey Barbara R. Lowrey Associate Secretary of the Board 1. 10267 Beach Drive, SW Calabash 28467 2. 100 East Cumberland Street Dunn 28334 3. 3364 Harmony Highway Harmony 28634 4. 8800 Richland Highway Richlands 28574 5. 400 West Grubb Street Hertford 27944 Appendix B Other Local Banking Markets Where Centura and NationsBank NC Compete, All in North Carolina Jacksonville -- approximated by the Jacksonville RMA and the rest of Onslow County. After consummation of the proposal, Centura would control 17.6 percent of the market deposits and would remain the fourth largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would not increase and would be 2484 points. Raleigh -- approximated by the Raleigh RMA and the rest of Franklin, Harnett, Johnston, and Wake Counties. After consummation of the proposal, Centura would control 6.5 percent of the market deposits and would remain the seventh largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would not increase and would be 1390 points. Statesville -- approximated by Iredell County, excluding the portion of Iredell County that is in the Charlotte-Rock Hill banking market. After consummation of the proposal, Centura would control 6.6 percent of the market deposits and would become the fourth largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would not increase and would be 2110 points. Wilmington -- approximated by the Wilmington RMA and the rest of Brunswick and Pender Counties. After consummation of the proposal, Centura would control 8.5 percent of the market deposits and would remain the fifth largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would not increase and would be 1679 points. Footnotes The branches are listed in . State data are as of June 30, 1996, and have been updated to reflect transactions as of June 30, 1997. 12 U.S.C. ยง 1828(c)(5). See St. Joseph Valley Bank , 68 Federal Reserve Bulletin 673 (1982). The key question to be considered in making this selection "is not where the parties to the merger do business or even where they compete, but where, within the area of competitive overlap, the effect of the merger on competition will be direct and immediate." United States v. Philadelphia Nat'l Bank , 374 U.S. 321, 374 (1963); United States v. Phillipsburg Nat'l Bank , 399 U.S. 350 (1969). The county has an area of approximately 247 square miles and a population of approximately 10,900. Market data are as of June 30, 1996. In this context, depository institutions include commercial banks, savings banks, and savings associations. Market share data before consummation are based on calculations in which the deposits of thrift institutions are included at 50 percent. The Board previously has indicated that thrift institutions have become, or have the potential to become, significant competitors of commercial banks. See WM Bancorp , 76 Federal Reserve Bulletin 788 (1990); National City Corporation , 70 Federal Reserve Bulletin 743 (1984). As discussed in , the HHI for the Jacksonville, Raleigh, Statesville and Wilmington banking markets would not increase as a result of the proposal. Under the revised Department of Justice Merger Guidelines, 49 Federal Register 26,823 (June 29, 1984), a market in which the post-merger HHI is between 1000 and 1800 is considered moderately concentrated. The Justice Department has informed the Board that a bank merger or acquisition generally will not be challenged (in the absence of other factors indicating anticompetitive effects) unless the post-merger HHI is at least 1800 and the merger increases the HHI by more than 200 points. The Justice Department has stated that the higher than normal HHI thresholds for screening bank mergers for anticompetitive effects implicitly recognize the competitive effect of limited-purpose lenders and other non-depository financial entities. The OCC and the FDIC also have not objected to the proposal. Some commenters contend that no alternative provider of banking services would remain in Hertford if the acquisition was made. Another commenter maintains that the loss of a banking organization would adversely affect economic development in Perquimans County. As discussed, eight depository institution competitors would remain in the relevant banking market, including a savings association in Hertford. In addition, Centura received a "satisfactory" rating under the Community Reinvestment Act at its most recent performance rating and offers a wide range of services and products to help in meeting the credit needs of all its communities. Examiners noted that Centura offered a variety of products, including residential mortgages, residential construction, home improvement, small business, commercial, consumer, agricultural, and community development loans and that these products were considered responsive to the significant credit needs in the various communities. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, Governors Kelley and Phillips. Absent and not voting: Governor Meyer. The loans and deposits of the NationsBank NC Hertford branch will be transferred to the existing Centura branch, which is less than one mile away.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve today issued a report that summarizes opinions and views it received from a series of payments system forums held around the country earlier this year. The forums were part of the work of the Committee on the Federal Reserve in the Payments Mechanism. The committee is currently examining the Federal Reserve's future role in the nation's payments system, in light of the rapid and significant changes occurring in the financial services and technology sectors. It was established late last year by Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan and is composed of Vice Chair Alice M. Rivlin as Committee Chair, Governor Edward W. Kelley, Jr., President William J. McDonough of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and President Thomas C. Melzer of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. In May and June of this year, the committee and the Reserve Banks met with representatives from 450 institutions, including depository institutions of all sizes, clearinghouses and other third-party service providers, consumers, retailers, and academics. Discussions at these meetings focused on five hypothetical scenarios depicting various alternative roles of the Federal Reserve, ranging from exiting the retail payments system to adopting a leadership role in the industry. The report summarizes the views expressed by the forum participants on how the alternative roles of the Federal Reserve would affect the price and accessibility of services as well as the efficiency and integrity of the retail payments system. A large majority of forum participants opposed withdrawal of the Federal Reserve from the check and automated clearinghouse (ACH) services. "While a few large banks and clearinghouses thought the Federal Reserve should exit the check collection and ACH business, the overwhelming majority of forum participants opposed Federal Reserve withdrawal, primarily because of concern about payments system disruptions," the summary said. There was also a general consensus that the Federal Reserve should play a stronger leadership role in improving the efficiency of the check collection system and in leading the industry toward more advanced electronic systems of the future. "Many participants urged the Federal Reserve to collaborate with diverse participants in the retail payments system to share ideas and identify impediments to the transition to a more efficient retail payments system," the summary said. Input from the forums is being used by the committee in preparing its final report and recommendations, which are expected by the end of the year.
Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan Economic and budgetary outlook Before the Committee on the Budget, U.S. House of Representatives October 8, 1997 After decades of budgetary imprudence, there has been a growing recognition of our fiscal problems in recent years and an increased willingness of Presidents and Congresses to address them. The capping of discretionary programs and the first steps to deal with entitlement programs are encouraging, as, unquestionably, is the slower pace at which we are creating new entitlement programs. But it is important to place this improvement in the context of the decades-long deterioration in our fiscal position; we have stopped the erosion for now, but we have made only a down payment on the longer-range problem confronting us. Moreover, much of the fiscal improvement of recent years is less the result of a return to the prudent attitudes and actions of earlier generations, than the emergence of benevolent forces largely external to the fiscal process. The end of the Cold War has yielded a substantial peace dividend, and the best economic performance in decades has augmented tax revenues far beyond expectations while restraining countercyclically sensitive outlays. The payout of the peace dividend is coming to an end. Defense outlays have fallen from 6.2 percent of GDP in 1985 to 3.4 percent this year. Further cuts may be difficult to achieve, for even if we are fortunate enough to enjoy a relatively tranquil world, spending will tend to be buoyed by the need to replace technologically obsolescent equipment, as well as by the usual political pressures. The long-term outlook for the American economy presents us with, perhaps, even greater uncertainties. There can be little doubt that the American economy in the last several years has performed far better than the history of business expansions would have led us to expect. Labor markets have tightened considerably without inflation emerging as it has in the past. Encouraged by these results, financial markets seem to have priced in an optimistic outlook, characterized by a significant reduction in risk and an increasingly benevolent inflation process. For example, in equity markets, continual upward revisions of longer-term corporate earnings expectations have driven price-earnings ratios to levels not often observed at this stage of an economic expansion. Contributing to the expected increases in profits is a perceived marked increase in the prospective rate of return on new business ventures. This is evidenced by the sharp increase in capital investment since early 1993, especially in hi-tech equipment, which has persisted and even accelerated in recent quarters. Underlying this apparent bulge in expected profitability and rates of return, as I suggested in my July Humphrey-Hawkins testimony, may be a maturing of major technologies in recent years. The synergies of lasers and fiber optics have spurred large increases in communications investments. The continued extraordinary spread of computer-related applications, as costs of manipulating data and other information fall, has also been a major factor in increased investment outlays. The combination of advancing telecommunications and computer technologies have induced large investment outlays to support the Internet and utilize it to realize efficiencies in purchasing, production, and marketing. This dramatic change in technology, as I pointed out in earlier testimony, has markedly shortened the lead times in bringing new production facilities on line to meet increased demand, and has accordingly significantly reduced longer-term bottlenecks and materials shortages, phenomena often leading to inflation in the past. Indeed, this faster response of facility capacity, coupled with dramatic declines in transportation costs owing to a downsizing of products, has led to speculation that we are operating with a new "paradigm," where price pressures need rarely ever arise because low-cost capacity, both here and abroad, can be brought on sufficiently rapidly when demand accelerates. Before we go too far in this direction, however, we need to recall that it was just three years ago that we were confronted with bottlenecks in the industrial sector. Though less extensive than in years past at similarly high levels of capacity utilization, they were nonetheless putting visible upward pressures on prices at early stages of the production chain. Further strides toward greater flexibility of facilities have occurred since 1994, but this is clearly an evolutionary, not a revolutionary, process. At least for the foreseeable future, it will still take time to bring many types of new facilities into the production process, and productive capacity will still impose limits on meeting large unexpected increases in demand in a short period. More relevant, by far, however, is that technology and management changes have had only a limited effect on the ability of labor supply to respond to changes in demand. To be sure, individual firms have acquired additional flexibility through increased use of outsourcing and temporary workers. In addition, smaller work teams may be able to adapt more readily to variations in order flows. While these techniques put the right workers at the right spots to reduce bottlenecks, they do not increase the aggregate supply of labor. That supply is sensitive to changes in demand but to a far more limited extent than facilities. New plants can almost always be built. But labor capacity for an individual country is constrained by the size of the working-age population, which, except for immigration, is basically determined several decades in the past. Its lead time reflects biology, not technology. Of course, the demand for capital facilities and labor are not entirely independent. Within limits, labor and capital are substitutes, and slack in one market can offset tightness in another. For example, additional work shifts often can expand output without significant addition to facilities. Similarly, more labor-saving equipment can permit production to be increased with the same level of employment, an outcome that we would observe as increased labor productivity. As I will be discussing in a moment, we are seeing some favorable signs in this regard, but they are only suggestive, and the potential for increased productivity to enhance the effective supply of labor is limited. The fact is, that despite large additions to the capital stock in recent years, the supply of labor has kept pace with the demand for goods and services and the labor to produce them only by reducing the margin of slack in labor markets. Of the more than two million net new hires at an annual rate from early 1994 through the third quarter of this year, little more than half came from an expansion in the population aged 16 to 64 who wanted a job, and more than a third of those were net new immigrants. The remaining one million per year increase in employment was pulled from those who had been reported as unemployed (nearly 700 thousand annually) and those who wanted, but had not actively sought, a job (more than 300 thousand annually). The latter, of course, are not in the official unemployment count. The key point is that continuously digging ever deeper into the available working-age population is not a sustainable trajectory for job creation. The unemployment rate has a downside limit, if for no other reason than unemployment, in part, reflects voluntary periods of job search and other frictional unemployment, and includes people whose skills are not well adapted to work today and would be very costly to employ. In addition, there is a limit on how many of the millions who wanted a job but were not actively seeking one could be readily absorbed into jobs--in particular, the large number whose availability is limited by their enrollment in school, and those who may lack the necessary skills or may face other barriers to taking jobs. The number of people saying they would like a job, but have not been engaged in active job search, declined dramatically in 1996. But, despite increasingly favorable labor markets, few more of these 5 million individuals have been added to payrolls in 1997. This group of potential workers, on balance, is at its lowest level relative to the working-age population since at least 1970. As a source of new workers we may have reached about as far as is feasible into this group of the population. Presumably, some of the early retirees, students, or homemakers who do not now profess to want to work could be lured to the job market. Rewards sufficient to make jobs attractive, however, could conceivably also engender upward pressures on labor costs that would trigger renewed price pressures, undermining the expansion. Thus, there would seem to be emerging constraints on potential labor input. If the recent 2 million plus annual pace of job creation were to continue, the pressures on wages and other costs of hiring large numbers of such individuals could escalate more rapidly. To be sure, job growth slowed significantly in August and September, but it did not slow enough to close, from the demand side alone, the gap of the demand for labor over the supply from increases in the working-age population. Thus, the performance of the labor markets this year suggests that the economy has been on an unsustainable track. That the marked rate of absorption of potential workers since 1994 has not induced a more dramatic increase in employee compensation per hour and price inflation has come as a major surprise to most analysts. The strengthened exchange value of the dollar, which has helped contain price increases, is certainly one factor in explaining business reluctance to grant wage increases. Another explanation I have offered in the past is that the acceleration in technology and capital investment, in part by engendering important changes in the types of facilities with which people work on a day-by-day basis, has also induced a discernible increase in fear of job skill obsolescence and, hence, an increasing willingness to seek job security in lieu of wage gains. Certainly, the dramatic rise in recent years of on-the-job training and a substantial increase in people returning to school--especially those aged twenty-five to thirty-four, mainly at the college level-- suggests significant concerns about skills. But the force of insecurity may be fading. Public opinion polls, which recorded a marked increase in fear of job loss from 1991 to 1995, a period of tightening labor markets, now indicate a partial reversal of that uptrend. To be sure, there is still little evidence of wage acceleration. To believe, however, that wage pressures will not intensify as the group of people who are not working, but who would like to, rapidly diminishes, strains credibility. The law of supply and demand has not been repealed. If labor demand continues to outpace sustainable increases in supply, the question is surely when, not whether, labor costs will escalate more rapidly. Of course, a falloff in the current pace of demand for goods and services could close the gap and avoid the emergence of inflationary pressures. So could a sharp improvement in productivity growth, which would reduce the pace of new hiring required to produce a given rate of growth of real output. Productivity growth in manufacturing, as best we can measure it, apparently did pick up some in the third quarter and the broader measures of productivity growth have exhibited a modest quickening this year. Certainly, the persistence, even acceleration, of commitments to invest in new facilities suggests that the actual profitability of recent past investments, and by extension increased productivity, has already been achieved to some degree rather than being merely prospective. However, to reduce the recent two million plus annual rate of job gains to the one million rate consistent with long-term population growth would require, all else equal, a full percentage point increase in the rate of productivity growth. While not inconceivable, such a rapid change is rare in the annals of business history, especially for a mature industrial society of our breadth and scope. Clearly, impressive new technologies have imparted a sense of change in which previous economic relationships are seen as being less reliable now. Improvements in productivity are possible if worker skills increase, but gains come slowly through experience, education, and on-the-job training. They are also possible as capital substitutes for labor, but that is limited by the state of current technology. Very significant advances in productivity require technological breakthroughs that alter fundamentally the efficiency with which we use our labor and capital resources. But at the cutting edge of technology, where America finds itself, major improvements cannot be produced on demand. New ideas that matter are hard won. Short of a marked slowing in the demand for goods and services and, hence, labor--or a degree of acceleration of productivity growth that appears unlikely--the imbalance between the growth in labor demand and the expansion of potential labor supply of recent years must eventually erode the current state of inflation quiescence and, with it, the solid growth of real activity. In this context, the economic outlook sketched out for the United States by both the Office of Management and Budget and the Congressional Budget Office is realistic, even in some sense conservative. But you should recognize the range of possible long-term outcomes, both significantly better or worse, has risen markedly in the last year. An acceleration of productivity growth, should it materialize, would put the economy on a higher trend growth path than they have projected. The development of inflationary pressures, on the other hand, would doubtless create an environment of slower growth in real output than that projected by OMB or CBO. A reemergence of inflation is, without question, the greatest threat to sustaining what has been a balanced economic expansion virtually without parallel in recent decades. In this regard, we at the Federal Reserve recognize that how we handle monetary policy will be a significant factor influencing the path of economic growth and, hence, fiscal outcomes. Given the wider range of possible outcomes that we face for long-term economic growth, the corresponding ranges of possible budget outcomes over the next five to ten years also has widened appreciably. In addition to the uncertainties associated with economic outcomes, questions may be raised about other assumptions behind both projected receipts and outlays. With regard to the former, it is difficult to believe that our much higher-than-expected income tax receipts of late are unrelated to the huge increase in capital gains, which since 1995 have totaled the equivalent of one-third of national income. Aside from the question of whether stock prices will rise or fall, it clearly would be unrealistic to look for a continuation of stock market gains of anything like the magnitude of those recorded in the past couple of years. On the outlay side, the recently enacted budget agreement relies importantly on significant, but as-yet-unspecified, restraints on discretionary spending to be made in the years 2001, 2002, and thereafter. Supporters of each program expect the restraints to fall elsewhere. Inevitably, the eventual publication of the detail will expose deep political divisions, which could make the realization of the budget projections less likely. In addition, while the budget agreement included significant cuts in Medicare spending, past experience has shown us how difficult Medicare is to control, raising the possibility that savings will never be realized. More generally, I wonder whether there is enough funding slack to accommodate contingencies, or the inevitable new, but as yet unidentified, spending programs. Budget forecasts are understandably subject to fairly large errors. Seemingly small changes in receipts and outlays are magnified in the budget deficit. For example, during the 1990s, the average absolute error in the projections of February for receipts and outlays in the fiscal years starting the subsequent October has been greater than four percent. A four percent error in both outlays and receipts in opposite directions amounts to more than $125 billion annually. Indeed, the uncertainty of budget forecasts is no better illustrated than by an admittedly extreme case. During the last two and a half years the projection of the fiscal balance, excluding new initiatives, for the year 2002 has changed by about $250 billion. While all this fortunately has been in the direction of smaller deficits, the degree of uncertainty suggests that the error could just as easily be on the other side. With this high level of uncertainty in projecting budget totals and associated deficits, the Congress needs to evaluate the consequences to long-term economic growth of errors in fiscal policy. A base issue in such an evaluation is whether we are better off to be targeting a large deficit, balance, or a chronic surplus in our unified budget. There is nothing special about budget balance per se, except that it is far superior to deficits. I have always emphasized the value of a budgetary surplus in increasing national savings, especially when American private domestic savings is low, as it is today. Higher national savings lead in the long run to higher investment and living standards. They also foster low inflation. Low inflation itself may be responsible, in part, for higher productivity growth and larger gains in standards of living. If economic growth and rising living standards, fostered by investment and price stability, are our goal, fiscal policy in my judgment will need to be biased toward surpluses in the years immediately ahead. This is especially so given the inexorable demographic trends that threaten huge increases in outlays beyond 2010. We should view the recent budget agreement, even if receipts and outlays evolve as expected, as only an important downpayment on the larger steps we need to take to solve the harder problem--putting our entitlement programs on a sound financial footing for the twenty-first century. Moreover, targeted surpluses could hopefully help to offset the inbuilt political bias in favor of budget deficits. I have been in too many budget meetings in the last three decades not to have learned that the ideal fiscal initiative from a political perspective is one that creates visible benefits for one group of constituents without a perceived cost to anybody else, a form of political single-entry bookkeeping. To be sure, in recent years we have been showing some real restraint in our approach to fiscal policy. Yet, despite terminating a number of programs, the ratio of federal nondefense, noninterest spending to GDP still stands at nearly 14 percent, double what it was in the 1950s. This may be one reason why inflation premiums, embodied in long-term interest rates, still are significant. There is, thus, doubtless a lot of catching up to do. The current initiatives toward welfare, social security, and Medicare reform are clearly steps in the right direction, but far more is required. Let us not squander years of efforts to balance the budget and the benefits of ideal economic conditions by failing to address our long-term imbalances. A critical imbalance is the one faced by social security. Its funds reported imbalance stems primarily from the fact that, until very recently, the payments into the social security trust accounts by the average employee, plus employer contributions and interest earned, were inadequate, at retirement, to fund the total of retirement benefits. This has started to change. Under the most recent revisions to the law, and presumably conservative economic and demographic assumptions, today's younger workers will be paying social security taxes over their working years that appear sufficient to fund their benefits during retirement. However, the huge liability for current retirees, as well as for much of the work force closer to retirement, leaves the system, as a whole, badly underfunded. The official unfunded liability for the Old Age, Survivors and Disability funds, which takes into account expected future tax payments and benefits out to the year 2070, has reached a staggering $3 trillion. This issue of funding underscores the critical elements in the forthcoming debate on social security reform, because it focusses on the core of any retirement system, private or public. Simply put, enough must be set aside over a lifetime of work to fund the excess of consumption over claims on production a retiree may enjoy. At the most rudimentary level, one could envision households saving by actually storing goods purchased during their working years for consumption during retirement. Even better, the resources that would have otherwise gone into the stored goods could be diverted to the production of new capital assets, which would, cumulatively, over a working lifetime, produce an even greater quantity of goods and services to be consumed in retirement. In the latter case, we would be getting more output per worker, our traditional measure of productivity, and a factor that is central in all calculations of long-term social security trust fund financing. Hence, the bottom line in all retirement programs is physical resource availability. The finance of any system is merely to facilitate the underlying system of allocating real resources that fund retirement consumption of goods and services. Unless social security savings are increased by higher taxes (with negative consequences for growth) or lowered benefits, domestic savings must be augmented by greater private saving or surpluses in the rest of the government budget to help ensure that there is enough savings to finance adequate productive capacity down the road to meet the consumption needs of both retirees and active workers. The basic premise of our current largely pay-as-you-go social security system is that future productivity growth will be sufficient to supply promised retirement benefits for current workers. However, even supposing some acceleration in long-term productivity growth from recent experience, at existing rates of domestic saving and capital investment this is becoming increasingly dubious. Accordingly, short of a far more general reform of the system, there are a number of initiatives, at a minimum, that should be addressed. As I argued at length in the Social Security Commission deliberations of 1983, with only marginal effect, some delaying of the age of eligibility for retirement benefits will become increasingly pressing. For example, adjusting the full-benefits retirement age to keep pace with increases in life expectancy in a way that would keep the ratio of retirement years to expected life span approximately constant would help to significantly narrow the funding gap. Such an initiative will become easier to implement as fewer and fewer of our older citizens retire from physically arduous work. Hopefully, other modifications to social security, such as improved cost-of-living indexing, will be instituted. There are a number of thoughtful reform initiatives that, through the process of privatization, could increase domestic saving rates. These are clearly worthy of intensive evaluation. Perhaps the strongest argument for privatization is that replacing the current underfunded system with a fully funded one could boost domestic saving. But, we must remember it is because privatization plans might increase savings that makes them potentially valuable, not their particular form of financing. As I have argued elsewhere, unless national savings is increased, shifting social security trust funds to private securities, while increasing government retirement system income, will lower retirement incomes in the private sector to an offsetting degree. This would not be an improvement to our overall retirement system. The types of changes that will be required to restore fiscal balance to our social security accounts, in the broader scheme of things, are significant but manageable. More important, most entail changes that are less unsettling if they are enacted soon, even if their effects are significantly delayed, rather than waiting five or ten years or longer for legislation. Minimizing the potential disruptions associated with the inevitable changes to social security is made all the more essential because of the pressing financial problems in the Medicare system, social security's companion program for retirees. Medicare as you are well aware is in an even more precarious position than social security. The financing of Medicare faces some of the same problems associated with demographics and productivity as social security but faces different, and currently greater, pressures owing to the behavior of medical costs and utilization rates. Reform of the Medicare system will require more immediate and potentially more dramatic changes than those necessary to reform social security. We owe it to those who will retire after the turn of the century to be given sufficient advance notice to make what alterations in retirement planning may be required. The longer we wait to make what are surely inevitable adjustments, the more difficult they will become. If we procrastinate too long, the adjustments could be truly wrenching. Our senior citizens, both current and future, deserve better.
Testimony of Governor Susan M. Phillips The Federal Reserve's supervisory processes Before the Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit of the Committee on Banking and Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives October 8, 1997 Madam Chairwoman and members of the subcommittee, I am pleased to be here today to discuss the Federal Reserve's efforts in recent years to strengthen its supervisory processes and also to share with you the Board's views about what challenges lie ahead, both for the banking system and the supervisory process. As you know, the U.S. economy and its banking system have enjoyed half a decade of improving strength in which U.S. banks have become better capitalized and more profitable than they have been in generations. Moreover, in the past 13 months not a single insured bank has failed, and the Bank Insurance Fund is now capitalized at a level requiring most banks to pay only nominal fees for their insurance. While we can take comfort and, to some degree, satisfaction in these events, experience has demonstrated that at times like these -- if we are not vigilant -- risks can occur that set the stage for future problems. As I begin my remarks, I would like to point out that no system of supervision or regulation can provide total assurance that banking problems will not occur or that banks will not fail. Nor should it. Our goal as regulators is to identify weak banking practices early so that small or emerging problems can be addressed before they become large and costly -- either to the insurance fund or the financial system as a whole. We believe that progress made in recent years to focus our examinations on the areas of highest risk at banking organizations places us in a better position to identify problems early, control systemic risk, and maintain financial stability. That goal and the need to adapt the supervisory process to the potentially rapidly changing conditions in banking and financial markets underlies our decision to pursue a more risk-focused supervisory approach. We are well under way in implementing this new supervisory framework, and initial indications about that process from both the Federal Reserve's supervisory staff and the banking industry, itself, have been favorable. The risk-focused approach reflects our supervisory response to the effects that technology and financial innovation have had on the pace of change in banking organizations, the nature of U.S. and world financial markets, and the techniques employed for managing and controlling risk. As banking practices and markets continue to evolve, our emphasis on risk-focused supervision will be even more necessary in the years to come. The Federal Reserve's Oversight Role As the primary federal supervisor of U.S. bank holding companies, state member banks, and most U.S. offices of foreign banks, the Federal Reserve has sought to apply effective supervision and contain excessive risks to the federal safety net, while also ensuring that banks adequately serve their communities and accommodate economic growth. As the nation's central bank, the Federal Reserve brings a different, important perspective to the supervisory process through its attention to the broad and long-term consequences of supervisory actions on the financial system and the economy. Significantly, the practical, hands-on involvement which the Federal Reserve gains through its supervisory function supports and complements our other central bank responsibilities including fostering a safe and efficient payment system and ensuring the stability of the financial system. Past studies of bank failures have cited a number of contributing factors including, but certainly not limited to, inadequate supervisory staffing and antiquated examination procedures. Over the years, as it has supervised and regulated banking organizations, the Federal Reserve has emphasized periodic, on-site examinations that entail substantive loan portfolio reviews and significant transaction testing to identify emerging problems. In that connection, the Federal Reserve has sought to maintain a sufficient number and quality of supervisory personnel to conduct examinations with appropriate frequency and depth. That approach appears to have provided us with some consistent success. As conditions within the industry have substantially improved, the Board has been mindful of the cost of conducting its supervisory activities and has worked to contain those costs in the face of increased responsibilities. Throughout this period we have recognized the need to maintain stability in our work force, and have sought to avoid excessive build-ups or periods of disruptive retrenchment. That approach has enabled us to maintain what we believe has been an adequate and consistent level of oversight of banking organizations under our supervision during both good times and bad. Developments Driving Change During the past decade, the U.S. banking system has experienced a great deal of turmoil, stress, and change. Ten years ago, many of the country's largest banks announced huge loan loss provisions, beginning the process of reducing the industry's overhang of doubtful developing country loans. At the same time, many of these institutions and smaller regional banks were struggling with oil and agriculture sector difficulties or accumulating commercial real estate problems. These and other difficulties took a heavy toll. By the end of the 1980s, more than 200 banks were failing annually, and there were more than 1,000 other problem banks. This experience provided important lessons and forced supervisors and bankers, alike, to reconsider the way they approached their jobs. For their part, bankers recognized the need to build their capital and reserves, strengthen their internal controls, and improve practices for identifying, underwriting and managing risk. Supervisors were also reminded of the need to remain vigilant and of the high costs that bank failures can bring, not only to the insurance fund but to local communities as well. The FDIC Improvement Act of 1991 emphasized that point, requiring frequent examinations and prompt regulatory actions when serious problems emerge. Beyond these largely domestic, institutional events, banks and businesses throughout the world were dealing in the 1980s and 1990s with new technologies that were leading to a multitude of new and increasingly complex financial products that changed the nature of banking and financial markets. These technologies have brought many benefits that facilitate more efficient markets and, in turn, greater international trade and economic growth. They may also, however, have raised macro-stability concerns by concentrating the growing volume and complexity of certain activities within a small number of truly global institutions. It is essential that these largest firms adequately manage the related risks of these activities and that they remain adequately supervised. For it is these institutions that have the potential to disrupt worldwide payment systems and contribute most to systemic risk. In addition to the formal supervisory oversight exerted by regulators, concerns may be eased somewhat by the strong counterparty discipline being brought to bear worldwide on banks and other financial institutions dealing in these new products. The scrutiny among counterparties in the global market place has contributed to improvements in capital positions and in overall risk management practices. In many ways, U.S. banks have been in the vanguard in applying technological advances to their products, distribution systems, and management processes, with such applications and innovations as ATMs, home banking, securitizations, and credit derivatives. Such efforts, combined with greater attention to pricing their services and measuring their risks, have had material effects on the increased strength and profitability that our banks have seen. Within the United States, our banking system has also experienced a dramatic consolidation in the number of banking institutions, with the number of independent commercial banking organizations declining from 12,400 in 1980 to 7,400 in June of this year. That structural change has also contributed to industry earnings by providing banks with greater opportunities to reduce costs. The challenge going forward for many of these institutions may be in managing the growth and the continuing process of industry consolidation. This challenge may be greatest as banking organizations expand, particularly through acquisitions, into more diverse or nontraditional banking activities. That growth into a wider array of activities is especially important if banks are to meet the wide-ranging needs of their business and household customers while competing effectively with other regulated and unregulated firms. However, the managerial implications of rapid growth and growth into new activities should not be overlooked, either by the institutions or their supervisors. Supervisory Challenges Ahead There is also no shortage of tasks facing the Federal Reserve as a bank supervisor, despite the virtually unprecedented strong condition of the U.S. banking system today. We, too, must deal with the evolving financial markets and advances in technology. At the same time, we must ensure that our own supervisory practices, tools, and standards take advantage of technological improvements and financial techniques so that our oversight is not only effective, but also as unobtrusive and appropriate as possible. These tasks are wide-ranging, extending from our own re-engineering of the supervisory process to the way supervisors approach issues such as measuring capital adequacy and how we seek convergence on bank supervisory standards worldwide. Risk-focused examinations Constructing a sound supervisory process while minimizing regulatory burden has been a long-standing and ongoing effort at the Federal Reserve and an objective we have sought to advance with our emphasis on risk-focused examinations. Particularly in the past decade, we have found that the increased range of products and the greater depth and liquidity of financial markets permit banking organizations to change their risk profiles more rapidly than ever before. That possibility requires that we strike an appropriate balance between evaluating the condition of an institution at a point in time and evaluating the soundness of the bank's processes for managing risk. Recognition of the need for that balance is at the heart of the risk-focused examination approach. The risk-focused approach, by definition, entails a more formal risk assessment planning phase that identifies those areas and activities that warrant the most extensive review. This preplanning process is supported by technology, for example, to download certain information about a bank's loan portfolio to our own computer systems and target areas of the portfolio for review. Once on-site, examiners analyze the bank's loans and other assets to ascertain the organization's current condition, and also to evaluate its internal control process and its own ability to identify and resolve problems. As a result, the Federal Reserve is placing greater reliance than before on a bank's internal auditors and on the accuracy and adequacy of its information systems. The review of the information flow extends from top to bottom, and with the expectation that bank senior management and boards of directors are actively involved in monitoring the bank's activities and providing sufficient guidance regarding risk assumption. As in the past, performance of substantive checks on the reliability of a bank's controls remains today a cornerstone of the examination process, albeit in a more automated and advanced form. For example, automated loan sampling is performed for the purpose of generating statistically valid conclusions about the accuracy of a bank's internal loan review process. To the extent we can validate the integrity of a bank's internal controls more efficiently, we can place more confidence in them at an earlier stage and can also take greater comfort that management is getting an accurate indication of the bank's condition. Toward that end, Board staff is working to refine loan sampling procedures that should further boost examiner productivity and accomplish other supervisory goals. Moreover, as examiners are able to complete loan reviews more quickly, they will have more time to review other high priority aspects of the institution's operations. A significant benefit of the risk-focused approach is its emphasis on ensuring that the bank's internal oversight processes are sound and that communication between the bank and senior examiners is ongoing between examinations. That approach is generally supported by institutions we supervise and provides a more comprehensive oversight process that complements our annual or 18-month examinations. Such an approach strengthens our ability to respond promptly if conditions deteriorate. Another benefit of the risk-focused approach has been a greater amount of planning, analysis, and information gathering at Reserve Banks prior to the on-site portion of the examination. Far from reducing our hands-on knowledge of the institution, this approach has ensured that when we are on-site, we are reviewing and analyzing the right areas, talking to the right people, and making better use of our time and that of the bank's management and employees. In addition to improving productivity, it has also reduced our travel costs and improved employee morale. Examination staff at the Reserve Banks indicate that this process may be reducing on-site examination time by 15-30 percent in many cases and overall examination time of Federal Reserve personnel by perhaps 10 percent. While those results are tentative, partial, and unscientific, they are certainly encouraging in terms of resource implications. Complementing the risk-focused approach to supervision are enhancements to the tools we use to grade a bank's condition and management. Since 1995, we have asked Federal Reserve examiners to provide a specific supervisory rating for a bank's risk management process. More recently, the CAMEL rating system, too, has been revised by the banking agencies to place more emphasis on the adequacy of a bank's risk management practices and was expanded to include a specific "S" rating for an institution's sensitivity to market risk. As you may know, the Federal Reserve has also, for some time, used a rating scheme that focuses heavily on managerial procedures and controls in its oversight of U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks. How effective is the risk-focused process? Since economic and industry conditions have been generally favorable for the past several years, there has not been a sufficiently stressful economic downturn to test fully bank risk-management systems or supervisory practices. The market volatility beginning in 1994 did, however, provide some tests for the risk management systems of the larger banks with active trading desks. Nevertheless, there are many indications that bank and supervisory practices are materially better than they were in the 1980s and early 1990s. For example, the risk-focused approach is helping to identify certain deficiencies before they show up in a bank's financial condition. These are evidenced by instances where ratings for the quality of bank management are lower than those for capital, asset quality, or earnings. Because managerial weaknesses eventually show up in a bank's financial condition, it is important to identify and resolve those weaknesses early. In that regard, the risk-focused approach endeavors to prevent problems from developing to the point that they cause unnecessary losses that impair the institution's capital and require resolution under the Prompt Corrective Action mandate. One example of how the risk-focused approach is helping to identify and address deficiencies is our supervisory experience with the U.S. branches of foreign banks. Subsequent to the enactment of the Foreign Bank Supervision Enhancement Act of 1991, which gave the Federal Reserve greater supervisory authority over foreign branches, our examinations uncovered a number of entities with internal control and audit weaknesses. This result was not completely unexpected, as these foreign banking organizations were not previously subject to the same level of oversight as our domestic organizations. Recognizing the seriousness of these weaknesses and their potential for causing problems in the future, the Federal Reserve has taken a number of steps to ensure that practices are materially upgraded at foreign branches and that any weaknesses continue to be uncovered. In addition to identifying and addressing internal control and audit weaknesses through examinations and supervisory follow-up, these efforts include ensuring that the foreign bank provides the necessary managerial support to its U.S. branches, including adequate systems of controls and audit. To place even more emphasis on internal controls and audit systems, the foreign branch rating system was revised in 1994. Furthermore, in 1996 additional steps were taken to ensure that internal control weaknesses are corrected and will not cause financial harm by adopting requirements for audit procedures in situations where significant control weaknesses are detected. These efforts to detect problems at their early stages and resolve them appear to be having positive effects. After peaking in 1993, there has been a steady decline in the number of U.S. branches and agencies with an overall examination rating of fair or lower and a rating of fair or lower in an examination component substantively affected by internal control and audit weaknesses. We believe that our continued efforts in this area will lead to further improvements in the internal control and audit practices of foreign banking organizations Implementing the risk-focused approach has not been an easy task. It has required a significant revision of our broad and specialized training programs, including expansion of capital markets, information technology, and global trading activities as well as courses devoted exclusively to internal controls. These education programs will, of course, need to be continually updated as industry activities and conditions evolve. With the greater discretion provided to examiners to focus on areas of highest risk, ensuring the consistency and quality of examinations has increased in importance. Fortunately, new training courses and improved examination platforms, tools, and programs that guide examiners through the appropriate selection of examination procedures will help. In addition, our ability to evaluate more thoroughly the quality of an examination has improve with the greater depth of analysis provided in supporting examination materials such as the written risk assessments and analysis of exam findings. Those materials are allowing us to perform comparative reviews of examinations across institutions of similar size, risk profile, and complexity to ensure quality and consistency. So far we have been able to evaluate the effectiveness of our examination programs by identifying whether problems are identified early and resolved in a timely fashion, by evaluating whether examination reports and findings provide clear feedback to management and identify areas of highest risk, and by monitoring the extent to which our examinations are complying with statutory mandates for the frequency of examinations. Based on those criteria, I believe our examination program has been generally successful. Application of technology to supervisory process The Federal Reserve has also done much to increase its own use of technology in an effort to improve examiner productivity, enhance analyses, and reduce burden on banks. Much of this effort has been conducted on an interagency basis, particularly in cooperation with the FDIC and state banking departments with whom we share supervision of state-chartered banks. Specific results include the development of a personal computer, laptop workstation that provides examiners with a decision tree framework to assist them through the necessary procedures. The workstation also helps them document their work and prepare exam reports more efficiently. In addition, a software program has also been developed for receiving and analyzing loan portfolio data transmitted electronically from financial institutions. This process not only saves time but also improves the examiner's understanding of the risks presented by individual portfolios. The Federal Reserve is also developing an electronic examination tool for large domestic and foreign banking organizations that enhances our ability to share examination analysis and findings and other pertinent supervisory information among our Reserve Banks and with other supervisory authorities. This platform should substantively improve our ability to provide comprehensive oversight to those firms that are most prominent in the payment system and global financial markets. In addition to examination tools, the Federal Reserve has for many years maintained a comprehensive source of banking structure, financial, and examination data in its National Information Center. By year-end, we will have completed significant enhancements to the tools that provide examiners and analysts at the federal and state banking agencies access to those data. The Year 2000 One of the clearest reminders that managing technology is a challenge of its own is the need for banks to resolve the "Year 2000" problem. U.S. banks appear to be taking this matter seriously and are generally well under-way toward identifying their individual needs and developing action plans. The Federal Reserve and the other federal bank supervisors are reviewing the relevant efforts of every insured depository institution in order to determine whether adequate progress on this issue is being made. This process should be complete by the middle of next year so that any detected deficiencies may be addressed in time. Meeting the demands of this review and ensuring proper remedies both before and after the year 2000 will be a significant and costly task to both the industry and the banking agencies. However, even within the context of banking, the scope of the Year 2000 problem extends far beyond U.S. banks to foreign banks, bank borrowers, depositors, vendors, and other counterparties. Through the Bank for International Settlements and other international forums, the Federal Reserve and other U.S. banking agencies have emphasized the need for all institutions to recognize this issue and to address it actively. Importantly, century date compliance is gaining more attention internationally, and the Basle Supervisors Committee is taking steps to address this matter. Banks and others need to address year 2000 system alterations, not only because of the potential effects on overall markets, but also as a threat to individual firm viability. At a minimum, banks should be concerned about their ability to provide uninterrupted service to their customers into the next millennium. If nothing else, it is simply good business. Efforts to accommodate industry growth and innovation Another goal of the Federal Reserve's supervisory approach is to remove unnecessary barriers that might hinder the industry's ability to grow, innovate, and remain competitive. Recently, the Board refined its application process to ensure that well-run, well capitalized banking organizations may apply to acquire banks and nonbanks in a more streamlined fashion and commence certain types of new activities without prior approval. The Board also significantly revised various rules for section 20 companies and scaled back or removed many redundant firewalls. While these refinements require some changes to the supervisory process, we firmly believe that removing barriers to these lower risk activities is essential to maintaining the industry's health and competitiveness and its ability to serve its customers and the community. Supervising nationwide and international institutions The consolidation and transformation of the U.S. banking system resulting from evolving market, statutory, and regulatory changes are also requiring the Federal Reserve to adapt to new conditions. As previously noted, we are working closely with the FDIC and state banking agencies to deal with the challenges presented by interstate banking and branching to ensure that the dual banking system remains viable in future years. To address that goal, the FDIC, the Federal Reserve, and the state banking departments began on October 1 a common risk-focused process for the examination of state-chartered community banks. Another initiative has been the State/Federal Supervisory Protocol, which commits the various banking agencies to work toward a "seamless" and minimally burdensome oversight process. In short, it sets forth a process in which state banking supervisors will accept the supervisory reports of other agencies for banks operating in their states through branches, but headquartered elsewhere. The fact that the plan has been accepted by all involved parties is encouraging. We now need to ensure that it is implemented as intended, as banks make use of their broader branching powers. Similar coordination efforts are necessary and under-way in an international context. Through the Bank for International Settlements, for example, the Federal Reserve and the other U.S. banking agencies participate with supervisors from other G-10 countries to develop not only prudential capital and other regulatory standards, but also to promote sound practices over a broad range of banking issues. In this regard, the Basle Committee on Banking Supervision, with the approval of the central bank Governors of the G-10 countries, recently issued three documents: one dealing with the management of interest rate risk by banks, one dealing with the Year 2000 problems, and another identifying 25 "core principles" of effective supervision that is directed at bank supervisors worldwide. The Basle Committee is also working to improve international risk disclosure practices of banks, and has created the new market risk capital standard that is based on banks' internal value-at-risk models. That standard goes into effect in January of next year. Beyond the work of the Basle Committee and the banking agencies, we are also meeting with the SEC and international securities and insurance regulators to identify common issues and to bring about greater convergence in our respective regulatory frameworks. That effort also has links to the committee's efforts and should prove helpful in strengthening the oversight and regulation of financial institutions throughout the world that provide a broad range of financial products. Successful groundwork from this effort could also have implications for moving forward domestically in an era of financial reform. Guidance as well as supervisory and regulatory standards such as these -- whether developed in a domestic or international context -- are soon incorporated into examination procedures and help examiners in their reviews of many of the more complex activities of global banking organizations. These global institutions are perhaps the most challenging to supervise. Since it is not feasible for supervisors to review all locations of a global banking organization, emphasis is placed on the integrity of risk management and internal control systems, coordination with international supervisors, strong capital standards, and improved disclosures. Staffing the supervisory process A final supervisory challenge relates to the Federal Reserve's need to continue attracting, training, and retaining expert staff. Retaining sufficient numbers of individuals with the expertise to evaluate fully the risks in a rapidly changing banking industry is a major priority for the Federal Reserve and figures prominently in the bank supervision function's strategic plan. Particularly challenging is attracting and retaining specialists in the areas of capital markets and information technology where we have experienced increased turnover. We will continue efforts to attract and retain both specialists and generalists that are qualified to address issues as the industry evolves. As I have outlined in my testimony, the Federal Reserve's supervisory strategy is to maintain staff that can adequately evaluate the general soundness of banking activities by placing strong emphasis on the bank's management processes, systems, and controls. I believe such an approach will serve us well as the industry continues to evolve either by expanding the scope of its activities or through broader structural changes from financial modernization legislation. Nevertheless, developing the supervisory techniques, and attracting and training the personnel to do the job will pose a continuing challenge in the years ahead. Conclusion The history of banking and of bank supervision shows a long and rather close relationship between the health of the banking system and the economy, a connection reflecting the role of banks in the credit intermediation process. We can expect that relationship to continue and for bank earnings and asset quality to fluctuate as economic conditions change. As supervisors, we must prepare for such developments. In many ways, however, the banking and financial system have changed dramatically in the past decade both in terms of structure and diversity of activities. Risk-management practices have also advanced, helped by technological and financial innovations. I believe that both bank supervisors and the banking industry have learned important lessons from the experience of the past ten years specifically about the need to actively monitor, manage, and control risks. Nevertheless, conditions can always change, and the risk-focused approach will be continually challenged to anticipate and avoid new kinds of problems. We must recognize that a risk-focused approach to supervision is a developing process and however successful it may be, there will again be bank failures. Indeed, having no bank failures may suggest inadequate risk-taking by banks and less economic growth. Through our supervisory process, the Federal Reserve seeks to maintain the proper balance--permitting banks maximum freedom, while still protecting the safety net and maintaining financial stability. Devoting adequate attention to banking practices and conditions and responding promptly as events unfold is the key. We intend to do that now and in the years ahead.
For immediate release
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application and notice of First Union Corporation, Charlotte, North Carolina, to acquire Signet Banking Corporation, Richmond, Virginia, and thereby acquire Signet Banking Corporation's banking and nonbanking subsidiaries. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. First Union Corporation Charlotte, North Carolina Order Approving the Acquisition of a Bank Holding Company By order of the Board of Governors, effective October 14, 1997. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Appendix A Nonbanking Subsidiaries and Activities of Signet First Union proposes to acquire all the voting shares of the following nonbanking subsidiaries of Signet: (a) Signet Commercial Credit Corporation, Richmond, Virginia, and thereby engage in making revolving extensions of credit secured by inventory, accounts receivable and similar security interests, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(1) of Regulation Y. (b) Signet Financial Services, Inc., Richmond, Virginia, and thereby engage in providing discount brokerage services, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(7) of Regulation Y. (c) Signet Insurance Services, Inc., Richmond, Virginia, a grandfathered insurance subsidiary, and thereby engage in providing life and property/casualty insurance, as agent, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(11)(iv) of Regulation Y. (d) Signet Strategic Capital Corporation, Richmond, Virginia, and thereby engage in providing futures commission merchant services and foreign exchange advisory and transactional services, pursuant to sections 225.28(b)(7) and (8) of Regulation Y. (e) Signet Trust Company, Richmond, Virginia, and thereby engage in providing trust services, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(5) of Regulation Y. (f) Virtus Capital Management, Inc., Baltimore, Maryland, and thereby engage in providing investment advisory services, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(6) of Regulation Y. Appendix B 1. Banking markets in which consummation of the proposal would not exceed DOJ Guidelines without divestitures. Annapolis : Approximated by the Annapolis, Maryland, Ranally Metropolitan Area ("RMA"). After consummation of the proposal, First Union would control 2.3 percent of the market deposits and would become the third largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase 3 points to 1112. Baltimore : Approximated by the Baltimore, Maryland, RMA and the rest of Harford County. After consummation of the proposal, First Union would control 14.5 percent of the market deposits and would become the third largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase 101 points to 1185. Fredericksburg : Approximated by Fredericksburg, Virginia, and the counties of Caroline, King George, Spotsylvania, and Stafford, excluding the Washington, D.C.-Maryland-Virginia RMA portion. After consummation of the proposal, First Union would control 7.8 percent of the market deposits and would become the third largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase 25 points to 1302. Johnson City/Kingsport/Bristol : Approximated by the Johnson City-Kingsport-Bristol, Tennessee-Virginia, RMA and Unicoi County, Tennessee, and the rest of the Tennessee counties of Carter and Washington and Scott County, Virginia. After consummation of the proposal, First Union would control 8.2 percent of the market deposits and would become the third largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase 32 points to 1332. Newport News/Hampton : Approximated by the Newport News-Hampton, Virginia, RMA and the rest of James City County. After consummation of the proposal, First Union would control 11.7 percent of the market deposits and would become the third largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase 68 points to 1477. Norfolk/Portsmouth : Approximated by the Norfolk-Portsmouth, Virginia, RMA and Currituck County, North Carolina. After consummation of the proposal, First Union would control 12.0 percent of the market deposits and would become the third largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase 68 points to 1174. Norton : Approximated by Norton, Virginia, and Wise County, Virginia. After consummation of the proposal, First Union would control 33.7 percent of the market deposits and would become the third largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase 135 points to 2058. Pulaski/Radford : Approximated by Pulaski-Radford, Virginia, and the counties of Montgomery and Pulaski. After consummation of the proposal, First Union would control 11.1 percent of the market deposits and would become the third largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase 62 points to 1408. Richmond/Petersburg : Approximated by the Richmond-Petersburg, Virginia, RMA and the rest of the counties Chesterfield, Dinwiddie, Goochland, Hanover, Henrico, Powhatan, and Prince George, and the counties of Charles City, King William, and New Kent, Virginia. After consummation of the proposal, First Union would control 25.7 percent of the market deposits and would become the third largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase 125 points to 1606. Washington, D.C. : Approximated by the Washington, D.C.-Maryland-Virginia RMA and the rest of Loudoun County, Virginia. After consummation of the proposal, First Union would control 15.1 percent of the market deposits and would become the third largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase 61 points to 1103. 2. Banking markets in which consummation of the proposal would not exceed DOJ Guidelines with divestitures, all in Virginia. Roanoke : Approximated by the Roanoke RMA and the rest of the counties of Botetourt and Roanoke, and Boones Mill in Franklin County. After consummation of the proposal and the proposed divestitures to an out-of-market competitor, First Union would control 38.9 percent of the market deposits and would become the largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase 175 points to 1968. Galax : Approximated by Galax and the counties of Carroll and Grayson, excluding the portion that is within the Mount Airy, North Carolina, banking market. After consummation of the proposal and the proposed divestitures to an out-of-market competitor, First Union would control 22.5 percent of the market deposits and would become the largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase 186 points to 1759. Russell : Approximated by Russell County. After consummation of the proposal and the proposed divestitures to an out-of-market competitor, First Union would control 30.3 percent of the market deposits and would become the largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase 175 points to 2916.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application by Wachovia Corporation, Winston-Salem, North Carolina, to merge with Central Fidelity Banks, Inc. ("CFB"), and thereby acquire CFB's bank and nonbank subsidiaries. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Wachovia Corporation Winston-Salem, North Carolina Order Approving the Merger of Bank Holding Companies Wachovia Corporation, Winston-Salem, North Carolina ("Wachovia"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 3 of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. ยง 1842) to merge with Central Fidelity Banks, Inc. ("CFB"), and thereby acquire CFB's subsidiary bank, Central Fidelity National Bank ("CFB Bank"), both in Richmond, Virginia. Wachovia also has requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. ยง 1843(c)(8)) and section 225.24 of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.24) to acquire CFB's nonbank subsidiary, CFB Insurance Agency, Inc., Richmond, Virginia ("Insurance Agency"), and thereby engage in credit life insurance activities pursuant to section 225.28(b)(11)(i) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(11)(i)). Notice of the applications, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (62 Federal Register 44,130 (1997)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the proposals and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in sections 3 and 4 of the BHC Act. Wachovia, with total consolidated assets of $47.6 billion, is the 21st largest banking organization in the United States, controlling approximately 1.2 percent of the total banking assets of insured commercial banks in the nation ("total banking assets"). The subsidiary banks of Wachovia operate in North Carolina, South Carolina, and Virginia. Wachovia also engages through other subsidiaries in a number of permissible nonbanking activities. CFB, with total consolidated assets of $10.6 billion, is the 58th largest banking organization in the United States, controlling less than 1 percent of total banking assets in the nation. CFB operates one subsidiary bank, which is located in Virginia, and engages through a subsidiary in permissible nonbanking activities. On consummation of the proposal, Wachovia would become the 16th largest banking organization in the United States, with consolidated assets of $58.2 billion, representing approximately 1.4 percent of the total banking assets in the United States. Wachovia is the seventh largest depository institution in Virginia, controlling $1.8 billion in deposits, representing approximately 2.5 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in Virginia. CFB is the third largest depository institution in Virginia, controlling approximately $8 billion in deposits, representing approximately 11.1 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in the state. On consummation of the proposal, and taking into account all proposed divestitures, Wachovia would become the second largest depository institution in Virginia, controlling $9.6 billion in deposits, representing approximately 13.2 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in Virginia. Interstate Banking Analysis Section 3(d) of the BHC Act, as amended by section 101 of the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act of 1994, allows the Board to approve an application by a bank holding company to acquire a bank located in a state other than the home state of such bank holding company if certain conditions are met. For purposes of the BHC Act, the home state of Wachovia is North Carolina, and Wachovia proposes to acquire a bank located in Virginia. The conditions for an interstate acquisition under section 3(d) are met in this case. In view of all the facts of record, the Board is permitted to approve the proposal under section 3(d) of the BHC Act. Competitive Considerations The BHC Act prohibits the Board from approving an application under section 3 of the BHC Act if the proposal would result in a monopoly or if the effect of the proposal may be substantially to lessen competition in any relevant market, unless the Board finds that the anticompetitive effects of the proposal are clearly outweighed in the public interest by the probable effect of the proposal in meeting the convenience and needs of the community to be served. Wachovia and CFB compete directly in ten banking markets. The Board has carefully reviewed the competitive effects of the proposal in these banking markets in light of all the facts of record, including the number of competitors that would remain in the markets, the characteristics of the markets, the projected increase in the concentration of total deposits in depository institutions in the markets ("market deposits"), as measured by the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index ("HHI") under the Department of Justice Merger Guidelines ("DOJ Guidelines"), and commitments made by Wachovia to divest certain branches. Consummation of the proposal would be consistent with the DOJ Guidelines in seven banking markets without divestitures and in two additional banking markets with divestitures. Consummation of the proposal in the remaining banking market--the Charlottesville, Virginia, banking market ("Charlottesville banking market")--would exceed the DOJ guidelines with the proposed divestiture. The HHI would increase 277 points to 2237, and Wachovia would become the largest depository institution in the market, controlling approximately 36.8 percent of market deposits. In evaluating the competitive effects of the proposal in the Charlottesville banking market, the Board has considered that, following consummation of the proposal, seven competitors, in addition to Wachovia, would remain in the market, including a large bank holding company competitor with a substantial share of market deposits. In addition, the proposed transaction would not decrease the number of competitors in the Charlottesville banking market because Wachovia would divest nine branches to an out-of-market competitor. The Board also has considered that the Charlottesville banking market is attractive for entry. The Charlottesville Metropolitan Statistical Area ("MSA"), for example, which closely approximates the Charlottesville banking market, substantially exceeds all MSAs in the southeastern United States with respect to median household income, per capita income, and percentage of households with income over $50,000. In addition, two commercial banks recently announced plans to enter the banking market de novo . The Board sought comments from the office of the United States Attorney General ("Attorney General") and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency ("OCC") on the competitive effects of the proposal. The Attorney General has advised the Board that, in light of the proposed divestitures, it does not object to consummation of the proposal. The OCC also has not objected to consummation of the proposal. Based on all the facts of record, including the proposed divestitures, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposal would not have a significantly adverse effect on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in the Charlottesville banking market or in any relevant banking market. Other Considerations The BHC Act also requires the Board to consider the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the companies and banks involved in the proposal, the convenience and needs of the communities to be served, and certain supervisory factors. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that the financial and managerial resources and the future prospects of Wachovia, CFB, and their respective subsidiaries are consistent with approval, as are the other supervisory factors that the Board must consider under section 3 of the BHC Act. In addition, considerations relating to the convenience and needs of the communities to be served are consistent with approval of the proposal. Wachovia also has filed notice, under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act to acquire Insurance Agency and thereby engage in credit life insurance activities. The Board has determined by regulation that credit life insurance activities are closely related to banking, and Wachovia has committed to conduct these activities in accordance with Regulation Y. In order to approve the proposal, the Board also must determine that the proposed activities are a proper incident to banking, that is, that the proposed transaction "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public . . . that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices." As part of the Board's evaluation of these factors, the Board considers the financial and managerial resources of the notificant and its subsidiaries, including any company to be acquired, and the effect the transaction would have on such resources. For the reasons noted above, and based on all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that financial and managerial considerations are consistent with approval of the proposal. The Board also has considered the competitive effects of the proposed acquisition of Insurance Agency. Wachovia operates a nonbanking subsidiary that engages in credit life insurance activities. This subsidiary, however, does not compete with Insurance Agency in any relevant market. As a result, the Board has concluded that the proposal would not result in a significantly adverse effect on competition in any relevant market. In addition, the Board expects that the acquisition would provide added convenience to CFB's customers and the public. Accordingly, based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the balance of public benefits that the Board must consider under the proper incident to banking standard of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act is favorable and consistent with approval of the proposal. Conclusion Based on the foregoing and all the other facts of record, the Board has determined that the application and notice should be, and hereby are, approved. The Board's approval is specifically conditioned on compliance by Wachovia with all the commitments made in connection with the proposal, including the divestiture commitments discussed in this order. The Board's determination on the nonbanking activities also is subject to all the terms and conditions set forth in Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.25(c) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.7 and 225.25(c)), and to the Board's authority to require such modification or termination of the activities of a bank holding company or any of its subsidiaries as the Board finds necessary to ensure compliance with, and to prevent evasion of, the provisions of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders issued thereunder. The commitments and conditions relied on by the Board in reaching this decision are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision, and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The acquisition of CFB Bank shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day following the effective date of this order, and the proposal shall not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective October 20, 1997. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Appendix A. Banking markets in which consummation of the proposal would not exceed the DOJ Guidelines: (1) Fredericksburg Banking Market: The Fredericksburg banking market is approximated by Caroline, King George, Spotsylvania, and Stafford Counties, and the City of Fredericksburg, all in Virginia, except for the portions of these counties that are included in the Washington DC-MD-VA RMA. After consummation of the proposal, Wachovia would control 11.5 percent of market deposits and would become the fifth largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase by 63 points to 1280. (2) Harrisonburg Banking Market: The Harrisonburg banking market is approximated by Rockingham County and the City of Harrisonburg, both in Virginia. After consummation of the proposal, Wachovia would control 10.4 percent of market deposits and would become the fifth largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase by 37 points to 1391. (3) Newport News/Hampton Banking Market: The Newport News/Hampton banking market is approximated by the Newport News-Hampton, Virginia RMA plus the remainder of James City County. After consummation of the proposal, Wachovia would control 15.8 percent of market deposits and would become the third largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase by 39 points to 1414. (4) Norfolk/Portsmouth Banking Market: The Norfolk/Portsmouth banking market is approximately by the Norfolk-Portsmouth, Virginia RMA plus Currituck County, North Carolina. After consummation of the proposal, Wachovia would control 18.6 percent of market deposits and would become the largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase by 47 points to 1070. (5) Richmond/Petersburg Banking Market: The Richmond/Petersburg banking market is approximated by the Richmond-Petersburg, Virginia RMA, the remainder of Chesterfield, Dinwiddie, Goochland, Hanover, Henrico, Powhatan, and Prince George Counties, and Charles City, King William, and New Kent Counties, all in Virginia. After consummation of the proposal, Wachovia would control 16.5 percent of market deposits and would become the third largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase by 78 points to 1469. (6) Washington, D.C. Market: The Washington, D.C. banking market is approximated by the Washington DC-MD-VA RMA and the remainder of Loudon County, Virginia. After consummation of the proposal, Wachovia would control 3 percent of market deposits and would become the eighth largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase by 1 point to 1038. (7) Winchester Banking Market: The Winchester banking market is approximated by Clark and Frederick Counties, the City of Winchester, and the town of Strasburg, all in Virginia, and Hampshire County, West Virginia. After consummation of the proposal, Wachovia would control 12.1 percent of market deposits and would become the third largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase by 61 points to 1718. B. Banking markets in which consummation of the proposal would not exceed the DOJ Guidelines with divestitures: (1) Culpeper Banking Market: The Culpeper banking market is approximated by Culpeper County, Virginia. After divestiture of one branch and consummation of the proposal, Wachovia would control 44.6 percent of market deposits and would become the largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase 135 points to 3772. (2) Farmville Banking Market: The Farmville banking market is approximated by Cumberland and Prince Edward Counties and the City of Farmville, all in Virginia. After divestiture of one branch and consummation of the proposal, Wachovia would control 26.2 percent of market deposits and would become the largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would not increase. Footnotes Wachovia also has requested the Board's approval to exercise an option to purchase up to 19.9 percent of the voting shares of CFB. The option would terminate on consummation of the proposal. Asset data are as of June 30, 1997. State and market data are as of June 30, 1996, adjusted to reflect Wachovia's acquisition of Jefferson Bancshares, Inc., Charlottesville, Virginia. In this context, depository institutions include commercial banks, savings banks, and savings associations. Pub. L. No. 103-328, 108 Stat. 2338 (1994). A bank holding company's home state is the state in which the operations of the bank holding company's banking subsidiaries were principally conducted on July 1, 1966, or the date on which the company became a bank holding company, whichever is later. See 12 U.S.C. ยงยง 1842(d)(1)(A) and (B) and 1842(d)(2)(A) and (B). Wachovia is adequately capitalized and adequately managed. In addition, on consummation of the proposal, Wachovia would control less than 10 percent of the total amount of deposits of insured depository institutions in the United States and less than 30 percent of the total amount of deposits of insured depository institutions in Virginia. CFB Bank also has been in existence and continuously operated for at least the minimum period required under Virginia law. All other requirements of section 3(d) of the BHC Act also would be met on consummation of the proposal. Market share data before consummation are based on calculations in which the deposits of thrift institutions are included at 50 percent. The Board previously has indicated that thrift institutions have become, or have the potential to become, significant competitors of commercial banks. See WM Bancorp , 76 Federal Reserve Bulletin 743 (1984). Thus, the Board has regularly included thrift deposits in the calculation of market share on a 50-percent weighted basis. See , e.g. , First Hawaiian, Inc. , 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 52 (1991). Under the DOJ Guidelines, 49 Federal Register 26,823 (June 29, 1984), a market in which the post-merger HHI is more than 1800 is considered highly concentrated. The Justice Department has informed the Board that a bank merger or acquisition generally will not be challenged (in the absence of other factors indicating anticompetitive effects) unless the post-merger HHI is at least 1800 and the merger increases the HHI by more than 200 points. The Justice Department has stated that the higher than normal threshold for an increase in the HHI when screening bank mergers and acquisitions for anticompetitive effects implicitly recognizes the competitive effects of limited-purpose lenders and other non-depository financial entities. In each market in which Wachovia has committed to divest offices to mitigate the anticompetitive effects of the proposal, Wachovia has committed to execute sales agreements with a competitively suitable purchaser prior to consummation of the acquisition of CFB and to complete the divestitures within 180 days of consummation of the acquisition. Wachovia also has committed that, in the event it is unsuccessful in completing any divestiture within 180 days of consummation of the proposal, Wachovia will transfer the unsold branch(es) to an independent trustee that is acceptable to the Board and that will be instructed to sell the branches promptly. BankAmerica Corporation , 78 Federal Reserve Bulletin 338 (1992); United New Mexico Financial Corporation , 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 484 (1991). Wachovia has further committed that, prior to consummation, it will submit to the Board an executed trust agreement acceptable to the Board stating the terms of these divestitures. These banking markets are discussed in the Appendix. The Charlottesville banking market is approximated by the Charlottesville Ranally Metropolitan Area ("RMA"), the remainder of Albemarle County, plus Fluvanna, Greene, and Nelson Counties, all in Virginia. The Board received a comment from the Piedmont Housing Alliance stating that the proposal would broaden the financial services and assets available to the region. See 12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(11)(i). See 12 U.S.C. ยง 1843(c)(8). See 12 C.F.R. 225.26. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Phillips, and Meyer.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of an Order of Prohibition against Kang Soo Lee, a former officer and institution-affiliated party of the Flushing branch of the Korea Exchange Bank, Flushing, New York, a state licensed insured branch of the Korea Exchange Bank, Seoul, South Korea. Mr. Lee, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order due to his alleged misappropriation of funds during the time he was an officer of the Flushing branch. The order was issued jointly with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. A copy of the order is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today requested public comment on a joint interagency proposal to amend respective risk-based capital standards for banks, bank holding companies and thrifts with regard to the treatment of certain unrealized revaluation gains on equity securities. These gains are reported as a component of equity capital under generally accepted accounting principals (GAAP), but are not currently included in regulatory capital under the federal banking agencies capital standards. Comment is requested by December 26, 1997 . The proposal, if adopted as a final rule, would establish uniform interagency rules permitting institutions to include in supplementary (Tier 2) capital up to 45 percent of unrealized gains on certain available-for-sale equity securities. The proposal, which is consistent with the prudential standards of the Basle Accord, also is being issued by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of Thrift Supervision. The interagency notice is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board today published a revised list of over-the-counter (OTC) market stocks that are subject to its margin regulations (OTC List). Also published today is a revised list of foreign equity securities that meet the margin criteria in Regulation T (Foreign List). The Lists are effective November 10, 1997, and supersede the previous Lists that were effective August 11, 1997. The next revision of these Lists is scheduled to be effective February, 1998. These Lists are published for the information of lenders and the general public. The changes that have been made to the revised OTC List, which now contains 4,880 OTC stocks, are as follows: 165 stocks have been included for the first time, 143 under National Market System (NMS) designation; 52 stocks previously on the List have been removed for substantially failing to meet the requirements for continued listing; 115 stocks have been removed for reasons such as listing on a national securities exchange or involvement in an acquisition. The OTC List is composed of OTC stocks that have been determined by the Board to be subject to margin requirements in Regulations G, T and U. It includes OTC stocks qualifying under Board criteria and also includes all OTC stocks designated as NMS securities. Additional NMS securities may be added in the interim between quarterly Board publications; these securities are immediately marginable upon designation as NMS securities. The Foreign List is composed of foreign equity securities that are eligible for margin treatment at broker-dealers. Effective July 1, 1996, foreign stocks that have a "ready market" for purposes of the Securities Exchange Commission's (SEC) net capital rule may be included on the Foreign List. The SEC effectively treats all stocks included on the Financial Times/Standard & Poor's Actuaries World Indices (FT/S&P-AW Indices) as having a "ready market" for capital purposes. The Board is adding 10 foreign stocks and deleting 30, based on changes to the FT/S&P-AW Indices. The revised Foreign List now contains 1,956 securities displayed in country order. Margin regulations generally limit the amount of credit a person or firm may obtain to buy or carry stock. Stocks on the OTC List and the Foreign List are subject to the same margin requirements (currently 50 percent) as stocks listed on national securities exchanges in the United States. This means a person or firm buying a stock on credit must make a down payment equal to at least 50 percent of the purchase price of the stock and may obtain credit for the remaining 50 percent. These margin requirements are only applicable to credit extended on OTC or foreign stocks after they are placed on the Lists and the Lists have become effective or the stocks are designated as NMS securities. No credit may be extended by broker-dealers on stocks that are not traded on a national securities exchange unless they are on the OTC List, the Foreign List, or in the NMS group. Credit extended by banks and other lenders on foreign stocks or OTC stocks that are neither on the OTC List nor in the NMS group need only conform to the good faith lending limitation contained in Regulations G and U. It is unlawful for any person to cause any representation to be made that inclusion of a stock on the OTC List or the Foreign List indicates that the Board or the Securities and Exchange Commission has in any way passed upon the merits of any such stock or transaction therein. Any references to the Board in connection with these Lists or any stocks thereon in any advertisement or similar communications is unlawful.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice of Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, Toronto, Canada, to acquire indirectly all the voting shares of Oppenheimer Holdings, Inc., New York, New York, and thereby engage in underwriting and dealing, to a limited extent, in all types of debt and equity securities, and in certain other nonbanking activities. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce Toronto, Canada Order Approving Notice to Engage in Nonbanking Activities Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, Toronto, Canada ("Canadian Imperial"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), and its wholly owned subsidiary, CIBC Wood Gundy Securities Corp., New York, New York ("Wood Gundy"), have requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. ยง 1843(c)(8)) and section 225.24 of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.24) to acquire all the voting shares of Oppenheimer Holdings, Inc., New York, New York. ("Oppenheimer"). Canadian Imperial would thereby engage in the following activities: Underwriting and dealing, to a limited extent, in all types of debt and equity securities, other than ownership interests in open-end investment companies ("bank-ineligible securities"); Extending credit, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(1) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(1)); Providing services related to extending credit, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(2) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(2)); Providing financial and investment advisory services, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(6) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(6)); Providing securities brokerage, private placement, riskless principal, futures commission merchant, and other transactional services pursuant to section 225.28(b)(7) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(7)); Underwriting and dealing in government obligations and money market instruments in which state member banks may underwrite and deal under 12 U.S.C. ยงยง 335 and 24(7) ("bank-eligible securities"), engaging in investing and trading activities, and buying and selling bullion and related activities, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(8) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(8)); and Acting as the commodity pool operator ("CPO") of certain investment funds engaged in purchasing and selling futures and options on futures on certain commodities. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (62 Federal Register 43,532 (1997)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the notice and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Canadian Imperial, with total consolidated assets of approximately $165 billion, is the second largest banking organization in Canada. In the United States, Canadian Imperial operates a branch in Chicago, Illinois; agencies in New York, New York, Los Angeles and San Francisco, California, and Atlanta, Georgia; and a representative office in Houston, Texas. Canadian Imperial also engages through Wood Gundy in a broad range of permissible nonbanking activities in the United States and worldwide, including underwriting and dealing to a limited extent in bank-ineligible securities. Oppenheimer, with total consolidated assets of $5.2 billion, engages through its affiliates in a broad range of securities underwriting, brokerage, investment advisory, and other activities. Canadian Imperial proposes to merge Oppenheimer's broker-dealer subsidiary, Oppenheimer & Co., Inc., New York, New York ("OpCo"), with Wood Gundy. Wood Gundy is and, following the proposed merger with OpCo, will continue to be a broker-dealer registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") under the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934 ("1934 Act") (15 U.S.C. ยง 78a et seq. ) and a member of the National Association of Securities Dealers ("NASD"). Accordingly, Wood Gundy is and will remain subject to the recordkeeping and reporting obligations, fiduciary standards, and other requirements of the 1934 Act, the SEC, and the NASD. Following the proposed merger, Wood Gundy also would be registered as a CPO with the Commodity Futures Trading Commission ("CFTC") and would be subject to the recordkeeping and reporting obligations, fiduciary standards, and other requirements of the Commodity Exchange Act (7 U.S.C. ยง 2 et seq. ) and the CFTC. Underwriting and Dealing Activities The Board has determined -- subject to the framework of prudential limitations to address the potential for conflicts of interests, unsound banking practices, or other adverse effects -- that the proposed activities of underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities are so closely related to banking as to be a proper incident thereto within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. The Board also has determined that conduct of the proposed activities is consistent with section 20 of the Glass-Steagall Act (12 U.S.C. ยง 377), provided that the company engaged in underwriting and dealing activities derives no more than 25 percent of its gross revenues from underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities over a two-year period. CIBC has committed that Wood Gundy will conduct its bank-ineligible securities underwriting and dealing activities subject to the Board's 25-percent revenue limit. Other Activities Approved by Regulation or Order The Board previously has determined by regulation that the proposed credit and credit-related activities; financial and investment advisory services; securities brokerage, riskless principal, private placement, futures commission merchant, and other transactional activities; bank-eligible underwriting and dealing, investment and trading, and buying and selling of bullion and related activities to be conducted by Canadian Imperial after its acquisition of Oppenheimer are closely related to banking within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. In addition, the Board previously has determined by order that a bank holding company may serve as the CPO of private investment funds. Canadian Imperial has committed to conduct each of these activities in accordance with the BHC Act, Regulation Y, and the relevant Board interpretations and orders. Proper Incident to Banking Standard In order to approve the proposal, the Board also must determine that the proposed activities are a proper incident to banking, that is, that the proposed transaction "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public . . . that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices." As part of its evaluation of these factors, the Board considers the financial condition and managerial resources of the notificant and its subsidiaries and the effect the transaction would have on such resources. In considering the financial resources of the notificant, the Board has reviewed the capitalization of Canadian Imperial and Wood Gundy in accordance with the standards set forth in the Section 20 Orders. The Board finds the capitalization of each to be consistent with approval of the proposal. The Board's determination is based on all the facts of record, including Canadian Imperial's projections of the volume of Wood Gundy's underwriting and dealing activities in bank-ineligible securities. The Board also has reviewed the managerial resources of each of the entities involved in this proposal. The Board has reviewed these resources in light of examination reports and the Board's supervisory experience with Canadian Imperial and Wood Gundy. The Board also has considered that Canadian Imperial has established policies and procedures to ensure compliance with this order and the Section 20 Orders, including computer, audit, and account systems, internal risk management controls, and the necessary operational and managerial infrastructure. On the basis of these and all the facts of record, including the commitments provided in this case and the proposed managerial structure and risk management systems of Wood Gundy, the Board has concluded that financial and managerial considerations are consistent with approval of the notice. The Board has carefully considered the competitive effects of the proposed acquisition. Canadian Imperial represents that there are few overlaps in the services provided by Wood Gundy and Oppenheimer: Wood Gundy specializes in offering and underwriting and dealing in debt products, while OpCo's business has been focused primarily on equity research and underwriting. To the extent that Wood Gundy and Oppenheimer offer different types of products, the proposed acquisition would result in no loss of competition. In those markets in which Wood Gundy's and Oppenheimer's product offerings do overlap, there are numerous existing and potential competitors. Consummation of the proposal, therefore, would have a de minimis effect on competition in the market for these services, and the Board has concluded that the proposal would not result in any significantly adverse competitive effects in any relevant market. As noted above, Canadian Imperial has committed that, following the proposed acquisition, Wood Gundy will conduct its bank-ineligible securities underwriting and dealing activities in accordance with the prudential framework established by the Board's Section 20 Orders. Under the framework and conditions established in this order and the Section 20 Orders, and based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that Wood Gundy's proposed underwriting and dealing activities in bank-ineligible securities are not likely to result in significantly adverse effects that would outweigh the public benefits. Similarly, the Board finds no evidence that Wood Gundy's proposed riskless principal, private placement, and other nonbanking activities -- conducted under the framework and conditions established in this order and Regulation Y -- would likely result in any significantly adverse effects that would outweigh the public benefits of the proposal. The Board expects that the proposed acquisition would provide added convenience to customers of both Canadian Imperial and Oppenheimer. Canadian Imperial has indicated that the acquisition would expand the range of products and services available to its customers and those of Oppenheimer. Canadian Imperial also has stated that the proposed transaction would result in operational efficiencies that would allow it to become a more effective competitor. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that performance of the proposed activities by Canadian Imperial can reasonably be expected to produce public benefits. Accordingly, the Board has determined that performance of the proposed activities by Canadian Imperial is a proper incident to banking for purposes of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Conclusion On the basis of all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the notice should be, and hereby is, approved, subject to all the terms and conditions in this order and the Section 20 Orders, as modified by the Modification Orders. The Board's approval of the proposal extends only to activities conducted within the limitations of those orders and this order, including the Board's reservation of authority to establish additional limitations .to ensure that Wood Gundy's activities are consistent with safety and soundness, avoidance of conflicts of interests, and other relevant considerations under the BHC Act. Underwriting and dealing in any manner other than as approved in this order and the Section 20 Orders (as modified by the Modification Orders) is not within the scope of the Board's approval and is not authorized for Wood Gundy. The Board's determination is subject to all the terms and conditions set forth in Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.25(c) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.7 and 225.25(c)), and to the Board's authority to require such modification or termination of the activities of a bank holding company or any of its subsidiaries as the Board finds necessary to ensure compliance with, and to prevent evasion of, the provisions of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders issued thereunder. The Board's decision is specifically conditioned on compliance with all the commitments made in connection with this notice, including the commitments discussed in this order, and the conditions set forth in this order and the above-noted Board regulations and orders. These commitments and conditions are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision, and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The proposal shall not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good .cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective October 27, 1997. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes Asset data are as of April 30, 1997, and are based on the exchange rate applicable on that date. Ranking data are as of December 31, 1995. Oppenheimer currently engages in certain insurance and real estate activities, and controls, either by itself or through certain joint venture relationships, several limited partnerships that invest in debt and equity securities beyond the levels permissible for bank holding companies. Canadian Imperial has committed to conform the activities, investments, and relationships of Oppenheimer and its subsidiaries to those permissible for bank holding companies under section 4 of the BHC Act within two years of acquiring Oppenheimer. Canadian Imperial also has committed to cease selling new insurance policies and annuities and to cease making new real estate investments that would be impermissible for bank holding companies under the BHC Act within six months and one year, respectively, of consummation of the proposed acquisition. See J.P. Morgan & Co. Incorporated, et al. , 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 192 (1989), aff'd sub nom. Securities Industries Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System , 900 F.2d 360 (D.C. Cir. 1990); Citicorp, et al. , 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 473 (1987), aff'd sub nom. Securities Industry Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System , 839 F.2d 47 (2d Cir. 1988), cert. denied , 486 U.S. 1059 (1988); as modified by Review of Restrictions on Director, Officer and Employee Interlocks, Cross-Marketing Activities, and the Purchase and Sale of Financial Assets Between a Section 20 Subsidiary and an Affiliated Bank or Thrift , 61 Federal Register 57,679 (1996), and Amendments to Restrictions in the Board's Section 20 Orders , 62 Federal Register 45,295 (1997) (collectively, "Section 20 Orders"). Compliance with the revenue limitation shall be calculated in accordance with the method stated in the Section 20 Orders, as modified by the Order Approving Modifications to the Section 20 Orders , 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 751 (1989), and 10 Percent Revenue Limit on Bank-Ineligible Activities of Subsidiaries of Bank Holding Companies Engaged in Underwriting and Dealing in Securities , 61 Federal Register 48,953 (1996), and Revenue Limit on Bank-Ineligible Activities of Subsidiaries of Bank Holding Companies Engaged in Underwriting and Dealing in Securities , 61 Federal Register 68,750 (1996) (collectively, "Modification Orders"). Wood Gundy may provide services that are necessary incidents to the proposed underwriting and dealing activities. Unless Canadian Imperial receives specific approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act to conduct the activities independently, Wood Gundy must treat any revenues from the incidental activities as ineligible revenues subject to the Board's revenue limitation. See 12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(1), (2), (6), (7), and (8). See The Bessemer Group, Inc. , 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 569 (1996). See 12 U.S.C. ยง 1843(c)(8). See 12 C.F.R. 225.26; see also The Fuji Bank, Limited, 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 94 (1989); Bayerische Vereinsbank AG , 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 155 (1987). Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley and Meyer. Absent and not voting: Governor Phillips.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application by Crรฉdit Agricole Indosuez, Paris, France, to establish state-licensed branches in New York, New York, and Chicago, Illinois, and representative offices in Houston, Texas, and San Francisco, California. Attachment Crรฉdit Agricole Indosuez Paris, France Order Approving Establishment of Branches and Representative Offices Crรฉdit Agricole Indosuez, Paris, France ("Bank"), a foreign bank within the meaning of the International Banking Act ("IBA"), has applied under sections 7(d) and 10(a) of the IBA (12 U.S.C. ยงยง 3105(d) and 3107(a)) to establish state-licensed branches in Chicago, Illinois, and New York, New York; and representative offices in Houston, Texas, and San Francisco, California. The Foreign Bank Supervision Enhancement Act of 1991 ("FBSEA"), which amended the IBA, provides that a foreign bank must obtain the approval of the Board to establish a branch or representative office in the United States. Notice of the application, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published in a newspaper of general circulation in Chicago ( Chicago Tribune , July 3, 1997); New York ( The New York Times , July 10, 1997); Houston ( Houston Chronicle , July 2, 1997); and San Francisco ( San Francisco Chronicle , July 2, 1997). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the application and all comments received. Bank has total assets equivalent to approximately $88 billion. Caisse Nationale de Crรฉdit Agricole, Paris, France ("CNCA"), a foreign bank, holds 100 percent of the shares of Bank. Bank engages in a wide range of banking and capital market activities worldwide directly and through subsidiaries. Bank currently operates a state-licensed branch in New York, New York. In addition, Bank operates a number of U.S. subsidiaries engaged in, among other activities, securities and futures trading, leasing, financing, brokerage, and financial consulting activities. In the United States, CNCA operates branches in Chicago, Illinois, and New York, New York; and representative offices in Houston, Texas, and San Francisco, California. Bank proposes to acquire through merger the U.S. banking operations of CNCA as part of a restructuring of the worldwide operations of CNCA and Bank. After the restructuring and the establishment of the proposed offices by Bank, CNCA and Bank would remain qualifying foreign banking organizations within the meaning of Regulation K. (12 C.F.R. 211.23(b)). CNCA acquired 53 percent of Bank on July 1, 1996. CNCA's home state under the IBA and Regulation K is Illinois and Bank's home state is New York. Collectively, CNCA and Bank are entitled to only one home state under Regulation K. On approval of the proposed offices by the Board and the relevant state banking authorities, CNCA would change its home state to New York. Bank proposes to establish a branch in Illinois, which is outside of Bank's home state. Under section 5(a)(2) of the IBA, a foreign bank, with the approval of the Board and the appropriate state banking supervisor, may establish and operate a state-licensed branch outside the home state of the foreign bank to the extent a state bank with the same home state as the foreign bank could do so under section 44 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act ("FDI Act"). Bank proposes to acquire through the proposed merger all of the U.S. banking operations of CNCA, a transaction that would constitute an interstate merger transaction as defined in the FDI Act. Section 44(a) of the FDI Act permits the Board to approve a merger transaction under the Bank Merger Act between state banks with different home states provided neither of the states has elected to prohibit interstate merger transactions pursuant to section 44(a)(2) of the FDI Act. New York and Illinois both permit interstate merger transactions. Accordingly, the proposed interstate merger transaction would be permitted under section 44 of the FDI Act and the Board is permitted to approve the establishment by Bank of the branch outside its home state of New York provided the remaining criteria of section 5(a) of the IBA are met, including the criteria for establishment of a branch or agency. In order to approve an application by a foreign bank to establish a branch or agency in the United States, the IBA and Regulation K require the Board to determine that the foreign bank applicant engages directly in the business of banking outside of the United States, and has furnished to the Board the information it needs to assess the application adequately. The Board also generally must determine that the foreign bank is subject to comprehensive supervision or regulation on a consolidated basis by its home country supervisor (12 U.S.C. ยง 3105(d)(2); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)(1)). The Board may also take into account additional standards as set forth in the IBA and Regulation K (12 U.S.C. ยง 3105(d)(3)-(4); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)(2)). Section 5(a)(3) of the IBA also establishes additional criteria that must be met in order for the Board to approve the establishment of branches outside a foreign bank's home state under section 5(a)(2) of the IBA. As noted above, CNCA and Bank engage directly in the business of banking outside the United States through banking operations in France and elsewhere. Bank also has provided the Board with the information necessary to assess the application through submissions that address the relevant issues. Regulation K provides that a foreign bank will be considered to be subject to comprehensive supervision or regulation on a consolidated basis if the Board determines that the bank is supervised and regulated in such a manner that its home country supervisor receives sufficient information on the foreign bank's worldwide operations, including the relationship of the foreign bank to any affiliate, to assess the overall financial condition of the foreign bank and its compliance with law and regulation (12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)(1)). With respect to supervision by home country authorities, the Board has considered the following information. The Board previously has determined that CNCA is subject to comprehensive, consolidated home country supervision. No material changes have occurred in the manner of CNCA's supervision since that time that would alter the Board's previous determination. In this case, Bank is supervised on the same terms and conditions as CNCA. Based on all facts of record, the Board has determined that CNCA and Bank are subject to comprehensive supervision on a consolidated basis by their home country supervisors. The Board also has taken into account the additional standards set forth in section 7 of the IBA and Regulation K (see 12 U.S.C. ยง 3105(d)(3)-(4); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)(2)). In this regard, the Banque de France has approved the establishment of the proposed offices. France is a signatory to the Basle risk-based capital standards, and French risk-based capital standards meet those established by the Basle Capital Accord ("Accord"). Bank's capital is in excess of the minimum levels required by the Accord and can be considered equivalent to capital that would be required of a U.S. banking organization. Managerial and other financial resources of Bank also are considered consistent with approval, and Bank appears to have the experience and capacity to support the proposed offices. The Board has reviewed the restrictions on disclosure in certain jurisdictions where Bank and CNCA operate and has communicated with appropriate governmental authorities regarding access to information. Bank and CNCA have committed to make available to the Board such information on their operations and the operations of their affiliates that the Board deems necessary to determine and enforce compliance with the IBA, the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956, as amended, and other applicable Federal law. To the extent that the provision of such information may be prohibited by law, Bank and CNCA have committed to cooperate with the Board in obtaining any consents or waivers that might be required from third parties for disclosure. In addition, subject to certain conditions, the Commission Bancaire may share information on Bank's and CNCA's operations with other supervisors, including the Board. In light of these commitments and other facts of record, and subject to the condition described below, the Board concludes that Bank has provided adequate assurances of access to any necessary information the Board may request. Finally, with respect to the proposed establishment by Bank of a branch outside its home state pursuant to section 5(a)(2) of the IBA, the Board has determined that the additional conditions specified in section 5(a)(3) of the IBA are satisfied. The Board finds, pursuant to section 5(a)(3)(B) of the IBA, that the financial resources of Bank are equivalent to those required for a domestic bank to receive approval for interstate branching under section 44 of the FDI Act. The Board has consulted with the Department of the Treasury concerning capital equivalency. Additionally, the Board finds that all applicable requirements under section 5(a)(3)(C) of the IBA have been met. On the basis of all the facts of record, and subject to the commitments made by Bank and CNCA, as well as the terms and conditions set forth in this order, the Board has determined that Bank's application to establish branches and representative offices should be, and hereby is, approved. Should any restrictions on access to information on the operations or activities of Bank or any of its affiliates subsequently interfere with the Board's ability to determine the compliance by Bank or its affiliates with applicable federal statutes, the Board may require termination of any of Bank's direct or indirect activities in the United States. Approval of this application is also specifically conditioned on compliance by Bank and CNCA with the commitments made in connection with this application, and with the conditions in this order. The commitments and conditions referred to above are conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its decision, and may be enforced in proceedings under 12 U.S.C. ยง 1818 against Bank, its offices, and its affiliates. By order of the Board of Governors, effective October 27, 1997. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes Financial data are as of December 31, 1996. CNCA is a cooperative bank organized under the laws of France. CNCA coordinates the operations of 57 regional and 2,775 local credit cooperatives. CNCA, together with its affiliated regional and local credit cooperatives, comprise the Crรฉdit Agricole Group ("CA Group"). The CA Group has total consolidated assets equivalent to approximately $477 billion. The CA Group is the largest retail banking organization in France and the eighth largest banking organization in the world. CNCA acquired the remainder of Bank's shares on December 23, 1996. See 12 C.F.R. 211.22(c)(1). However, in connection with the acquisition of Bank's shares by CNCA the Board gave CNCA and Bank a limited period of time within which to conform to the home state requirements of Regulation K. See letter dated June 26, 1996, from Jennifer J. Johnson, Deputy Secretary of the Board, to Michael Bradfield, Esq. Under Regulation K, a foreign bank may change its home state once. 12 C.F.R. 211.22(b). Upon consummation of this proposal, CNCA would continue to operate its Illinois branch for a limited period of time in order to wind down its business in accordance with applicable law. Bank would limit temporarily the deposit-taking of its Illinois branch to that authorized for an Edge corporation operating under section 25A of the Federal Reserve Act until the Illinois branch of CNCA surrenders its license. 12 U.S.C. ยง 3103(a)(2). 12 U.S.C. ยง 1831u. See 12 U.S.C. ยง 1831u(f)(6)&(7); 12 U.S.C. ยง 1828(c). N.Y. [Banking] Law ยง 223 (McKinney Supp. 1997); 205 Ill. Comp. Stat. 5/21(c) (West 1997). In acting on an application to establish a representative office, the Board must take into account the standards applicable to the establishment of a branch, agency, or commercial lending company. 12 U.S.C. ยง 3107(a)(2); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(d)(2). Because Bank has applied to establish branches and representative offices, the Board has made its findings with respect to the proposed representative offices in accordance with the stricter standards applicable to branch applications. In assessing this standard, the Board considers, among other factors, the extent to which the home country supervisors: (i) ensure that the bank has adequate procedures for monitoring and controlling its activities worldwide; (ii) obtain information on the condition of the bank and its subsidiaries and offices through regular examination reports, audit reports, or otherwise; (iii) obtain information on the dealings with and relationship between the bank and its affiliates, both foreign and domestic; (iv) receive from the bank financial reports that are consolidated on a worldwide basis, or comparable information that permits analysis of the bank's financial condition on a worldwide consolidated basis; (v) evaluate prudential standards, such as capital adequacy and risk asset exposure, on a worldwide basis. These are indicia of comprehensive, consolidated supervision. No single factor is essential, and other elements may inform the Board's determination. Caisse National de Crรฉdit Agricole , 81 Federal Reserve Bulletin 1055 (1995). The Board's authority to approve the establishment of the proposed offices parallels the continuing authority of the states of California, Illinois, New York, and Texas to license offices of a foreign bank. The Board's approval of this application does not supplant the authority of those states to license the proposed offices of Bank in accordance with any terms or conditions that the states may impose. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, and Meyer. Absent and not voting: Governor Phillips.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today its approval of the application of The Cyprus Popular Bank, Nicosia, Cyprus, to establish a state-licensed branch in New York, New York. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. The Cyprus Popular Bank, Ltd. Nicosia, Cyprus Order Approving Establishment of a Representative Office The Cyprus Popular Bank, Ltd. ("Bank"), Nicosia, Cyprus, a foreign bank within the meaning of the International Banking Act ("IBA"), has applied under section 10(a) of the IBA (12 U.S.C. ยง 3107(a)) to establish a representative office in New York, New York. The Foreign Bank Supervision Enhancement Act of 1991, which amended the IBA, provides that a foreign bank must obtain the approval of the Board to establish a representative office in the United States. Notice of the application, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published in a newspaper of general circulation in New York, New York ( The Wall Street Journal , July 13, 1992). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the application and all comments received. Bank, with $5 billion in consolidated assets, is a commercial bank chartered in Cyprus. The Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation ("HSBC"), a commercial banking organization, and Lanitis EC Estates Ltd., a Cypriot property development company, each own more than 10 percent but less than 25 percent of the shares of Bank. Bank's remaining shares are widely held. Bank is principally engaged in commercial and retail lending, trade finance, foreign exchange, and money market transactions. Bank operates approximately 140 branches in Cyprus, six branches in the United Kingdom, five representative offices in Australia, and representative offices in Canada and South Africa. Bank does not engage, directly or indirectly, in any activities in the United States. The proposed representative office would provide market research, advisory, solicitation, and customer relations services on behalf of Bank. In acting on an application to establish a representative office, the IBA and Regulation K provide that the Board shall take into account whether the foreign bank engages directly in the business of banking outside of the United States, has furnished to the Board the information it needs to assess adequately the application, is subject to comprehensive supervision or regulation on a consolidated basis by its home country supervisor, and has provided adequate assurances of access to information on the operations of the bank and its affiliates to determine compliance with U.S. laws. (12 U.S.C. ยง 3107(a); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(d)). The Board also may take into account additional standards as set forth in the IBA (12 U.S.C. ยง 3105(d)(3),(4)) and Regulation K (12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)). The Board previously has stated that the standards that apply to the establishment of a branch or agency need not in every case apply to the establishment of a representative office, because representative offices do not engage in a banking business and cannot take deposits or make loans. In evaluating an application to establish a representative office under the IBA and Regulation K, the Board will take into account the standards that apply to the establishment of branches and agencies, subject generally to the following considerations. With respect to supervision by home country authorities, a foreign bank that proposes to establish a representative office should be subject to a significant degree of supervision by its home country supervisor. A foreign bank's financial and managerial resources will be reviewed to determine whether its financial condition and performance demonstrate that it is capable of complying with applicable laws and has an operating record that would be consistent with the establishment of a representative office in the United States. Finally, all foreign banks, whether operating through branches, agencies or representative offices, will be required to provide adequate assurances of access to information on the operations of the bank and its affiliates necessary to determine compliance with U.S. laws. With respect to home country supervision of Bank, the Board has considered the following information. Bank is subject to the supervisory authority of the Central Bank of Cyprus ("Central Bank"). The Central Bank is the supervisory authority for all banks licensed in Cyprus, including Bank. The Central Bank obtains information on Bank's financial condition and compliance with law through direct on-site examinations, which generally are conducted every one to two years. The examiners assess Bank's operations through the review of management, lending procedures, asset quality, liquidity management, capital adequacy, profitability, internal controls, and compliance with regulations and guidelines. Examination findings are reviewed with Bank management. The Central Bank also meets with representatives of Bank and its external auditors each year to discuss any significant supervisory issues that may have arisen during examinations. In addition to oversight through direct examinations, the Central Bank receives periodic financial reports from Bank. These include weekly liquidity returns as well as monthly balance sheets. Foreign exchange position reports are submitted quarterly, and income statements, capital adequacy reports, credit card operations reports, and reports on credit facilities to customers and directors are submitted semi-annually. The Central Bank uses these reports to identify problems and to verify regulatory compliance. Bank's financial statements are audited annually by an independent external auditor. The Central Bank requires Bank to establish a system of internal monitoring and control that permits Bank to properly administer its operations. Bank monitors its domestic and overseas operations through periodic reports and on-site reviews by its internal audit staff. The proposed representative office would submit periodic reports to Bank's head office. Bank's internal auditors would conduct on-site examinations of the proposed representative office at least biannually, and senior Bank officers would visit the office periodically to ensure that the office is complying with applicable laws and regulations and with Bank policies and procedures. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that factors relating to the supervision of Bank by its home country supervisors are consistent with approval of the proposed representative office. The Board also has determined that, for purposes of the IBA and Regulation K, Bank engages directly in the business of banking outside of the United States through its operations in Cyprus. Bank has provided the Board with the information necessary to assess the application through submissions that address relevant issues. The Board also has taken into account the additional standards set forth in section 7 of the IBA and Regulation K (see 12 U.S.C. ยง 3105(d)(3),(4); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)(2)). As noted above, the Central Bank does not object to Bank's establishing the proposed representative office. The Board also has determined that the financial and managerial factors are consistent with approval of the proposed representative office. Bank appears to have the experience and capacity to support the proposed office and also has established controls and procedures for the proposed representative office to ensure compliance with U.S. law. Finally, with respect to access to information about Bank's operations, the Board has reviewed the applicable provisions of law in relevant jurisdictions, and has communicated with appropriate government authorities regarding access to information. Bank has committed to make available to the Board such information on the operations of Bank and any of its affiliates that the Board deems necessary to determine and enforce compliance with the IBA, the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956, as amended, and other applicable Federal law. To the extent that the provision of such information to the Board may be prohibited or impeded by law, Bank has committed to cooperate with the Board to obtain any necessary consents or waivers that might be required from third parties in connection with disclosure of certain information. In light of these commitments and other facts of record, and subject to the condition described below, the Board concludes that Bank has provided adequate assurances of access to any necessary information the Board may request. On the basis of all the facts of record, and subject to the commitments made by Bank, as well as the terms and conditions set forth in this order, the Board has determined that Bank's application to establish a representative office should be, and hereby is, approved. Should any restrictions on access to information on the operations or activities of Bank and any of its affiliates subsequently interfere with the Board's ability to determine the compliance by Bank or its affiliates with applicable federal statutes, the Board may require termination of any of Bank's direct or indirect activities in the United States. Approval of this application is also specifically conditioned on Bank's compliance with the commitments made in connection with this application, and with the conditions in this order. The commitments and conditions referred to above are conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its decision, and may be enforced in proceedings under 12 U.S.C. ยง 1818 against Bank and its affiliates. By order of the Board of Governors, effective October 27, 1997. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes Data are as of December 31, 1996. Bank also holds a 57 percent ownership interest in European Popular Bank S.A., a commercial bank in Greece established as a joint venture among Bank, HSBC and other Cypriot corporations and individuals. In addition, Bank has six wholly owned nonbanking subsidiaries, all of which are registered in Cyprus, engaged in installment finance, insurance, investment banking, factoring, and property development. See 58 Federal Register 6348, 6351 (1993). See Citizens National Bank , 79 Federal Reserve Bulletin 805 (1993). The Board's authority to approve the establishment of the proposed representative office parallels the continuing authority of the State of New York to license offices of a foreign bank. The Board's approval of this application does not supplant the authority of the State of New York and its agent, the New York State Banking Department, to license the proposed representative office of Bank in accordance with any terms or conditions that the New York State Banking Department may impose. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice-Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley and Meyer. Absent and not voting: Governor Phillips.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application of First State Bancshares, Inc., Farmington, Missouri, to acquire up to 10 percent of the voting shares of Perry County Financial Corporation, and thereby acquire Perry County's wholly owned savings association subsidiary, Perry County Savings Bank, FSB, a federal savings bank, both in Perryville, Missouri. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. First State Bancshares, Inc. Farmington, Missouri Order Approving the Acquisition of a Savings Association First State Bancshares, Inc., Farmington, Missouri ("First State"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. รฏยฟยฝ 1843(c)(8)) and section 225.24 of the Board's Regulation Y (12 CFR 225.24) to acquire up to 10 percent of the voting shares of Perry County Financial Corporation ("Perry County"), and thereby acquire Perry County's wholly owned savings association subsidiary, Perry County Savings Bank, FSB, a federal savings bank ("Perry County FSB"), both in Perryville, Missouri. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (62 Federal Register 37,057 (1997)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the notice and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 4 of the BHC Act. First State is the 40th largest depository institution in Missouri, controlling deposits of $174.4 million, representing less than 1 percent of the total deposits in depository institutions in the state. Perry County controls one thrift in Missouri with deposits of $62.5 million. The Board previously has determined by regulation that operating a savings association is closely related to banking for purposes of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. The Board requires savings associations acquired by bank holding companies to conform their direct and indirect activities to those permissible for bank holding companies under section 4 of the BHC Act and Regulation Y. First State has committed that it will conduct this activity in accordance with the Board's regulations. In order to approve the proposal, the Board also must determine that the performance of the proposed activities are a proper incident to banking, that is, that the proposed transaction "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public . . . that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices." As part of the Board's evaluation of these factors, the Board has carefully considered the competitive effects of the proposed transaction in light of all the facts of record. First State and Perry County compete directly in the Perryville banking market in Missouri. The Board has noted previously that the acquisition of a substantial ownership interest in a competitor or a potential competitor of the acquiring firm may alter the market behavior of both firms in such a way as to weaken or eliminate independence of action between the organizations and increase the likelihood of cooperative operations. If First State were considered to control Perry County, after consummation of the proposal, First State would become the second largest depository organization in the Perryville banking market controlling deposits of approximately $75.5 million, representing 16.9 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in the market. Market concentration as measured by the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index ("HHI"), would increase 81 points to 2219. Based on all the facts of record, including the number of competitors that would remain in the market and the resulting market concentration as measured by the HHI, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposal would not have a significantly adverse effect on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in the Perryville banking market or in any relevant banking market. Other Considerations As part of its evaluation of the public interest factors, the Board has carefully considered the financial and managerial resources of First State, Perry County, and their subsidiaries, and the effect the transaction would have on such resources in light of all the facts of record. These facts of record include supervisory reports of examination assessing the financial and managerial resources of the organizations, including management's record of compliance with applicable laws and regulations. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that the financial and managerial resources of the organizations involved in the proposal are consistent with approval. The record also indicates that consummation of the proposal would result in public benefits. There are public benefits to be derived from permitting capital markets to operate so that bank holding companies may make potentially profitable investments in nonbanking companies when those investments are consistent, as in this case, with the relevant considerations under the BHC Act, and from permitting banking organizations to allocate their resources in the manner they believe is most efficient. Based on all the facts or record, the Board has determined that the First State proposal can reasonably be expected to produce public benefits that outweigh possible adverse effects under the proper incident to banking standard of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Accordingly, the Board has determined that the balance of public interest factors it must consider under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act is favorable and consistent with approval. Based on the foregoing, and all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the notice should be, and hereby is, approved. The Board's approval is specifically conditioned on compliance by First State with all the commitments made in connection with this notice. The Board's determination also is subject to all the conditions in Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.23(g) (12 CFR 225.7 and 225.23(g)) and to the Board's authority to require such modification or termination of the activities of a holding company or any of its subsidiaries as the Board finds necessary to assure compliance with, or to prevent evasion of, the provisions and purposes of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and order issued thereunder. For the purpose of this action, the commitments and conditions relied on by the Board in reaching its decision are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision, and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The proposal shall not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good .cause by the Board, or by the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective October 29, 1997. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes First State currently owns approximately 5 percent of the voting shares of Perry County. State and market data are as of June 30, 1996. In this context, depository institutions include commercial banks, savings banks, and savings associations. 12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(4)(ii). The Perryville, Missouri, banking market is approximated by Perry County, Missouri, plus the area surrounding the town of St. Mary in Ste. Genevieve County, Missouri. First Banks, Inc ., 80 Federal Reserve Bulletin 34 (1994). First State proposes to acquire up to 10 percent of Perry County's voting securities, which are registered under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 and publicly traded. Market share data before consummation are based on calculations in which the deposits of thrift institutions are included at 50 percent. The Board previously has indicated that thrift institutions have become, or have the potential to become, significant competitors of commercial banks. See WM Bancorp , 76 Federal Reserve Bulletin 788 (1990). Because the deposits of Perry County FSB would be owned by a commercial banking organization after consummation of the proposal, those deposits are included at 100 percent in the calculation of First State's pro forma market share. See Norwest Corporation , 78 Federal Reserve Bulletin 452 (1992); First Banks, Inc ., 76 Federal Reserve Bulletin 669, 670 n. 9 (1990). Under the revised DOJ Guidelines, 49 Federal Register 26,823 (June 29, 1984), a market in which the post-merger HHI is above 1800 is considered highly concentrated. The Justice Department has informed the Board that a bank merger or acquisition generally will not be challenged (in the absence of other factors indicating anticompetitive effects) unless the post-merger HHI is at least 1800 and the merger increases the HHI by more than 200 points. The Board notes that First State's interest in Perry County exceeded 5 percent of the outstanding voting shares of Perry County as the result of a stock redemption, and that First State promptly requested the Board's approval to retain its interest. The Board also has carefully considered, in light of supervisory information provided by the Office of Thrift Supervision ("OTS"), Perry County FSB's primary federal supervisor, comments from Perry County contending that First State has not complied with the regulatory filing requirements of the OTS. In addition, the Board has provided Perry County's comments on First State's compliance with the federal securities laws to the Securities and Exchange Commission for consideration. The Board previously has determined that its limited jurisdiction to review applications and notices under the specific statutory factors in the BHC Act does not authorize the Board to adjudicate disputes between a commenter and an applicant that arise under statutes, like federal securities laws, that are administered and enforced by another federal agency. Voting for this action: Vice Chair Rivlin and Governors Kelley, Phillips, and Meyer. Absent and not voting: Chairman Greenspan.