For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced guidelines on sound risk management practices for private banking activities such as personalized investment services for selected customers. Private banking activities also involve money management and financial advice for high net worth clients, and have become an increasingly important aspect of some large, internationally active banking organizations. The Federal Reserve Bank of New York recently conducted a comprehensive review of private banking activities at approximately 40 domestic and foreign banking organizations in its district to enhance the Federal Reserve's understanding of private banking operations. Examiners assessed each institution's ability to recognize and manage the potential reputational and legal risks that may be associated with inadequate knowledge and understanding of its clients' personal and business backgrounds. The review has resulted in these policy guidelines on sound practices to provide banking organizations with guidance on basic controls necessary to minimize reputational and legal risk and to deter illicit activities such as money laundering. The essential elements associated with these sound private banking activities include: Management Oversight; "Know Your Customer" Policies and Procedures; Risk Management Practices and Monitoring Systems; Segregation of Duties, Compliance, and Audit; and Other Related Projects and Products. Additionally, the Federal Reserve will also distribute an updated Bank Secrecy Act examination manual in the next few weeks. The updated manual will include examination procedures relating to recent additions and changes to the Bank Secrecy Act, as well as updated sections relating to anti-money-laundering initiatives. The Federal Reserve's guidelines on sound private banking activities are attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today requested comment on a proposal to apply sections 23A and 23B of the Federal Reserve Act to transactions between a member bank and any subsidiary that engages in activities that are impermissible for the bank itself and that Congress has not previously exempted from coverage by section 23A. Sections 23A and 23B restrict the ability of a member bank to fund an affiliate through direct investment, loans, or other transactions that might expose the member bank to risk. Comment is requested by September 3, 1997 . The proposed treatment is largely consistent with the existing treatment of these subsidiaries by the other banking agencies, which have applied sections 23A and 23B in some form to transactions between a bank and such subsidiaries. The Board's notice is attached. |
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board has issued for public comment proposed amendments to model forms in Regulation B, Equal Credit Opportunity, to reflect statutory changes to disclosures required by the Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA). Creditors have the option of providing the FCRA disclosures separately or with the notice of action taken required under Regulation B. Comment is requested by August 15 . The Board's notice is attached. |
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of an Order of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty against Postipankki Ltd., Helsinki, Finland, and its New York branch. Postipankki Ltd., without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the order for allegedly engaging in unsafe and unsound practices related to misrepresentations to bank supervisory officials regarding trading losses, and for the branch's filing of allegedly false and misleading regulatory reports in 1994. Postipankki Ltd. paid a civil money penalty of $900,000. A copy of the order is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board and the Department of Housing and Urban Development will hold a public forum to give interested parties an opportunity to present their views concerning the streamlining and reform of the Truth in Lending Act (TILA) and the Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act (RESPA). The public forum will be held on Wednesday, July 30, from 8:15 a.m. until 4:30 p.m. in Dining Room E on the Terrace level of the Federal Reserve Board's Martin Building, located on C Street Northwest between 20th and 21st Streets. The Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act of 1996 directs the agencies to submit legislative recommendations to the Congress on how to simplify and improve consumer disclosures under TILA and RESPA if the disclosures cannot be simplified through regulatory change. The two agencies have concluded that meaningful simplification of the disclosures can only come about through statutory revisions. Interested parties unable to attend the forum or wishing to provide written views on the issues raised in the attached notice may submit comments by August 15. Comments may be submitted to either agency. The Board's notice is attached. FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM 12 CFR Part 226 [Regulation Z; Docket No. R-0979] Truth in Lending DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT 24 CFR Part 3500 [Regulation X; Docket No. FR-4257-N-01] Real Estate Settlement Procedures AGENCIES : Office of the Assistant Secretary for Housing-Federal Housing Commissioner (HUD); Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (the Board) (collectively, the Agencies). ACTION : Notice of Public Forum. SUMMARY : The Board and HUD will hold a public forum concerning the streamlining and reform of the Truth in Lending Act (TILA) and the Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act (RESPA). The Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act of 1996 directs the Agencies to submit legislative recommendations to the Congress on how to simplify and improve consumer disclosures under RESPA and TILA if the disclosures cannot be simplified through regulatory change. The Agencies have concluded that meaningful simplification of the disclosures can only come about through statutory revisions. In addition, some have suggested that more effective protection of consumers from adverse steering and unnecessary costs, as well as greater certainty about permitted and prohibited behavior, might be achieved through reform of other provisions of RESPA. The public forum is intended to give interested parties an opportunity to discuss their views on statutory reform with the Agencies. DATES : Public Forum . Wednesday, July 30, 1997, 8:15 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. Comments . Persons unable to attend the forum or wishing to provide written views on the issues raised in this notice may submit comments by August 15, 1997. ADDRESSES : Public Forum . Terrace Level, Room E of the Federal Reserve Board's Martin Building, C Street Northwest, between 20th and 21st Streets, Washington, DC. Comments . Comments may be submitted to either agency. Board : Comments submitted to the Board should refer to Docket No. R-0979, and may be mailed to William W. Wiles, Secretary, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 20th Street and Constitution Avenue, NW, Washington, DC 20551. Comments also may be delivered to Room B-2222 of the Eccles Building between 8:45 a.m. and 5:15 p.m. weekdays, or to the guard station in the Eccles building courtyard on 20th Street, NW (between Constitution Avenue and C Street) at any time. When possible, comment letters should use a standard courier typeface with a type size of 10 or 12 characters per inch. This will enable the Board to convert the text into machine-readable form through electronic scanning, and will facilitate automated retrieval of comments for review. Also, if accompanied by an original document in paper form, comments may be submitted on 3ï¿½ inch or 5ï¿½ inch computer diskettes in any IBM-compatible DOS-based format. Comments may be inspected in Room MP-500 of the Martin Building between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. weekdays, except as provided in 12 CFR 261.8 of the Board's Rules Regarding Availability of Information. HUD : Comments to HUD should be addressed to the Rules Docket Clerk, Office of General Counsel, Room 10276, Department of Housing and Urban Development, 451 Seventh Street, SW, Washington, DC 20410-0500. Communications should refer to the above docket number and title. Facsimile (FAX) comments are not acceptable. Comments received will be available for public inspection and copying between 7:30 a.m. and 5:30 p.m. weekdays at the above address. FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT : Board : Sheilah A. Goodman or Kyung Cho-Miller, Staff Attorneys, Division of Consumer and Community Affairs, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, at (202) 452-3667 or (202) 452-2412; for the hearing impaired only , Diane Jenkins, Telecommunications Device for the Deaf (TDD), at (202) 452-3544. HUD : David R. Williamson, Director, Officer of Consumer and Regulatory Affairs, Room 9146, (202) 708-4560; or for legal questions, Kenneth A. Markison, Assistant General Counsel for GSE/RESPA, Grant E. Mitchell, Senior Attorney for RESPA, or Rodrigo J. Alba, Attorney, Office of General Counsel, Room 9262, (202) 708-1550. For hearing- and speech-impaired persons, these numbers may be accessed via TTY (text telephone) by calling the Federal Information Relay Service at 1-800-877-8339. The address for the above-listed persons is: Department of Housing and Urban Development, 451 Seventh Street, SW, Washington, D.C. 20410. The telephone numbers for the Agencies are not toll-free. SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION : I. Background On September 30, 1996, the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act of 1996 (Pub. L. 104-208, 110 Stat. 3009) became law. Section 2101 of that act directs the Board and HUD to simplify and improve the disclosures given in a home mortgage transaction subject to TILA and RESPA, and to create a single disclosure that will satisfy the requirements of both statutes, if possible. If legislation is necessary to accomplish this objective, the Agencies are directed to submit legislative recommendations to the Congress. TILA is a comprehensive statute that covers all types of consumer credit transactions. The act's goal is to help consumers understand credit terms and shop for credit by requiring creditors to provide uniform credit disclosures. TILA is primarily a disclosure statute, though it contains some substantive provisions. TILA disclosures focus primarily on the costs imposed by a creditor and the terms of a credit obligation. The law requires the disclosure of two terms thought to be key in aiding consumers in comparison shopping for credit--the finance charge and the annual percentage rate (APR). The finance charge is intended to reflect the dollar amount of the cost of credit; the APR is the cost of the credit expressed as a yearly rate. TILA also requires, among other things, the disclosure of a payment schedule, whether a creditor will impose a penalty if a loan is prepaid, whether a loan may be assumed, and the fee for a late payment. Finally, TILA provides substantive protections for certain home-secured loans such as prohibitions on certain contract terms, and the right to cancel the transaction. RESPA was enacted in large measure to ensure that the home-buying public is afforded timely and effective information about the costs of settlement in mortgage transactions, and to eliminate kickbacks and referral fees that tend to increase unnecessarily the cost of settlement services. To achieve these goals, RESPA mandates disclosures at various points in the home financing process for transactions involving "federally related mortgage loans," which include most financial transactions creating a lien on owner-occupied residential structures. RESPA disclosures focus on the fees for services required in home mortgage transactions and require an itemization of all costs associated with settlement. RESPA also imposes certain restrictions on payments among settlement service providers (such as lenders, appraisers, and title companies). Section 8(a) of RESPA prohibits compensation for the referral of settlement service business; section 8(b) prohibits unearned fees and fee splitting arrangements. Section 8(c)(2) of RESPA, however, provides that payment may be made for ". . . goods or facilities actually furnished or for services actually performed . . . ." In December 1996, the Board and HUD jointly published for comment an advance notice of proposed rulemaking on the issue of simplifying and combining the disclosure requirements of RESPA and TILA (61 FR 69055, Dec. 31, 1996). The notice requested comment on both regulatory and statutory changes to improve the current disclosure scheme. The comments that were received covered a wide range of issues. Nearly all of the recommendations for reconciling the two regulations require legislative action (e.g. changes to the timing of disclosures under the two statutes). The remainder of the recommendations generally involved small changes that could produce only minor improvements that likely would not be worth the corresponding compliance costs for creditors associated with reprinting forms or retraining personnel. HUD is separately considering whether to propose minor simplification amendments to various RESPA-required forms. HUD will also weigh the merits of proposing such changes in light of the associated costs. On April 2, 1997, the Board published a second notice summarizing the comments and reopening the comment period to allow interested parties more time to comment on potential legislative action. (62 FR 15624) The Board determined, in consultation with HUD, that beyond the revisions that have been made over the past several years, without legislative action any additional regulatory changes would be inadequate to achieve the goal of harmonizing TILA and RESPA to any significant degree. The notice stated that the Agencies would consider holding public meetings, as was suggested by many of the commenters, to help in developing legislative recommendations. II. Public Forum Although TILA and RESPA both regulate mortgage transactions, they differ in fundamental ways. In crafting legislative recommendations, the Board and HUD believe that it is important to examine the goals of RESPA and TILA, and what problems this dual--but not identical--statutory scheme presents. Therefore, the Board and HUD will hold a joint public forum on July 30, 1997, to help the Agencies in their consideration of issues to be addressed in the legislative recommendations. The forum will be held at the Board's offices in Washington, D.C. The Agencies have invited speakers representing industry and consumer interests to participate in the discussion, which will be followed by an open session for other members of the public to express their views. At the forum, the Board's staff will present preliminary findings of a survey on consumer credit shopping that was commissioned by the Board. Each invited speaker will be given an opportunity to make a brief introductory statement. The invitees will be asked to discuss a number of topics, including (1) consumer credit shopping behavior, (2) the goals of TILA and RESPA, and whether the current statutory and regulatory scheme for home mortgage lending satisfies those goals, and (3) whether significant improvement can be made to the existing provisions of TILA and RESPA, or whether there is a need for more comprehensive reform. There will be an opportunity during the open session for other attendees to offer the Agencies their views on these issues. Oral statements in this open session should be brief to allow as many speakers as possible to offer their views. Written statements of any length may be submitted for the record, and are due by August 15, 1997. (signed) Nicolas P. Retsinas Nicolas P. Retsinas Assistant Secretary for Housing-Federal Housing Commissioner By order of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July 14, 1997. (signed) William W. Wiles William W. Wiles Secretary of the Board
Testimony of Governor Laurence H. Meyer Disclosure requirements for home mortgage loans Before the Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Regulatory Relief of the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, United States Senate July 15, 1997
Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan The Financial Services Competition Act of 1997 Before the Subcommittee on Finance and Hazardous Materials of the Committee on Commerce, U.S. House of Representatives July 17, 1997 Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the opportunity to present the views of the Board of Governors on the Financial Services Competition Act of 1997. The Banking Committee is to be commended for addressing the complex issues associated with financial modernization. The Committee has taken a major step forward in permitting affiliations of banking, securities, and insurance organizations within an appropriate framework for consolidated oversight. We believe such affiliations would improve the efficiency and competitiveness of the financial services industry, and result in more choices and better services for consumers. However, in addressing financial modernization the bill encompasses a large number of far ranging provisions. The Board has difficulty with the way some of the issues are resolved in the bill before you. Thus, while reemphasizing our support for much of the general thrust of the bill, I would like today to highlight our major concerns. Banking and Commerce The need to respond to the effects of technology is one of the major reasons we are here today. Technology has already eroded many of the previous distinctions between banking and nonbank finance, thereby supporting the desirability, if not the necessity, of permitting the merging of all financial activities. It seems clear that the same forces are in the process of blurring the boundaries between financial and nonfinancial businesses. Most of us are aware of software companies interested in the financial services business, but some financial firms, leveraging off their own internal skills, are also seeking to produce software for third parties. Shipping companies' tracking software lends itself to payment services. Manufacturers have financed their customers' purchases for a long time, but now increasingly are using the resultant financial skills to finance noncustomers. Moreover, many nonbank financial institutions are now profitably engaged in nonfinancial activities. Current facts and future trends, in short, are creating market pressures to permit the common ownership of financial and nonfinancial firms. The Board, in fact, has concluded that it is quite likely that in future years it will be close to impossible to distinguish where one type of activity ends and another begins. Nonetheless, the Federal Reserve Board also has concluded that it would be wise to move with caution in addressing the removal of the current legal barriers between commerce and banking, since the unrestricted association of banking and commerce would be a profound and surely irreversible structural change in the American economy. Were we fully confident of how emerging technologies would affect the evolution of our economic and financial structure, we could presumably develop today the regulations which would foster that evolution. But we are not, and history suggests we cannot. We thus run the risk of locking in a set of inappropriate rules that could adversely alter the development of market structures. Our ability to foresee accurately the future implications of technologies and market developments in banking, as in other industries, has not been particularly impressive. As Professor Rosenberg of Stanford University has pointed out, ". . . mistaken forecasts of future structure litter our financial landscape." Consider the view of the 1960s that the "cashless society" was imminent. Nonetheless, the public preference for paper has declined only gradually. Similarly, just a few years ago conventional wisdom argued that banks were dinosaurs that were becoming extinct. The reality today is far from it. Even more recently, it was argued that banks and nonfinancial firms had to merge in order to save the capital-starved banking system. Today, as you know, virtually all of our banks are very well capitalized. All these examples, and more, suggest that if we dramatically change the rules now about banking and commerce under circumstances of great uncertainty about future synergies between finance and nonfinance we may well end up doing more harm than good. And, as with all rule changes by government, we are likely to find it impossible to correct our errors promptly, if at all. Modifications of such a fundamental structural rule as the separation of banking and commerce accordingly should proceed at a deliberate pace in order to test the response of markets and technological innovations to the altered rules in the years ahead. Excessive delay would doubtless produce inequities. Expanded financial activities for banking organizations require, and the Banking Committee's Financial Services Competition Act provides, that those firms operating in markets that banks can enter, in turn, be authorized to engage in banking. However, some securities and insurance firms, as well as some thrifts, already own--or are owned by--nonfinancial entities. Continuing the commerce and banking prohibitions would thus require the divestiture or grandfathering of all nonfinancial activities by those organizations that wanted to acquire or establish banks. But, the fact is that we do not--and the Board's view is that we need not--have to make today as sweeping a banking and commerce decision as the Competition Act proposes. That bill would permit both banks and nonfinancial corporations each to originate up to 15 percent of their revenue from the other's activities. While there is some limit on the original size of each nonfinancial firm acquired by a bank holding company and on the original size of the one bank that a nonfinancial company could purchase, the subsequent growth is only constrained by the 15 percent revenue limit. This constraint may be more apparent than real, given the ongoing growth and consolidation of the financial services industry. In our judgment, these baskets are far larger than what is needed either as a controlled experiment or to permit unfettered consolidation with banks of those financial firms that have commercial affiliates. Moreover, the Banking Committee bill would permit additional bank and commercial affiliations beyond these holding company affiliate baskets and permit some affiliation within the bank or a bank subsidiary. Any commercial (or financial) activity that had been authorized by the Office of Thrift Supervision for thrifts or by the Federal Reserve Board's regulation for overseas operations of U.S. banks would be permitted to banks in the United States by the Banking Committee bill. Thus, over and above the basket, U.S. banks could create subsidiaries that invest up to 3 percent of the bank's assets in the equity of OTS-approved commercial enterprises. In addition, applying the Board's foreign market rule to domestic operations would mean that banks themselves could invest in the equity of individual nonfinancial firms. The Board's foreign market rule, authorized by statute, was promulgated to assist American banks to achieve a level playing field with their foreign competitors in foreign markets. We see no compelling need to apply that rule to American banks' domestic operations. We are also concerned that the grandfather date for savings and loan holding companies continues to shift with the date of enactment of the bill, thereby encouraging an increase in the number of commercial firms that seek to affiliate with insured savings associations before new rules come into effect. The Competition Act, in the Board's view, goes well beyond what both commercial banks and nonfinancial firms need to meet the requirements of today, as well as in the foreseeable future. The Board believes it would be virtually impossible to reverse such a change in the legal framework without major damage to established business relationships. Thus, any errors from larger-than-needed initial authorizations could result in significant problems. Moreover, the authorization of commercial activities through banks and their subsidiaries directly extends the subsidy of the safety net over a much wider range of activities, not to mention potentially undermining the safety and soundness of insured banks. Operating Subsidiaries Mr. Chairman, a number of observers have argued that there is no subsidy associated with the federal safety net for depository institutions--deposit insurance, and direct access to the Federal Reserve's discount window and payment system guarantees. The Board strongly rejects this view. In saying this, the Board fully agrees that mandated government supervision and regulation impose significant costs on banks, costs which, in many cases, can and should be reduced. But given that these costs cannot be avoided by a bank, no rational bank manager would ignore the opportunity to take advantage of the lower cost of funds, or equivalently, the lower capital ratio, that access to the safety net demonstrably provides. While it is true that the safety net does increase the possibility of loss to taxpayers, a far larger public policy concern is that it provides banks with a government-sanctioned competitive advantage over nonbank firms. In the Board's view, unless Congress explicitly desires to expand access to the safety net and tilt the competitive playing field further, a core component of any prudent financial modernization strategy should be to minimize the chances that safety net subsidies will be expanded into new activities and beyond the confines of insured depository institutions. Because the subsidy created by the federal safety net grants access to the "sovereign credit" of the United States, bank creditors are willing to accept a lower risk premium on bank liabilities and capital than otherwise would be the case. For fully insured deposits this risk premium is reduced essentially to zero. But other debt instruments also benefit, and the capital ratio demanded by the market is lower. The end result is that banks enjoy a lower total and marginal cost of funding, including lower capital ratios, than would otherwise be required by the market. While some benefits of the safety net are always available to banks, it is critical to understand that the value of the subsidy is smallest for very healthy banks during good economic times, and greatest at weak banks during a financial crisis. What was it worth in the late 1980s and early 1990s for a bank with a troubled loan portfolio to have deposit liabilities guaranteed by the FDIC, to be assured that it could turn illiquid assets to liquid assets at once through the Federal Reserve discount window, and to tell its customers that payment transfers would be settled on a riskless Federal Reserve Bank? For many, it was worth not basis points but percentage points. For some, it meant the difference between survival and failure. In contrast today, when the economy is performing well and the banking industry has just experienced its fifth straight year of record profits, it is perhaps too easy to ignore the value of the safety net and see only its costs. The Board believes that prudent public policy should take a longer view. In the Board's judgment, the bank holding company organizational form has, by the record, proved to be an effective means for limiting the safety net subsidy primarily to banks. There is clear evidence that market participants understand that regulatory policy is focused on the bank, and thus markets distinguish between the bank and its holding company parent and affiliates. Given this success, the holding company structure should, in the Board's view, not be abandoned. Indeed, our strong preference is for the holding company format to be retained for new activities that will under expanded authorities benefit from direct access to the federal safety net. Thus, we would recommend that the Financial Services Competition Act's provisions that allow expanded activities to be conducted either in a holding company subsidiary or in a direct operating subsidiary of a bank be amended to require that new activities be conducted only in a holding company subsidiary. Consolidated Oversight The Board supports the provisions of the Banking Committee's Competition Act that continue consolidated oversight of the bank holding company. In our judgment, it is essential that these provisions be retained and not weakened. The historical experience in supervising bank holding companies has shown that knowledge of the financial strength and risks inherent in a consolidated holding company can be critical to protecting an insured subsidiary bank and resolving problems once they arise. Examples are easy to recall: BCCI, Continental Illinois, Barings PLC, thrifts, and Texas banks all exhibited problems that spread quickly among their affiliates, or required a consolidated approach to resolve the problems at least cost and disruption to the overall financial system. Moreover, continued gains in technology and in innovative risk management techniques permit organizations of all kinds to manage and control their activities on an increasingly centralized basis, with less attention paid to the individual legal entities that make up the organization. In that environment, it seems to the Board that oversight on a consolidated basis of an organization's broad-based activities has become more crucial in recent years, not less. Bank supervisors throughout the world recognize this point, and have adopted consolidated oversight as a fundamental principle. The Congress also recognized the necessity of consolidated oversight for the U.S. banking system, by requiring, as a condition for a foreign bank's entry into this country, that the bank be subject to consolidated home country supervision. What is necessary for foreign banks entering the United States is surely just as necessary for U.S. banks and the U.S. banking system. Crisis Management and Systemic Risk. Mr. Chairman, we believe that the Federal Reserve needs to continue to have consolidated oversight authority, especially for organizations in which the bank is large enough that its failure could cause disruptions in financial markets sufficient to affect economic activity. Critically, the central bank has the responsibility to forestall financial crises (including systemic disturbances in the banking system) and to manage such crises once they occur. Supervisory and regulatory responsibilities afford the Federal Reserve both the insight and the authority to use crisis management techniques that are less blunt than open market operations, and more precisely calibrated to the problem at hand. Such tools not only improve our ability to manage crises but, more importantly, help us to avoid them. Indeed, we measure our degree of success in this area not by the number of crises we assist in containing, but rather in the number of crises which could have erupted but did not. The use of crises management techniques requires both the authority that comes with supervision and regulation and the understanding of the linkages among supervision and regulation, prudential standards, risk-taking, relationships among banks and other financial market participants, and macroeconomic stability. The objectives of the central bank in crisis management are to contain financial losses and prevent a contagious loss of confidence so that difficulties at one institution do not spread more widely to others. The focus of its concern is not to avoid the failure of entities that have made poor decisions or have had bad luck, but rather to see that such failures--or threats of failures--do not have broad and serious impacts on financial markets and the national, and indeed the global, economy. The Federal Reserve's ability to respond expeditiously to any particular incident does not necessitate comprehensive information on each banking institution. But it does require that the Federal Reserve have in-depth knowledge of how institutions of various sizes and other characteristics are likely to behave, and what resources are available to them in the event of severe financial stress. We currently gain the necessary insight by having a broad sample of banks subject to our supervision and through our authority over bank holding companies. Payment and Settlement Systems. A key element of avoiding systemic concerns is management of the payment system. Virtually all of the U.S. dollar transactions made worldwide--for securities transfers, foreign exchange and other international capital flows, and for payment for goods and services--are settled in the United States banking system. A small number of transactions that comprise the vast proportion of the total value of transactions are transferred over large-dollar payment systems. A critical component of these systems is the Federal Reserve's wire transfer network, Fedwire. Fedwire and a very small number of private clearinghouses are arguably the linchpin of the international system of payments that relies on the dollar as the major international currency for trade and finance. Disruptions and disturbances in the U.S. payment system thus can easily have global implications. In all of these payment and settlement systems, commercial banks play a central role, both as participants and as providers of credit to nonbank participants. Day-in and day-out, the settlement of payment obligations and securities trades requires significant amounts of bank credit. In periods of stress, such credit demands surge just at the time when some banks are least willing or able to meet them. These demands, if unmet, could produce gridlock in payment and settlement systems, exposing financial markets to dangerous stress. Indeed, it is in the cauldron of the payment and settlement systems, where decisions involving large sums must be made quickly, that all of the risks and uncertainties associated with problems at a single participant become focused as participants seek to protect themselves from uncertainty. Better solvent than sorry, they might well decide, and refuse to honor a payment request. Observing that, others might follow suit. And that is how crises often begin. Limiting, if not avoiding, such disruptions and ensuring the continued operation of the payment system requires broad and indepth knowledge of banking and markets, as well as detailed knowledge and authority with respect to the payment and settlement arrangements and their linkages to banking operations. This type of insight and authority--as well as knowledge about the behavior of key participants--cannot be created on an ad hoc basis. It requires broad and sustained involvement in both the payment infrastructure and the operation of the banking system. Supervisory authority over the major bank participants is a necessary element. Changing Role of Consolidated Oversight. The modernizing of our financial system--especially the combining of banks, securities firms, and insurance companies, as well as possibly banking and commerce--requires that the role of consolidated oversight also be reviewed. The necessity to understand and review centralized risk management and control mechanisms, and similarly to review intra-organizational fund transfers involving the insured depositories, does not require bank-like supervision of nonbank affiliates. The Competition Act appropriately recognizes this. It would require that the banking agencies rely to the fullest extent possible on examination reports and other information collected by supervisors of other regulated entities. In addition, the bill would require the banking agencies to defer to the Securities and Exchange Commission in interpretations and enforcement of the federal securities laws and to the state insurance commissioners and to state insurance laws. The bill continues to allow the Federal Reserve Board to establish capital adequacy guidelines at the holding company level. However, the bill sets important limits on these holding company guidelines. For example, the consolidated supervisor may not impose capital requirements on any nonbank subsidiary that is in compliance with applicable capital requirements of another federal or state agency. In addition, holding company capital guidelines must take full account of the capital position of these regulated nonbank subsidiaries when establishing consolidated capital guidelines, and full account of capital levels in unregulated subsidiaries when those levels are consistent with industry norms. The bill requires the Federal Reserve Board to address the use of double leverage (that is, the use of debt at the holding company to fund equity and subordinated debt at a regulated institution), but prohibits the establishment of a capital ratio that is not risk weighted. In addition, the bill requires that the consolidated supervisor consult with other supervisors, including in particular, supervisors of nonbanking entities, prior to establishing capital guidelines for holding companies. All of these--the capital and examination rules--are extremely important provisions both for existing bank holding companies and for securities firms and insurance companies that wish to affiliate with banks. Such provisions would greatly enhance the "two-way street" by eliminating unnecessary burden and red tape. Mr. Chairman, the Board believes that bank holding companies need to continue to have consolidated oversight in order both to protect the safety net and to limit the transference of the safety net subsidy. We believe that the Federal Reserve must not have its ability impaired to monitor banking organizations in order to respond effectively to systemic crises, to manage the risk in the payment system, and to ensure the safety and stability of our financial system. Conclusion Mr. Chairman, to summarize: The Board supports the overall thrust of the Banking Committee bill that is now being reviewed by this Committee. We strongly support the bill's approach to affiliations of banking, securities, and insurance organizations. We are, nonetheless, concerned that the bill goes unnecessarily far at this time in mixing commerce and banking. There is no reason not to proceed in incremental steps; first to integrate banking and finance with the minor and quite limited combinations of banking and commerce that this requires, and only later, as these developments mature, assess the desirability of fully dismantling the barriers between banking and commerce. In addition, we think it unwise to permit banks to conduct new activities in their own subsidiaries because of the extension of the safety net subsidy directly to those subsidiaries. We have concluded that the holding company framework provides the best insulation against the transference of that subsidy beyond the bank, and creates the most level playing field for affiliations of banks and other financial firms. Consolidated oversight of bank holding companies is critical both to protect the safety net and to minimize its transference. We believe that the central bank's role in the prevention and containment of financial crises and as guarantor of the payment system requires that we continue to have consolidated oversight responsibility for most holding companies.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application by Neighborhood Bancorp, San Diego, California, to become a bank holding company by acquiring approximately 95 percent of the voting shares of Neighborhood National Bank, also in San Diego, a de novo chartered national bank with a community development focus. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Neighborhood Bancorp San Diego, California Order Approving the Formation of a Bank Holding Company Neighborhood Bancorp, San Diego, California ("Neighborhood"), has requested the Board's approval under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act (12 U.S.C. § 1842) ("BHC Act") to become a bank holding company by acquiring approximately 95 percent of the voting shares of Neighborhood National Bank ("Bank"), also in San Diego, a de novo chartered national bank with a community development focus. Notice of the application, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (62 Federal Register 29,347 (1997)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the application and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 3(c) of the BHC Act. Neighborhood is a nonoperating corporation formed for the purpose of acquiring Bank. Accordingly, the Board concludes that consummation of this proposal would not have a significantly adverse effect on competition or the concentration of banking resources in any relevant banking market. The Board also concludes that the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of Neighborhood and Bank are consistent with approval, as are the convenience and needs and other supervisory factors the Board is required to consider under section 3 of the BHC Act. Based on the foregoing and all the facts of record, the Board has determined that this application should be, and hereby is, approved. The Board's approval is expressly conditioned on compliance with all the commitments made by Neighborhood, including those made by the principals of Neighborhood, in connection with this application. For purposes of this action, the commitments and conditions relied on by the Board in reaching this decision are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision, and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. This transaction shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day following the effective date of this order, or later than three months following the effective date of this order, and Bank shall be open for business within six months following the effective date of this order, unless such periods are extended for good cause by the Board or the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective July 21, 1997. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes The remaining voting shares of Bank would be acquired by the Federal National Mortgage Association. Bank would engage primarily in lending activities that support the development and maintenance of affordable housing stock in San Diego County, and has received preliminary charter approval from the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. This action was taken pursuant to the Board's Rules Regarding Delegation of Authority (12 C.F.R. 265.4(b)(1)) by a committee of Board members. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governor Meyer.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice filed by Bankers Trust New York Corporation, New York, New York, to acquire 100 percent of the voting shares of Alex. Brown Incorporated, Baltimore, Maryland, and thereby engage in a variety of nonbanking activities, including underwriting and dealing in all types of debt and equity securities on a limited basis. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
Testimony of Governor Laurence H. Meyer Conduct of monetary policy Before the Committee on Banking and Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives July 23, 1997 Organization NAIRU Trend GDP Growth Macro Advisers 5.9 2.2 DRI 5 3/4 2.3 CEA 5.5 2.1 CBO 5.8 2.1 Gordon 5.4-5.5 2.2
Testimony of Vice Chair Alice M. Rivlin Appropriate monetary policy and the strong economy Before the Committee on Banking and Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives July 23, 1997
The Federal Reserve Board today published a revised list of over-the-counter (OTC) market stocks that are subject to its margin regulations (OTC List). Also published today is a revised list of foreign equity securities that meet the margin criteria in Regulation T (Foreign List). The Lists are effective August 11, 1997, and supersede the previous Lists that were effective May 12, 1997. The next revision of these Lists is scheduled to be effective November, 1997. These Lists are published for the information of lenders and the general public. The changes that have been made to the revised OTC List, which now contains 4,880 OTC stocks, are as follows: 184 stocks have been included for the first time, 140 under National Market System (NMS) designation; 49 stocks previously on the List have been removed for substantially failing to meet the requirements for continued listing; 104 stocks have been removed for reasons such as listing on a national securities exchange or involvement in an acquisition. The OTC List is composed of OTC stocks that have been determined by the Board to be subject to margin requirements in Regulations G, T and U. It includes OTC stocks qualifying under Board criteria and also includes all OTC stocks designated as NMS securities. Additional NMS securities may be added in the interim between quarterly Board publications; these securities are immediately marginable upon designation as NMS securities. The Foreign List is composed of foreign equity securities that are eligible for margin treatment at broker-dealers. Effective July 1, 1996, foreign stocks that have a "ready market" for purposes of the Securities Exchange Commission's (SEC) net capital rule may be included on the Foreign List. The SEC effectively treats all stocks included on the Financial Times/Standard & Poor's Actuaries World Indices (FT/S&P-AW Indices) as having a "ready market" for capital purposes. The Board is adding 64 foreign stocks and deleting 63, based on changes to the FT/S&P-AW Indices. The revised Foreign List now contains 1,976 securities displayed in country order. Margin regulations generally limit the amount of credit a person or firm may obtain to buy or carry stock. Stocks on the OTC List and the Foreign List are subject to the same margin requirements (currently 50 percent) as stocks listed on national securities exchanges in the United States. This means a person or firm buying a stock on credit must make a down payment equal to at least 50 percent of the purchase price of the stock and may obtain credit for the remaining 50 percent. These margin requirements are only applicable to credit extended on OTC or foreign stocks after they are placed on the Lists and the Lists have become effective or the stocks are designated as NMS securities. No credit may be extended by broker-dealers on stocks that are not traded on a national securities exchange unless they are on the OTC List, the Foreign List, or in the NMS group. Credit extended by banks and other lenders on foreign stocks or OTC stocks that are neither on the OTC List nor in the NMS group need only conform to the good faith lending limitation contained in Regulations G and U. It is unlawful for any person to cause any representation to be made that inclusion of a stock on the OTC List or the Foreign List indicates that the Board or the Securities and Exchange Commission has in any way passed upon the merits of any such stock or transaction therein. Any references to the Board in connection with these Lists or any stocks thereon in any advertisement or similar communications is unlawful.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice of First Chicago NBD Corporation and its wholly owned subsidiary, First Chicago Capital Markets, Inc., both of Chicago, Illinois, to engage to a limited extent in underwriting and dealing in all types of equity securities except ownership interests in open-end investment companies. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM First Chicago NBD Corporation Chicago, Illinois First Chicago Capital Markets, Inc. Chicago, Illinois Order Approving Notice to Engage De Novo in Underwriting and Dealing in All Types of Equity Securities on a Limited Basis First Chicago NBD Corporation, Chicago, Illinois ("First Chicago"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), and its wholly owned subsidiary, First Chicago Capital Markets, Inc., Chicago, Illinois ("Company"), have requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1843(c)(8)) and section 225.24 of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.24) to engage to a limited extent in underwriting and dealing in all types of equity securities except ownership interests in open-end investment companies. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (62 Federal Register 32,611 (1997)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the notice and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. First Chicago, with total consolidated assets of $109.1 billion, is the eighth largest commercial banking organization in the United States. First Chicago operates bank subsidiaries in Illinois, Michigan, Florida, Indiana, and Delaware, and engages through its subsidiaries in a broad range of permissible nonbanking activities in the United States. Company currently engages in limited underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities, as permitted under section 20 of the Glass-Steagall Act (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 377). Company is, and will continue to be, a broker-dealer registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") and a member of the National Association of Securities Dealers, Inc. ("NASD"). Accordingly, Company is subject to the recordkeeping and reporting obligations, fiduciary standards, and other requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. ï¿½ 78a et seq. ), the SEC, and the NASD. The Board previously has determined that, subject to the prudential framework of limitations established in previous decisions to address the potential for conflicts of interests, unsound banking practices, or other adverse effects ("section 20 firewalls"), the proposed underwriting and dealing activities involving bank-ineligible securities are so closely related to banking as to be proper incidents thereto within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. First Chicago has committed that Company will conduct the proposed underwriting and dealing activities using the same methods and procedures, and subject to the same prudential limitations, as were established by the Board in the Section 20 Orders and other previous cases. The Board also has previously determined that conduct of the proposed activities is consistent with section 20 of the Glass-Steagall Act (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 377), provided that the company engaged in underwriting and dealing activities derives no more than 25 percent of its gross revenues from underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities over a two-year period. First Chicago has committed that Company will conduct its underwriting and dealing activities in bank-ineligible securities subject to the Board's revenue limit. In order to approve this notice, the Board also must consider whether performance of the proposed activities is a proper incident to banking, that is, whether the activities proposed "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public . . . that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices." As part of its evaluation of these factors, the Board considers the financial condition and managerial resources of the notificant and its subsidiaries and the effect the transaction would have on such resources. The Board has reviewed the capitalization of First Chicago and Company in accordance with the standards set forth in the Section 20 Orders and finds the capitalization of each to be consistent with approval of the proposal. With respect to Company, this determination is based on all the facts of record, including First Chicago's projections of the volume of Company's underwriting and dealing activities. On the basis of all the facts of record, and subject to the completion of a satisfactory infrastructure review, the Board concludes that financial and managerial considerations are consistent with approval of the notice. As noted above, First Chicago has committed that Company will conduct its bank-ineligible securities underwriting and dealing activities in accordance with the prudential framework established by the Board's Section 20 Orders. Under the framework and conditions established in this order and the Section 20 Orders, the Board concludes that Company's proposed activities are not likely to result in significantly adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interest, or unsound banking practices. The Board expects, additionally, that the de novo entry of Company into the market for the proposed services would provide added convenience to First Chicago's customers, lead to improved methods of meeting customer financing needs, and increase the level of competition among existing providers of these services. Accordingly, the Board has determined that performance of the proposed activities by First Chicago can reasonably be expected to produce public benefits that outweigh possible adverse effects under the proper incident to banking standard of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. For the reasons set forth in this order and the Section 20 Orders, the Board has concluded that First Chicago's proposal to engage through Company in the proposed activities is consistent with the Glass-Steagall Act, and that the proposed activities are so closely related to banking as to be proper incidents thereto within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act provided that First Chicago limits Company's activities as specified in this order and the Section 20 Orders, as modified by the Modification Orders. On the basis of all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the notice should be, and hereby is, approved, subject to all the terms and conditions in this order and the Section 20 Orders, as modified by the Modification Orders. The Board's approval of this proposal extends only to activities conducted within the limitations of those orders and this order, including the Board's reservation of authority to establish additional limitations to ensure that Company's activities are consistent with safety and soundness, avoidance of conflicts of interests, and other relevant considerations under the BHC Act. Underwriting and dealing in any manner other than as approved in this order and the Section 20 Orders (as modified by the Modification Orders) is not within the scope of the Board's approval and is not authorized for Company. The Board's approval of the proposed underwriting and dealing activities is conditioned on a future determination by the Board that First Chicago and Company have established policies and procedures to ensure compliance with the section 20 firewalls and the other requirements of this order and the Section 20 Orders, including computer, audit and accounting systems, internal risk management controls and the necessary operational and managerial infrastructure. After notification by the Board that this condition has been satisfied, Company may commence the proposed underwriting and dealing activities, subject to the other conditions of this order and the Section 20 Orders. The Board's determination also is subject to all the terms and conditions set forth in Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.25(c) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.7 and 225.25(c)), and to the Board's authority to require such modification or termination of the activities of a bank holding company or any of its subsidiaries as the Board finds necessary to ensure compliance with, and to prevent evasion of, the provisions of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders issued thereunder. The Board's decision is specifically conditioned on compliance with all the commitments made in connection with this notice, including the commitments discussed in this order, and the conditions set forth in this order and the above-noted Board regulations and orders. These commitments and conditions are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision, and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The proposal shall not be commenced later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective July 28, 1997. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes Asset and ranking data are as of March 31, 1997. As used in this order, the term "bank-ineligible securities" refers to securities that a bank may not underwrite or deal in directly under section 16 of the Glass-Steagall Act (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 24(Seventh)). Company has authority to underwrite and deal in, to a limited extent, all types of debt securities. See First Chicago Corporation, 80 Federal Reserve Bulletin 449 (1994). Company also is authorized to engage in a variety of other nonbanking activities. See id. See Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, et al. , 76 Federal Reserve Bulletin 158 (1990); J.P. Morgan & Co. Incorporated, et al. , 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 192 (1989), aff'd sub nom. Securities Industries Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 900 F.2d 360 (D.C. Cir. 1990); Citicorp, et al. , 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 473 (1987), aff'd sub nom. Securities Industry Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System , 839 F.2d 47 (2d Cir. 1988), cert. den. , 486 U.S. 1059 (1988); as modified by Review of Restrictions on Director, Officer and Employee Interlocks, Cross-Marketing Activities, and the Purchase and Sale of Financial Assets Between a Section 20 Subsidiary and an Affiliated Bank or Thrift , 61 Federal Register 57,679 (1996) (collectively, "Section 20 Orders"). See Section 20 Orders. Effective March 6, 1997, the Board increased from 10 to 25 percent the amount of total revenue that a section 20 subsidiary may derive from underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities. Revenue Limit on Bank-Ineligible Activities of Subsidiaries of Bank Holding Companies Engaged in Underwriting and Dealing in Securities , 61 Federal Register 68,750 (1996). Compliance with the revenue limitation shall be calculated in accordance with the method stated in the Section 20 Orders, as modified by the Order Approving Modifications to the Section 20 Orders , 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 751 (1989), and 10 Percent Revenue Limit on Bank-Ineligible Activities of Subsidiaries of Bank Holding Companies Engage in Underwriting and Dealing in Securities , 61 Federal Register 48,953 (1996) (collectively, "Modification Orders"). Company may provide services that are necessary incidents to the proposed underwriting and dealing activities. Unless Company receives specific approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act to conduct the activities independently, any revenues from the incidental activities must be treated as ineligible revenues subject to the Board's revenue limitation. 12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1843(c)(8). See 12 C.F.R. 225.24. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Phillips, and Meyer.
Testimony of Vice Chair Alice M. Rivlin The Government Performance and Results Act Before the Committee on Banking and Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives July 29, 1997
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today its approval of the application of ABSA Bank Limited, Johannesburg, Republic of South Africa, to establish a representative office in New York, New York. A copy of the Board's Order is attached. ABSA Bank Limited Johannesburg, Republic of South Africa Order Approving Establishment of a Representative Office ABSA Bank Limited ("Bank"), Johannesburg, Republic of South Africa, a foreign bank within the meaning of the International Banking Act ("IBA"), has applied under section 10(a) of the IBA (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 3107(a)) to establish a representative office in New York, New York. The Foreign Bank Supervision Enhancement Act of 1991, which amended the IBA, provides that a foreign bank must obtain the approval of the Board to establish a representative office in the United States. Notice of the application, affording interested persons an opportunity to comment, has been published in a newspaper of general circulation in New York ( The New York Times , April 19, 1995). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the application and all comments received. Bank, with assets of $28 billion as of March 31, 1997, is a wholly owned subsidiary of Amalgamated Banks of South Africa Limited ("Amalgamated"), the controlling company of the largest banking and financial services group in South Africa. Bank provides banking services throughout South Africa and has investments in a number of banks and nonbank companies. Outside South Africa, Bank operates branches in the United Kingdom and Singapore, and representative offices in the People's Republic of China and the Federal Republic of Germany, and owns subsidiaries in Hong Kong and Germany. The activities of Bank's proposed representative office would include acting as liaison between Bank's home office and customers in the United States, soliciting financial services business on behalf of Bank, and providing information and advice on economic conditions and investment opportunities in South Africa. The representative office would not execute contracts on behalf of Bank, approve loans, disburse funds, or accept deposits or loan repayments. In acting on an application to establish a representative office, the IBA and Regulation K provide that the Board shall take into account whether the foreign bank engages directly in the business of banking outside of the United States and has furnished to the Board the information it needs to assess the application adequately. The Board also shall take into account whether the foreign bank and any foreign bank parent is subject to comprehensive supervision or regulation on a consolidated basis by its home country supervisor (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 3107(a)(2); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(d)). The Board may also take into account additional standards as set forth in the IBA (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 3105(d)(3)-(4)) and Regulation K (12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)). The Board previously has stated that the standards that apply to the establishment of a branch or agency need not in every case apply to the establishment of a representative office, because representative offices do not engage in a banking business and cannot take deposits or make loans. In evaluating an application to establish a representative office under the IBA and Regulation K, the Board will take into account the standards that apply to the establishment of branches and agencies, subject generally to the following considerations. With respect to supervision by home country authorities, a foreign bank that proposes to establish a representative office should be subject to a significant degree of supervision by its home country supervisor. A foreign bank's financial and managerial resources will be reviewed to determine whether its financial condition and performance demonstrate that it is capable of complying with applicable laws and has an operating record that would be consistent with the establishment of a representative office in the United States. Finally, all foreign banks, whether operating through branches, agencies or representative offices, will be required to provide adequate assurances of access to information on the operations of the bank and its affiliates necessary to determine compliance with U.S. laws. The Board has considered the following information with respect to home country supervision of Bank. The South African Reserve Bank (the "Reserve Bank") is the primary bank supervisory authority in South Africa and, as such, is the home country supervisor of Bank. The Reserve Bank has authorized Bank to establish the proposed representative office. The Board previously has determined, in connection with an application involving another bank from South Africa, Standard Bank of South Africa, ("Standard Bank"), that Standard Bank was subject to a significant degree of supervision by the Reserve Bank. The Board has determined that Bank is supervised by the Reserve Bank on substantially the same terms and conditions as Standard Bank. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that factors relating to the supervision of Bank by its home country supervisor are consistent with approval of the proposed representative office. The Board also has determined that, for purposes of the IBA and Regulation K, Bank engages directly in the business of banking outside of the United States through its operations in South Africa. Bank has provided the Board with the information necessary to assess the application through submissions that address relevant issues. The Board also has taken into account the additional standards set forth in section 7 of the IBA and Regulation K ( see 12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 3105(d)(3)-(4); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)(2)). As noted above, the Reserve Bank has authorized Bank to establish the proposed representative office. Taking into consideration Bank's record of operations in its home country, its overall financial resources, and its standing with its home country supervisors, the Board also has determined that financial and managerial factors are consistent with approval of the proposed representative office. Bank appears to have the experience and capacity to support the proposed representative office and also has established controls and procedures for the proposed representative office to ensure compliance with U.S. law. With respect to access to information about Bank's operations, the Board has reviewed the restrictions on disclosure in South Africa and has communicated with the relevant authorities about access to information. Bank and its parents have committed to make available to the Board such information on the operations of Bank and any of its affiliates that the Board deems necessary to determine and enforce compliance with the IBA, the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956, as amended, and other applicable federal law. To the extent that the provision of such information to the Board may be prohibited or impeded by law, Bank and its parents have committed to cooperate with the Board to obtain any necessary consents or waivers that might be required from third parties in connection with disclosure of such information. In light of these commitments and other facts of record, and subject to the condition described below, the Board concludes that Bank has provided adequate assurances of access to any necessary information the Board may request. On the basis of all the facts of record, and subject to the commitments made by Bank, as well as the terms and conditions set forth in this order, the Board has determined that Bank's application to establish a representative office should be, and hereby is, approved. Should any restrictions on access to information on the operations or activities of Bank or any of its affiliates subsequently interfere with the Board's ability to determine the compliance by Bank or its affiliates with applicable federal statutes, the Board may require termination of any of Bank's direct or indirect activities in the United States. Approval of the application is also specifically conditioned on compliance by Bank with the commitments made in connection with the application and with the conditions in this order. The commitments and conditions referred to above are conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its decision, and may be enforced in proceedings under 12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1818 against Bank and its affiliates. By order of the Board of Governors, effective July 30, 1997. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes Amalgamated is controlled directly and indirectly by a number of South African companies engaged in insurance and other businesses. See 58 Federal Register 6348, 6351 (1993). See Citizens National Bank , 79 Federal Reserve Bulletin 805 (1993). See Standard Bank of South Africa , 81 Federal Reserve Bulletin 517 (1995). The Board's authority to approve the establishment of the proposed representative office parallels the continuing authority of the State of New York to license offices of a foreign bank. The Board's approval of this application does not supplant the authority of the State of New York and its agent, the New York State Banking Department (the "Department"), to license the proposed representative office of Bank in accordance with any terms or conditions that the Department may impose. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin and Governors Meyer and Phillips. Absent and not voting: Governor Kelley.