For immediate release
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today requested public comment on a joint interagency proposal to revise risk-based capital standards to address the regulatory capital treatment of recourse obligations and direct credit substitutes that expose banks, bank holding companies, and thrifts to credit risk. Comment is requested by February 3, l998 . The proposal would treat direct credit substitutes and recourse obligations consistently and would use credit ratings and possibly certain other alternative approaches to match the risk-based capital assessment more closely to a banking organization's relative risk of loss in asset securitizations. The joint proposal by the Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Office of Thrift Supervision was developed under the auspices of the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council. The federal banking agencies intend that any final rules adopted in connection with this proposal that result in increased risk-based capital requirements for banking organizations apply only to transactions consummated after the effective date of the final rules. The interagency notice is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced a reduction for next year in fees for electronic payment services provided by the Federal Reserve Banks. Fees for paper-based payment services will remain relatively flat. The fees become effective January 2, 1998. Overall prices for Reserve Bank priced services are projected to decline by approximately 4.0 percent in 1998, compared to an overall price decline of 3.7 percent in 1997. The 1998 price decline is mainly attributable to an 11.4 percent reduction across electronic payment services, reflecting lower prices for most Fedwire funds transfers and automated clearing house (ACH) transactions. Depository institutions will save an estimated $15.6 million in 1998 because of these fee reductions. The savings generally reflect the efficiencies gained from the success of a five-year project to consolidate the Federal Reserve's automation processing facilities. This project has resulted in an estimated savings for depository institutions of $41.8 million since 1995 from lower fees for electronic payment services. In the Fedwire funds transfer service, the basic funds transfer fee will decline by 11.1 percent, from 45 cents to 40 cents. In the ACH service, fees will decline by as much as 12.5 percent for 1998, including a one mill ($0.001) decrease in fees for items originated, items received, and addenda items. Fees for the paper check service will remain relatively flat, with a modest volume-weighted increase of 0.2 percent in 1998. Fees for the noncash, Fedwire book-entry securities transfer, and net settlement services will be retained at their 1997 levels. The 1998 priced services fee schedules are available from the Reserve Banks. The Monetary Control Act of 1980 requires the Federal Reserve to recover the costs of providing priced services over the long run. The Federal Reserve continues to fully meet this requirement, recovering 99.9 percent of the costs of priced services, including targeted return on equity, during the period 1987 through 1996. In 1998, the Reserve Banks project to recover 100.8 percent of their priced services costs, including targeted return on equity, generating after-tax net income of $59.0 million. The Reserve Banks estimate that they will recover 101.0 percent of their costs in 1997. The Board today also approved the 1998 private sector adjustment factor (PSAF) for Reserve Bank priced services of $108.5 million, an increase of $7.0 million or 6.9 percent from the 1997 targeted PSAF of $101.5 million. The PSAF is an allowance for taxes and other imputed expenses that would have been paid and return on capital that would have been earned had the Federal Reserve's priced services been provided by a private business firm. The Board's notice is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today requested public comment on a proposal to integrate its policies on Privately Operated Large-Dollar Multilateral Netting Systems and Private Small-Dollar Clearing and Settlement Systems into a single, comprehensive policy statement on Privately Operated Multilateral Settlement Systems. Comment is requested by February 10, 1998 . The proposed policy statement would apply to privately operated multilateral settlement systems or arrangements that settle U.S. dollar payments, including but not limited to systems for the settlement of checks, automated clearing house (ACH) transfers, credit, debit, and other card transactions, large-value interbank transfers, or foreign exchange contracts involving the U.S. dollar. The proposed policy statement also would require multilateral settlement systems to address credit, liquidity, operational, legal, and systemic risks if these risks are material in the particular system. The proposal is not intended to alter the Board's policy with respect to existing privately operated large-dollar multilateral netting systems, but rather to integrate it within a a more consistent policy framework. The Board is also proposing to repeal its exiting policies for certain "small-dollar" payments clearing and settlement arrangements. The Board's notice is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of an Order of Prohibition against Jose E. Romero Muniz, a former credit card processing clerk of Banco Popular De Puerto Rico, Hato Rey, Puerto Rico. Mr. Muniz, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order based on his alleged theft, sale and unauthorized use of bank customer credit cards. A copy of the order is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of an Order of Prohibition against Luis Carrizo, a former officer of the New York agency of Banco de la Provincia de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina. Mr. Carrizo, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order in connection with his alleged solicitation and acceptance of bribes. A copy of the order is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application by Centura Bank, Rocky Mount, North Carolina, to acquire a branch of First Union National Bank, Charlotte, North Carolina, and to establish a branch at the former location of First Union National Bank. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Centura Bank Rocky Mount, North Carolina Order Approving Acquisition and Establishment of a Branch Centura Bank, Rocky Mount, North Carolina ("Centura"), a state member bank, has requested the Board's approval under section 18(c) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. § 1828(c)) (the "Bank Merger Act") to acquire a branch of First Union National Bank, Charlotte, North Carolina ("First Union"). Centura also has applied under section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. § 321) to establish a branch at the former branch location of First Union. Notice of the applications, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been given in accordance with the Bank Merger Act and the Board's Rules of Procedure (12 C.F.R. 262.3(b)). As required by the Bank Merger Act, reports on the competitive effects of the merger were requested from the United States Attorney General, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency ("OCC"), and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ("FDIC"). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the applications and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in the Bank Merger Act and the Federal Reserve Act. Centura is a wholly owned subsidiary of Centura Banks, Inc., Rocky Mount, North Carolina, which is the sixth largest commercial banking organization in North Carolina, controlling $4.7 billion of deposits, representing 6 percent of total deposits in commercial banking organizations in the state. The branch of First Union to be acquired controls deposits of $22.8 million, representing less than 1 percent of deposits in the state. On consummation of the proposal, Centura Banks, Inc., would remain the sixth largest commercial banking organization in North Carolina. Competitive Considerations The Bank Merger Act provides that the Board may not approve an application if the effect of the acquisition is to create a monopoly or substantially to lessen competition in any section of the country unless the Board finds that the anticompetitive effects of the proposal are clearly outweighed in the public interest by the probable effect of the proposal in meeting the convenience and needs of the community. In evaluating the competitive factors in this case, the Board has carefully considered comments that assert that the proposal would create a monopoly for banking services by eliminating Centura's only competitor in Bakersville, North Carolina. The Board and the courts have found that the relevant banking market for analyzing the competitive effects of a proposal must reflect commercial and banking realities and should consist of the local area where local customers can practicably turn for alternatives. In making a determination on the geographic market in this case, the Board has considered worker commuting patterns (as indicated by census data) and other indicia of economic integration and transmission of competitive forces among depository institutions. A commenter contends that the market for evaluating the competitive effects of this proposal should be the town of Bakersville, North Carolina. Based on all the facts, and for the reasons discussed herein, the Board concludes that the relevant geographic market for evaluating the competitive effects of this proposal is the Mitchell County, North Carolina, banking market ("Mitchell County banking market"), which is the area approximated by Mitchell County and includes the town of Bakersville. Mitchell County has a population of approximately 14,400 residents and is located in the western corner of North Carolina adjacent to Tennessee. Census Bureau data for 1990 indicate that approximately 68 percent of the workers who reside in Mitchell County work in the county. The county's major employers include several large furniture manufacturers in Spruce Pine, North Carolina, that each employ more than 200 workers. Other facts of record indicate that Spruce Pine is the center for economic activity for the county. Spruce Pine, with a population of more than 2,000 residents, is the largest town in Mitchell County and is located in the southern portion of the county which contains approximately 60 percent of the county's residents. Spruce Pine has a shopping mall and a hospital. The town also has the only newspaper and radio station in the county, thereby providing the primary advertising media for Mitchell County's residents. Four insured depository institutions, including First Union, are located in Spruce Pine. Bakersville is a smaller town with a population of approximately 330 residents, located 11 miles from Spruce Pine. The town's two largest employers employ a total of 125 workers, and there is no shopping mall or hospital in Bakersville. State Highway 226 provides Bakersville's residents with convenient access to the commercial and health care facilities in Spruce Pine. In light of these, and all facts of record, the Board concludes that Mitchell County is a local area that is economically integrated by the commercial activities conducted in Spruce Pine to an extent that local customers, including residents in Bakersville, can practicably turn for alternatives in the area. Accordingly, the relevant banking market for assessing the competitive effects of the proposal is the Mitchell County banking market and not the town of Bakersville. Centura is the third largest depository institution in the banking market, controlling deposits of approximately $27 million, representing approximately 19 percent of the total deposits in depository institutions in the market ("market deposits"). The First Union branch that Centura proposes to acquire controls deposits of $22.8 million, representing approximately 16 percent of market deposits. On consummation of the proposal, Centura would become the second largest depository institution in the Mitchell County banking market, controlling deposits of approximately $49.8 million, representing approximately 35 percent of market deposits. Centura proposes to purchase a branch of First Union, the largest competitor in the market, which controls approximately 52 percent of market deposits. On consummation, First Union's share of market deposits would decrease to approximately 35.4 percent. Because First Union's share of market deposits would be substantially reduced and would be acquired by a smaller competitor in the market, concentration in the market, as measured by the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index ("HHI"), would decrease approximately 522 points to 3027. In analyzing the competitive effects of the proposal in this market, the Board also has considered that the number of competitors in the Mitchell County banking market would not change because First Union would remain as one of the county's four competing depository institutions. First Union and another large bank holding company competitor would each control at least 20 percent of market deposits. The Department of Justice also has reviewed the proposal and advised the Board that consummation of the proposal would not likely have any significantly adverse competitive effects in these banking markets or any relevant banking market. Based on the characteristics of the market, which will maintain the same number of competitors, the size of the market competitors, and all other facts of record, the Board concludes that consummation of this proposal would not have a significantly adverse effect on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in the Mitchell County banking market or any other relevant banking market. Convenience and Needs Considerations The Board has carefully reviewed the convenience and needs factor in the Bank Merger Act, which includes a review of the records of the relevant depository institutions under the Community Reinvestment Act (12 U.S.C. § 2901 et seq .)("CRA"), in light of all the facts and comments. Commenters maintain that Centura generally does not assist in meeting the credit needs of its communities and, in particular, is not responsive to the credit needs of small businesses. As provided in the CRA, the Board has evaluated this factor in light of examinations by the primary federal supervisor of the CRA performance record of the relevant institution. An institutions's most recent CRA performance evaluation is a particularly important consideration in the applications process because it represents a detailed on-site evaluation of the institution's overall record of performance under the CRA by its primary federal supervisor. Centura received a "satisfactory" rating under the Community Reinvestment Act from the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond at its most recent performance examination, as of April 1996 ("1996 Examination"). The 1996 Examination found that Centura offered a wide range of services and products to help in meeting the credit needs of all its communities, including residential mortgages, residential construction, home improvement, small business, commercial, consumer, agricultural, and community development loans. There was no evidence of prohibited discrimination or other illegal practices at Centura. Examiners considered the products and services offered by Centura to be responsive to the significant credit needs in all its communities, including LMI neighborhoods. The 1996 Examination also concluded that lending data demonstrated a reasonable penetration of various loan products into all segments of Centura's delineated communities. In addition, Centura was considered to be a leader in making Small Business Administration ("SBA") loans in North Carolina. In 1995, Centura made 90 SBA loans, totalling $13 million. The Board has carefully considered all the facts of record, including the comments received, the CRA performance record of Centura, and relevant reports of examination and other supervisory information. Based on a review of the entire record and for the facts discussed above, the Board concludes that convenience and needs considerations, including the CRA record of performance of Centura are consistent with approval of this proposal. Other Considerations The Board has carefully considered the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of Centura and First Union in light of all the facts of record. The facts of record include supervisory reports of examination assessing the financial and managerial resources of the organizations and financial information provided by Centura. The Board notes that Centura is in satisfactory financial condition and would remain so after consummation of the proposal. In addition, reports of examination assessing the managerial resources of Centura indicate this factor is consistent with approval. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that considerations related to the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the institutions involved are consistent with approval as are the factors required to be considered under the Federal Reserve Act. Conclusion Based on the foregoing and all the facts of record, the Board has determined that this application should be, and hereby is, approved. The Board's approval of the proposal is specifically conditioned on compliance by Centura with all the commitments made in connection with this application. For purposes of this action, the commitments and conditions relied on in reaching this decision are both conditions imposed in writing by the Board and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The proposed acquisition shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day following the effective date of this order, or later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective November 10, 1997. (signed) Barbara R. Lowrey Barbara R. Lowrey Associate Secretary of the Board Footnotes Centura proposes to consolidate its branch at 117 Mitchell Avenue into First Union's branch at 114 Mitchell Avenue, both in Bakersville, North Carolina. State data are as of June 30, 1996, and have been updated to reflect transactions as of June 30, 1997. Deposits include Centura recent acquisition of five branches of NationsBank, N.A., Charlotte, North Carolina. 12 U.S.C. § 1828(c)(5). See St. Joseph Valley Bank , 68 Federal Reserve Bulletin 673, 674 (1982). The key question to be considered in making this selection "is not where the parties to the merger do business or even where they compete, but where, within the area of competitive overlap, the effect of the merger on competition will be direct and immediate." United States v. Philadelphia Nat'l Bank , 374 U.S. 321, 374 (1963); United States v. Phillipsburg Nat'l Bank , 399 U.S. 350 (1969). Market data are as of June 30, 1996. In this context, depository institutions include commercial banks, savings banks, and savings associations. Market share data before consummation are based on calculations in which the deposits of thrift institutions are included at 50 percent. The Board previously has indicated that thrift institutions have become, or have the potential to become, significant competitors of commercial banks. See WM Bancorp , 76 Federal Reserve Bulletin 788 (1990); National City Corporation , 70 Federal Reserve Bulletin 743 (1984). Under the revised Department of Justice Merger Guidelines, 49 Federal Register 26,823 (June 29, 1984), a market in which the post-merger HHI is above 1800 is considered highly concentrated. The Justice Department has informed the Board that a bank merger or acquisition generally will not be challenged (in the absence of other factors indicating anticompetitive effects) unless the post-merger HHI is at least 1800 and the merger increases the HHI by more than 200 points. The Justice Department has stated that the higher than normal HHI thresholds for screening bank mergers for anticompetitive effects implicitly recognize the competitive effect of limited-purpose lenders and other non-depository financial entities. The OCC and the FDIC also have not objected to the proposal. Several commenters criticize the proposal because no alternative banking services will be available in Bakersville. As discussed above, there is a branch of First Union and two other financial institutions in Spruce Pine which is 11 miles from Bakersville. The record indicates that residents of Mitchell County, including Bakersville's residents, are likely to travel to Spruce Pine as the county's center for commercial activity to obtain services. The Board also has considered Centura's record of assisting to meet the credit needs of its communities in light of the comments and, as discussed above, concludes that this record is satisfactory. The Statement of the Federal Financial Supervisory Agencies Regarding the Community Reinvestment Act ("Agency CRA Statement") provides that a CRA examination is an important and often controlling factor in the consideration of an institutions's CRA record and that reports of these examinations will be given great weight in the applications process. See 54 Federal Register 13,742 and 13,745 (1989). Some commenters also contend that Centura's fees for services are excessive. Centura provides a full range of credit products and banking services to assist in meeting the credit and banking needs of its communities, including low- and moderate-income ("LMI") communities. The Board notes that examiners favorably noted Centura's "Simple Checking," a low-cost checking account. In addition, there is no evidence in the record that the fees charged by Centura are based on any factor that would be prohibited under law. Although the Board has recognized that banks help serve the banking needs of their communities by making basic services available at nominal or no charge, the CRA does not impose any limitation on the fees or surcharges for services. A commenter contends that the proposal will result in a loss of jobs. The convenience and needs factor has been consistently interpreted by the federal banking agencies, the courts, and Congress to relate to the effect of a proposal on the availability and quality of banking services in the community, and does not extend to the effect of a proposed acquisition on employment in a community. See, e.g., Wells Fargo & Company , 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 445, 457 (1996). A commenter has requested that the Board hold a hearing on the application. The Board is not required under the Bank Merger Act or the Federal Reserve Act to hold a public hearing or meeting in this case. Under the Board's rules, the Board may, in its discretion, hold a public hearing or meeting on an application to clarify factual issues related to the application and to provide an opportunity for testimony, if appropriate. The Board has carefully considered the commenter's request for a hearing in light of all the facts of record. In the Board's view, the commenter has had ample opportunity to submit his views, and has submitted two written comments that have been carefully considered by the Board in acting on this application. The commenter's request fails to demonstrate why his written presentations do not adequately present his evidence, allegations and views. After a careful review of all the facts of record, moreover, the Board has concluded that the commenter disputes the weight that should be accorded to, and the conclusions that the Board should draw from, the facts of record, but does not identify disputed issues of fact that are material to the Board's decision. For these reasons, and based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that a public hearing or meeting is not required or warranted to clarify the factual record in the application, or otherwise warranted in this case. Accordingly, the request for a hearing on the proposal is hereby denied. Voting for this action: Vice Chair Rivlin and Governors Kelley, Phillips, Meyer, Ferguson, and Gramlich. Absent and not voting: Chairman Greenspan.
For immediate release A joint report on the public disclosure of trading and derivatives activities of banks and securities firms worldwide has been issued by the Basle Committee on Banking Supervision and the Technical Committee of the International Organisation of Securities Commissions (IOSCO). This joint report provides an overview of the disclosures about trading and derivatives activities in the 1996 annual reports of a sample of the largest, internationally active banks and securities firms in the G-10 countries, and notes improvements since 1993. The analysis builds, in part, upon a framework used by the Federal Reserve in analyzing the trading and derivatives disclosures of major U.S. banking organizations. In total, 79 major banks and securities firms in the G-10 countries comprised the sample reviewed for the 1993 - 1996 period, representing over $14 trillion in total assets and over $83 trillion in notional amounts of derivative instruments. Disclosures in the 1995 and 1996 annual reports of a major securities firm in Hong Kong were also reviewed. The analysis revealed that there have been general improvements as well as voluntary innovations in the annual report disclosures of a number of large, internationally active banks and securities firms. In particular, there were notable improvements in quantitative disclosures about market risk in 1996 and 1995. However, despite encouraging advances in disclosure practices by a number of institutions in the G-10 countries, many institutions continued to disclose very little about their trading and derivatives activities. In addition, the report includes recommendations made by the Basle Committee and IOSCO in 1995 for further improvements in disclosures of qualitative and quantitative information about institutions' involvement in trading and derivatives activities, including their risk exposures and risk management policies, and the earnings impact of these activities. The report's recommendations draw on concepts developed in the Discussion Paper on Public Disclosure of Market and Credit Risks by Financial Intermediaries released by the Euro-currency Standing Committee of the G-10 central banks in September 1994, and in the joint report of the Basle Committee and the IOSCO Technical Committee, Framework for Supervisory Information About the Derivatives Activities of Banks and Securities Firms , issued in May 1995. Attachments are available on the BIS Website. |
Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan The growing international financial system Before the Committee on Banking and Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives November 13, 1997 Recent developments in world finance have highlighted growing interactions among national financial markets. The underlying technology-based structure of the international financial system has enabled us to improve materially the efficiency of the flows of capital and payment systems. That improvement, however, has also enhanced the ability of the financial system to transmit problems in one part of the globe to another quite rapidly. Doubtless, there is much to be learned from the recent experience in Asia that can be applied to better the workings of the international financial system and its support of international trade that has done so much to enhance living standards worldwide. While each of the Asian economies differs in many important respects, the sources of their spectacular growth in recent years, in some cases decades, and the problems that have emerged are relevant to a greater or lesser extent to nearly all of them. Following the early post-World War II period, policies generally fostering low levels of inflation and openness of their economies coupled with high savings and investment rates contributed to a sustained period of rapid growth, in some cases starting in 1960s and 1970s. By the 1980s most economies in the region were expanding vigorously. Foreign net capital inflows grew, but until recent years were relatively modest. The World Bank estimates that net inflows of long-term debt, foreign direct investment, and equity purchases to the Asia Pacific region were only about $25 billion in 1990, but exploded to more than $110 billion by 1996. A major impetus behind this rapid expansion was the global stock market boom of the 1990s. As that boom progressed, investors in many industrial countries found themselves more heavily concentrated in the recently higher valued securities of companies in the developed world, whose rates of return, in many instances, had fallen to levels perceived as uncompetitive with the earnings potential in emerging economies, especially in Asia. The resultant diversification induced a sharp increase in capital flows into those economies. To a large extent, they came from investors in the United States and Western Europe. A substantial amount came from Japan, as well, owing more to a search for higher yields than to rising stock prices and capital gains in that country. The rising yen through mid-1995 also encouraged a substantial increase in direct investment inflows from Japan. In retrospect, it is clear that more investment monies flowed into these economies than could be profitably employed at modest risk. I suspect that it was inevitable in those conditions of low inflation, rapid growth, and ample liquidity that much investment moved into the real estate sector, with an emphasis by both the public and private sectors on conspicuous construction projects. This is an experience, of course, not unknown in the United States on occasion. These real estate assets, in turn, ended up as collateral for a significant proportion of the assets of domestic financial systems. In many instances, those financial systems were less than robust, beset with problems of lax lending standards, weak supervisory regimes, and inadequate capital. Moreover, in most cases, the currencies of these economies were closely tied to the U.S. dollar, and the dollar's substantial recovery since mid-1995, especially relative to the yen, made their exports less competitive. In addition, in some cases, the glut of semiconductors in 1996 suppressed export growth, exerting further pressures on highly leveraged businesses. However, overall GDP growth rates generally edged off only slightly, and imports, fostered by rising real exchange rates, continued to expand, contributing to what became unsustainable current account deficits in a number of these economies. Moreover, with exchange rates seeming to be solidly tied to the dollar, and with dollar and yen interest rates lower than domestic currency rates, a significant part of the enlarged capital inflows into these economies, in particular short-term flows, was denominated by the ultimate borrowers in foreign currencies. This put additional pressure on companies to earn foreign exchange through exports. The pressures on fixed exchange rate regimes mounted as foreign investors slowed the pace of new capital inflows, and domestic businesses sought increasingly to convert domestic currencies into foreign currencies, or, equivalently, slowed the conversion of export earnings into domestic currencies. The shifts in perceived future investment risks led to sharp declines in stock markets across Asia, often on top of earlier declines or lackluster performances. To date, the direct impact of these developments on the American economy has been modest, but it can be expected not to be negligible. U.S. exports to Thailand, the Philippines, Indonesia, and Malaysia (the four countries initially affected) were about 4 percent of total U.S. exports in 1996. However, an additional 12 percent went to Hong Kong, Korea, Singapore and Taiwan (economies that have been affected more recently). Thus, depending on the extent of the inevitable slowdown in growth in this area of the world, the growth of our exports will tend to be muted. Our direct foreign investment in, and foreign affiliate earnings reported from, the economies in this region as a whole have been a smaller share of the respective totals than their share of our exports. The share is, nonetheless, large enough to expect some drop-off in those earnings in the period ahead. In addition, there will be indirect effects on the U.S. real economy from countries such as Japan that compete even more extensively with the economies in the Asian region. Particularly troublesome over the past several months has been the so-called contagion effect of weakness in one economy spreading to others as investors perceive, rightly or wrongly, similar vulnerabilities. Even economies, such as Hong Kong, with formidable stocks of international reserves, balanced external accounts, and relatively robust financial systems, have experienced severe pressures. One can debate whether the turbulence in Latin American asset values reflects contagion effects from Asia, the influence of developments in U.S. financial markets, or home-grown causes. Whatever the answer, and the answer may be all of the above, this phenomenon illustrates the interdependencies in today's world economy and financial system. Perhaps it was inevitable that the impressive and rapid growth experienced by the economies in the Asian region would run into a temporary slowdown or pause. But there is no reason that above-average growth in countries that are still in a position to gain from catching up with the prevailing technology cannot persist for a very long time. Nevertheless, rapidly developing, free-market economies periodically can be expected to run into difficulties because investment mistakes are inevitable in any dynamic economy. Private capital flows may temporarily turn adverse. In these circumstances, companies should be allowed to default, private investors should take their losses, and government policies should be directed toward laying the macroeconomic and structural foundations for renewed expansion; new growth opportunities must be allowed to emerge. Similarly, in providing any international financial assistance, we need to be mindful of the desirability of minimizing the impression that international authorities stand ready to guarantee the external liabilities of sovereign governments or failed domestic businesses. To do otherwise could lead to distorted investments and could ultimately unbalance the world financial system. The recent experience in Asia underscores the importance of financially sound domestic banking and other associated financial institutions. While the current turmoil has significant interaction with the international financial system, the recent crises would arguably have been better contained if long-maturity property loans had not accentuated the usual mismatch between maturities of assets and liabilities of domestic financial systems that were far from robust to begin with. Our unlamented savings and loan crises come to mind. These are trying days for economic policymakers in Asia. They must fend off domestic pressures that seek disengagement from the world trading and financial system. The authorities in these countries are working hard, in some cases with substantial assistance from the IMF, the World Bank, and the Asian Development Bank, to stabilize their financial systems and economies. The financial disturbances that have afflicted a number of currencies in Asia do not at this point, as I indicated earlier, threaten prosperity in this country, but we need to work closely with their leaders and the international financial community to assure that their situations stabilize. It is in the interest of the United States and other nations around the world to encourage appropriate policy adjustments, and where required, provide temporary financial assistance.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of its first enforcement action to address the Year 2000 compliance issue. A Cease and Desist Order was issued by the Board against Putnam-Greene Financial Corporation, Eatonton, Georgia, a bank holding company. This action was coordinated with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Georgia Commissioner of Banking and Finance, who jointly issued Cease and Desist Orders against Putnam-Greeneï¿½s three subsidiary banks. The Federal Reserveï¿½s Order is primarily designed to ensure that Putnam-Greene establishes and implements an adequate electronic information system and that all of the computer-related operations that the company performs for itself and its three subsidiary banks will continue to function effectively after the century date change on January 1, 2000. A copy of the order is attached.
Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan Social security Before the Task Force on Social Security of the Committee on the Budget, U.S. Senate November 20, 1997 I am pleased to appear here today to discuss one of our nation's most pressing challenges: putting social security's Old-Age and Survivors Insurance program on a sound financial footing for the twenty-first century. It has become conventional wisdom that the social security system, as currently constructed, will not be fully viable after the baby boom generation starts to retire. The most recent report by the social security trustees projected that the trust funds of the system will grow over approximately the next fifteen years. However, beginning in the year 2014, the annual expected costs of the Old-Age and Survivors Insurance program are projected to exceed annual earmarked tax receipts, and the subsequent deficits are projected to deplete the trust funds by the year 2031. This imbalance in social security stems primarily from the fact that, until very recently, payments into the social security trust accounts by the average employee, plus employer contributions and interest earned, were inadequate to fund the total of retirement benefits. This has started to change. Under the most recent revisions to the law and presumably conservative economic and demographic assumptions, today's younger workers will pay social security taxes over their working years that appear sufficient, on average, to fund their benefits during retirement. However, the huge liability for current retirees, as well as for much of the work force closer to retirement, leaves the system as a whole badly underfunded. This issue of funding underscores the critical elements in the forthcoming debate on social security reform, because it focuses on the core of any retirement system, private or public. Simply put, enough resources must be set aside over a lifetime of work to fund the excess of consumption over claims on production a retiree may enjoy. At the most rudimentary level, one could envision households saving by actually storing goods purchased during their working years for consumption during retirement. Even better, the resources that would have otherwise gone into the stored goods could be diverted to the production of new capital assets, which would, cumulatively, over a working lifetime, produce an even greater quantity of goods and services to be consumed in retirement. In the latter case, we would be getting more output per worker, our traditional measure of productivity, and a factor that is central in all calculations of long-term social security trust fund financing. In sum, the bottom line in all retirement programs is the availability of real resources. The finance of any system is merely to facilitate the allocation of resources that fund retirement consumption of goods and services. Unless social security savings are increased by higher taxes (with negative consequences for growth) or reduced benefits, domestic savings must be augmented by greater private saving or surpluses in the rest of the government budget to ensure that there are enough overall savings to finance adequate productive capacity down the road to meet the consumption needs of both retirees and active workers. The basic premise of our current largely pay-as-you-go social security system is that future productivity growth will be sufficient to supply promised retirement benefits for current workers. However, even supposing some acceleration in long-term productivity growth from recent experience, at existing rates of saving and capital investment, a pick-up in productivity growth large enough by itself to provide for impending benefits is problematic. Moreover, savings borrowed from abroad, our current account deficit, cannot be counted on indefinitely to bridge the gap between domestic investment and domestic savings. Accordingly, short of a far more general reform of the system, there are a number of initiatives, at a minimum, that should be addressed. As I argued at length during the Social Security Commission deliberations of 1983, with only modest effect, some delaying of the age of eligibility for retirement benefits is becoming increasingly pressing. For example, adjusting the full-benefits retirement age further to keep pace with increases in life expectancy in a way that would keep the ratio of retirement years to expected life span approximately constant would significantly narrow the funding gap. Such an initiative would become easier to implement as fewer and fewer of our older citizens retire from physically arduous work. Hopefully, other modifications to social security, such as improved cost-of-living indexing, will be instituted. There are a number of broader reform initiatives that, through the process of privatization, could increase domestic saving rates. Given the considerable stakes involved, these are clearly worthy of intensive evaluation. Perhaps the strongest argument for privatization is that replacing the current underfunded system with a fully funded one could boost domestic saving. But, we must remember that it is because privatization plans might increase savings that they are potentially viable, not because of their particular form of financing. Moving toward a privatized defined-contribution plan would, by definition, convert our social security system into a fully funded plan. But, the same issues and questions remain as under the current system. What level of retirement income would be viewed as adequate, and should required contributions to private accounts (and savings) be increased to meet this level? Is there an alternative to forced savings to raise the level of contributions to the private funds? Finally, if individuals did invest a portion of their accounts in equities and other private securities, thereby receiving higher rates of return and enhancing their social security retirement income, what would be the effect on non-social security investments? As I have argued elsewhere, unless national saving increases, shifting social security trust funds to private securities, while likely increasing income in the social security system, will, to a first approximation, reduce non social-security retirement income to an offsetting degree. Without an increase in the savings flow, private pension and insurance funds, among other holders of private securities, presumably would be induced to sell higher-yielding stocks and private bonds to the social security retirement funds in exchange for lower-yielding U.S. Treasuries. This could translate into higher premiums for life insurance, and lower returns on other defined-contribution retirement plans. This would not be an improvement to our overall retirement system. Furthermore, the potential consequences of moving social security to a system that features private retirement accounts need to be considered carefully. Any move toward privatization will confront the problem of how to finance previously promised benefits. That would presumably involve making the implicit accrued unfunded liability of the current social security system to beneficiaries explicit. For example, participants at the time of privatization could each receive a non-marketable certificate that confirmed irrevocably the obligations of the U.S. Government to pay a real annuity at retirement, indexed to changes in the cost of living. The amount of that annuity would reflect the benefits accrued through the date of privatization. Under our current system, social security beneficiaries technically do not have an irrevocable claim to current levels of promised future benefits because legislative actions can lower future benefits. In contrast, the explicit liability of federal government debt to the public is essentially irrevocable. A critical consideration for the privatization of social security is how financial markets are factoring in the implicit unfunded liability of the current system in setting long-term interest rates. If markets perceive that this liability has the same status as explicit federal debt, then one must presume that interest rates have already fully adjusted to the implicit contingent liability. However, if markets have not fully accounted for this implicit liability, then making it explicit could lead to higher interest rates for U.S. government debt. For any level of real annuity at retirement, the corresponding current value of recognition certificates would depend on a number of technical assumptions. These assumptions have no impact on the real payouts from the retirement annuities but determine the current notional value of recognition certificates, which is useful for making broad economic comparisons. For example, factoring in a 2 percent real annual rate of discount and including other technical assumptions, the value of recognition certificates the U.S. government would need to issue to ensure that all currently accrued legislated future benefits are paid would be roughly $9-1/2 trillion. Alternatively, at a 1 percent real rate, the value would be roughly $12 trillion, and at a 6 percent real rate, the value would be about $4-1/2 trillion. Because, under a wide range of assumptions, the magnitude of this liability remains very large relative to the current outstanding federal debt to the public--$3-1/2 trillion--the market adjustment could be substantial. There is reason to suspect, however, that if such a liability is made explicit in a manner similar to the transition procedure in Chile, each dollar of new liability will weigh far less on financial markets than a dollar of current public debt. In the case of the Chilean pension reform, a significant portion of the implicit liability of their old system was made explicit at the initiation of the new pension system by the issuance of "recognition bonds" that were deposited in workers' individual accounts. These bonds were initially nonmarketable, indexed for price inflation, and yielded a fixed real return on a specified face value. In Chile, the liquidation of these bonds generally occurs only after a worker retires and the proceeds from the bonds are required to be paid in the form of an annuity or through programmed partial withdrawals. These bonds have been viewed as a different instrument from other forms of public debt, and it is likely that if an instrument such as recognition certificates were issued here, it also would be viewed as distinct from fully-liquid marketable public debt. In effect, under privatization, the obligations of social security would be transferred from an implicit government account to millions of private individual accounts. Retirement needs would be funded first by the conversion of recognition certificates, and later by withdrawals from private defined contribution funds. The outstanding certificates would accordingly decline with time, and finally be paid off some decades in the future. But if benefits and contributions do not change, national savings are only being transferred from the federal government account to that of households and are not increased in the process. It is only if contributions or private saving increases that household and national saving increases. The transfer of savings from public to private accounts would affect the unified budget balance of the U.S. government, although precisely how that balance would be affected would depend on the exact budgetary accounting treatment adopted for recognition certificates. Certainly, with immediate and full privatization, the on-going annual unified budget balance would decline by at least the amount of the social security surplus: As payroll taxes were diverted from public coffers to private accounts, they would no longer count as tax revenues; similarly, payments of social security benefits would not count as outlays. The issuance of recognition certificates under current accounting rules presumably would also increase outlays and the deficit by the value of the certificates at the time of issuance. Exactly how much the deficit would be affected in the initial year, and how much in subsequent years, would depend on how the certificates were structured and on bookkeeping conventions. However, the basic effects of privatization on the budget deficit are clear--the implicit liabilities of the social security system would start to appear on our balance sheets now, rather than when the baby boomers retire. It is an open, but crucial, question as to how financial markets would respond to a change of the magnitude contemplated by immediate full privatization. Before any such move is made, a thorough examination of the risks and benefits to the financial markets would be wise. The key issues that will affect the economy are (1) the change from the implicit liability of the current system to one of an irrevocable obligation to pay and (2) the magnitude of changes in national saving and the level of productivity-spurring investment. The budget bookkeeping on how privatization is recorded has little significance. An alternative to what is clearly a "big bang" one-shot transition, in which privatization occurs immediately for all, is a gradual transition where, for example, only younger workers are accorded recognition certificates, and are required to fund the remainder of their retirement needs through defined contribution plans. Over the years, ever older groups would be included in the new system. During the transition, two systems would operate in parallel. Such a transition would involve smaller immediate increases in recognition certificates (and in the unified budget deficit) and smaller accompanying market risks, but would have larger effects in subsequent years, as tax revenues from the younger groups would be diverted as contributions to private accounts, whereas all social security benefits to retirees would still be counted as government outlays. Thus, if there is a unified budget surplus before the transition, it will be reduced or turned to a deficit at least to the extent of the loss in tax revenues. In effect, social security benefits will be increasingly financed with "general revenues" for a time. Should this be the direction that the Congress decides to move, containment of spending outside of social security doubtless would be necessary to add assurances to the market. Ultimately, of course, even under a gradual transition, the system would be almost fully privatized. I say almost because I presume Congress would provide some form of assistance to those who through investment imprudence or unforeseen events had retirement benefits below a certain level perceived as an absolute minimum. Needless to say such a new entitlement would have to be rigorously delimited because political pressures to increase it could be overwhelming. Despite all of these complications, in the broader scheme of things, the types of changes that will be required to restore fiscal balance to our social security accounts are significant but manageable. More important, most entail changes that are less unsettling if they are enacted soon, even if their effects are significantly delayed, rather than waiting five or ten years or longer for legislation. We owe it to those who will retire after the turn of the century to be given sufficient advance notice to make what alterations in retirement planning may be required. If we procrastinate too long, the adjustments could be truly wrenching. Our senior citizens, both current and future, deserve better.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today issued an amendment to its Truth in Lending Regulation that gives creditors flexibility in providing variable-rate disclosures. The amendment applies to variable-rate loans with a term exceeding one year and secured by the consumer's principal dwelling. It allows creditors to provide a statement that the periodic payment may substantially increase or decrease together with a maximum interest rate and payment based on a $10,000 loan amount, in lieu of providing a fifteen-year historical example of index values. The revisions are effective immediately but compliance is optional until October 1, 1998. The revisions implement a provision of the Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act of 1996. The Board's notice is attached. |
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of an Order of Prohibition against Eric C. Dill, a former employee of the New York Branch of the National Bank of Canada. Mr. Dill, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order in settlement of charges that in 1993 he mispriced securities in the trading portfolio for which he was responsible, causing substantial losses to the bank. A copy of the order is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application by First National Security Company, DeQueen, Arkansas, to acquire all of the voting shares of First Financial Corporation of Idabel and thereby acquire its subsidiary bank, First State Bank of Idabel, both in Idabel, Oklahoma. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. First National Security Company DeQueen, Arkansas Order Approving the Acquisition of a Bank Holding Company First National Security Company, DeQueen, Arkansas ("First National"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 3 of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1842) to acquire all of the voting shares of First Financial Corporation of Idabel ("First Financial"), and thereby acquire its subsidiary bank, First State Bank of Idabel, both in Idabel, Oklahoma ("Bank"). Notice of this proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (62 Federal Register 53,007 (1997)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the proposal and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 3 of the BHC Act. First National operates subsidiary banks in Arkansas and Oklahoma. First National is the 144th largest depository institution in Oklahoma, controlling approximately $41.9 million in deposits, representing less than 1 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in the state. First Financial is the 216th largest depository institution in Oklahoma, controlling approximately $23 million in deposits. On consummation of this proposal, First National would become the 96th largest depository institution in Oklahoma, controlling deposits of $64.9 million, representing less than 1 percent of the total deposits in depository institutions in the state. Interstate Banking Analysis Section 3(d) of the BHC Act, as amended by Section 101 of the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act of 1994, allows the Board to approve an application by a bank holding company to acquire a bank located in a state other than the home state of such bank holding company if certain conditions are met. For purposes of the BHC Act, the home state of First National is Arkansas, and First National proposes to acquire a bank in Oklahoma. The conditions for an interstate acquisition under section 3(d) of the BHC Act are met in this case. Competitive Considerations The BHC Act prohibits the Board from approving a proposal submitted under section 3 of the Act if the proposal would result in a monopoly or if the effect of the proposal may be to substantially lessen competition in any relevant market unless the Board finds that the anticompetitive effects of the proposed transaction are clearly outweighed in the public interest by the probable effect of the transaction in meeting the convenience and needs of the community to be served. First National and First Financial compete directly in the McCurtain County, Oklahoma, banking market. First National is the fourth largest commercial banking organization in the McCurtain County banking market, controlling deposits of approximately $41.9 million, representing 16.1 percent of the total deposits in commercial banking organizations in the market ("market deposits"). First Financial is the sixth largest commercial banking institution in the market, controlling deposits of approximately $23 million, representing 8.8 percent of market deposits. On consummation of this proposal, First National would become the largest commercial banking organization in the McCurtain County banking market, controlling deposits of approximately $64.9 million, representing 24.9 percent of market deposits. Concentration in the market, as measured by the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index ("HHI"), would increase by 285 points to 1971. In evaluating the competitive effects of the proposal in the McCurtain County banking market, the Board has considered several factors. The McCurtain County banking market is a relatively small rural market in southeastern Oklahoma and six competitors would remain in the market after consummation of the proposal, including a large multistate bank holding company. Each of the five banks that would compete with First National after consummation would have a market share of more than 5 percent, and three of the banks control more than 15 percent of market deposits. The Department of Justice has reviewed the proposal and advised the Board that consummation of the proposal would not likely have any significantly adverse competitive effects in the McCurtain County banking market or any other relevant banking market. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposal would not result in any significantly adverse effects on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in the McCurtain County banking market or any other relevant banking market. Other Factors The BHC Act also requires the Board to consider the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the companies and banks involved in the proposal, the convenience and needs of the communities to be served, and certain supervisory factors. The facts of record include supervisory reports of examination assessing the financial and managerial resources of the organizations and financial information provided by First National. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that the financial and managerial resources and the future prospects of First National, First Financial, and their respective subsidiary banks, are consistent with approval, as are the other supervisory factors the Board must consider under section 3 of the BHC Act. In addition, considerations relating to the convenience and needs of the communities to be served are consistent with approval of the application. Conclusion Based on the foregoing, and in light of all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the application should be, and hereby is, approved. The Board's approval is specifically conditioned on compliance by First National with all the commitments made in connection with this application. For the purpose of this action, the commitments and conditions relied on by the Board in reaching its decision are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The acquisition of First Financial shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day following the effective date of this order, or later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is.extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective November 24, 1997. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes Deposit data are as of June 30, 1996. In this context, depository institutions include commercial banks, savings banks, and savings associations. Pub. L. No. 103-328, 108 Stat. 2338 (1994). A bank holding company's home state is the state in which the operations of the bank holding company's banking subsidiaries were principally conducted on July 1, 1966, or the date on which the company became a bank holding company, whichever is later. 12 U.S.C. §§ 1842(c)(1)(A) and (B) and 1842(d)(2)(A) and (B). First National is adequately capitalized and adequately managed. On consummation of the proposal, First National would control less than 10 percent of the total amount of deposits of insured depository institutions in the United States, and less than 30 percent of the total amount of deposits of insured depository institutions in Oklahoma. In addition, Bank has been in existence for the minimum period of time necessary to satisfy age requirements established by applicable state law. See Okla. Stat. Ann. tit. 6 § 506(D)(1)(a). All other requirements of section 3(d) of the BHC Act also would be met on consummation of the proposal. The McCurtain County banking market is approximated by McCurtain County, Oklahoma. Market share data are as of June 30, 1996. No savings associations operate in the McCurtain County banking market. Under the revised Merger Guidelines, 49 Federal Register 26,823 (June 29, 1984), a market above 1800 is considered to be highly concentrated. The Department of Justice has informed the Board that a bank merger or acquisition generally will not be challenged (in the absence of other factors indicating anticompetitive effects) unless the post-merger HHI is at least 1800 and the merger increases the HHI by more than 200 points. The Department of Justice has stated that the higher than normal HHI thresholds for screening bank mergers for anticompetitive effects implicitly recognize the competitive effect of limited-purpose lenders and other non-depository financial entities. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Phillips, Meyer, Ferguson, and Gramlich.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice filed by First Union Corporation, Charlotte, North Carolina, to acquire Wheat First Butcher Singer, Inc., Richmond, Virginia, and thereby engage in a variety of securities-related activities, including engaging to a limited extent in underwriting and dealing in all types of debt and equity securities. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. First Union Corporation Charlotte, North Carolina Order Approving Notice to Engage in Nonbanking Activities First Union Corporation, Charlotte, North Carolina ("First Union"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8)) and section 225.24 of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.24) to acquire all the voting shares of Wheat First Butcher Singer, Inc. ("Wheat First"), and thereby acquire control of its wholly owned subsidiary, Wheat, First Securities, Inc. ("Company"), both of Richmond, Virginia. First Union would thereby engage in the following activities: (1) Underwriting and dealing in, to a limited extent, all types of debt and equity securities, other than ownership interests in open-end investment companies, that a member bank may not underwrite or deal in ("bank-ineligible securities"); (2) Providing financial and investment advisory services, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(6) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(6)); (3) Providing securities brokerage, private placement, riskless principal, futures commission merchant, and other transactional services, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(7) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(7)); and (4) Underwriting and dealing in government obligations and money market instruments in which state member banks may underwrite and deal under 12 U.S.C. §§ 335 and 24(7) ("bank-eligible securities"), engaging in investing and trading activities, and buying and selling bullion and related activities, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(8) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(8)). Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (62 Federal Register 55,403 (1997)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the notice and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. First Union, with total consolidated assets of approximately $155 billion, is the sixth largest banking organization in the United States. First Union operates bank subsidiaries in 12 states and the District of Columbia, and engages through subsidiaries in a broad range of permissible nonbanking activities. First Union currently engages in limited underwriting and is dealing in bank-ineligible securities that the Board has determined are permissible under section 20 of the Glass-Steagall Act (12 U.S.C. § 377). Company is, and will continue to be, a broker-dealer registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. § 78a et seq. ) ("1934 Act") and a member of the National Association of Securities Dealers, Inc. ("NASD"). Accordingly, Company is and will remain subject to the recordkeeping and reporting obligations, fiduciary standards, and other requirements of the 1934 Act, the SEC, and the NASD. Following consummation of the proposal, Company also would be registered as a futures commission merchant with the Commodity Futures Trading Commission ("CFTC") and would be subject to the recordkeeping and reporting obligations, fiduciary standards, and other requirements of the Commodity Exchange Act (7 U.S.C. § 2 et seq. ) and the CFTC. Underwriting and Dealing Activities The Board has determined -- subject to the framework of prudential limitations to address the potential for conflicts of interests, unsound banking practices, or other adverse effects -- that the proposed activities of underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities are so closely related to banking as to be a proper incident thereto within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. The Board also has determined that conduct of the proposed activities is consistent with section 20 of the Glass-Steagall Act, provided that the company engaged in underwriting and dealing activities derives no more than 25 percent of its gross revenues from underwriting and dealing bank-ineligible securities over a two-year period. First Union has committed that Company will conduct its bank-ineligible securities underwriting and dealing activities subject to the Board's 25-percent revenue limit. As a condition of this order, First Union also would be required to conduct its bank-ineligible securities activities subject to the Operating Standards for section 20 subsidiaries. Other Activities Approved by Regulation The Board previously has determined by regulation that the proposed financial and investment advisory services; securities brokerage, riskless principal, private placement, futures commission merchant, and other transactional services; and underwriting and dealing in bank-eligible securities, investing and trading services, and buying and selling of bullion and related activities to be conducted by Company after its acquisition by First Union are closely related to banking within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. First Union has committed that it will conduct each of these activities in accordance with the BHC Act, Regulation Y, and the relevant Board interpretations and orders. Proper Incident to Banking Standard In order to approve the proposal, the Board also must determine that the proposed activities are a proper incident to banking, that is, that the proposed transaction "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public . . . that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices." As part of its evaluation of these factors, the Board considers the financial condition and managerial resources of the notificant and its subsidiaries and the effect the transaction would have on such resources. In considering the financial resources of the notificant, the Board has reviewed the capitalization of First Union and Wheat First in accordance with the standards set forth in the Section 20 Orders. The Board finds the capitalization of each to be consistent with approval of the proposal. The Board's determination is based on all the facts of record, including First Union's projections of the volume of the bank-ineligible underwriting and dealing activities of Company. The Board also has reviewed the managerial resources of each of the entities involved in the proposal in light of examination reports and the Board's supervisory experience with First Union and FUCMC. The Board also has considered that First Union has established policies and procedures to ensure compliance with this order and the Section 20 Orders, including computer, audit, and account systems, internal risk management controls, and the necessary operational and managerial infrastructure. On the basis of these and all the facts of record, including the commitments provided in this case and the proposed managerial structure and risk management systems of Company, the Board has concluded that financial and managerial considerations are consistent with approval of the notice. The Board has carefully considered the competitive effects of the proposed acquisition. To the extent that FUCMC and Company offer different types of products and services, the proposed acquisition would result in no loss of competition. In those markets in which FUCMC's and Company's product and service offerings overlap, such as municipal finance underwriting, research, and placement and investment advisory activities for mutual funds, there are numerous existing and potential competitors. Consummation of the proposal, therefore, would have a de minimis effect on competition in the market for these services, and the Board has concluded that the proposal would not result in any significantly adverse competitive effects in any relevant market. The Board expects that the proposed acquisition would provide added convenience to customers of both First Union and Company. First Union has stated that the acquisition would expand the range of products and services available to its customers and those of Company. First Union also has stated that the proposed transaction would result in operational efficiencies that would allow it to become a more effective competitor. As noted above, First Union has committed that, following the proposed acquisition, Company will conduct its bank-ineligible securities underwriting and dealing activities in accordance with the prudential framework established by the Board's Section 20 Orders. Under the framework and conditions established in this order and the Section 20 Orders, and based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that Company's proposed underwriting and dealing activities in bank-ineligible securities are not likely to result in significantly adverse effects that would outweigh the public benefits. Similarly, the Board finds no evidence that Company's proposed riskless principal, private placement, and other nonbanking activities -- conducted under the framework and conditions established in this order and Regulation Y -- would likely result in any significantly adverse effects that would outweigh the public benefits of the proposal. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that performance of the proposed activities by First Union can reasonably be expected to produce public benefits. Accordingly, the Board has determined that performance of the proposed activities by First Union is a proper incident to banking for purposes of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Conclusion On the basis of all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the notice should be, and hereby is, approved, subject to all the terms and conditions in this order and the Section 20 Orders, as modified by the Modification Orders. The Board's approval of the proposal extends only to activities conducted within the limitations of those orders and this order, including the Board's reservation of authority to establish additional limitations to ensure that First Union's activities are consistent with safety and soundness, avoidance of conflicts of interests, and other relevant considerations under the BHC Act. Underwriting and dealing in any manner other than as approved in this order and the Section 20 Orders (as modified by the Modification Orders) is not within the scope of the Board's approval and is not authorized for First Union. The Board's determination is subject to all the terms and conditions set forth in Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.25(c) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.7 and 225.25(c)), and to the Board's authority to require such modification or termination of the activities of a bank holding company or any of its subsidiaries as the Board finds necessary to ensure compliance with, and to prevent evasion of, the provisions of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders issued thereunder. The Board's decision is specifically conditioned on compliance with all the commitments made in connection with this notice, including the commitments discussed in this order, and the conditions set forth in this order and the above-noted Board regulations and orders. These commitments and conditions are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decisions, and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The proposal shall not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective November 26, 1997. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes First Union would merge Wheat First into itself, and, immediately thereafter, merge the existing section 20 subsidiary of First Union, First Union Capital Markets Corp., Charlotte, North Carolina ("FUCMC"), into Company. Asset and ranking data are as of September 30, 1997, and include transactions approved by the Board after that date. See First Union Corporation, 81 Federal Reserve Bulletin 726 (1995); First Union Corporation, 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 645 (1989). See J.P. Morgan & Co. Incorporated, et al., 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 192 (1989), aff'd sub nom. Securities Industries Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 900 F.2d 360 (D.C. Cir. 1990); Citicorp, et al., 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 473 (1987), aff'd sub nom. Securities Industry Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 839 F.2d 47 (2d Cir. 1988), cert. denied, 486 U.S. 1059 (1988); as modified by Review of Restrictions on Director, Officer and Employee Interlocks, Cross-Marketing Activities, and the Purchase and Sale of Financial Assets between a Section 20 Subsidiary and an Affiliated Bank or Thrift, 61 Federal Register 57,679 (1996), and Amendments to Restrictions in the Board's Section 20 Orders, 62 Federal Register 45,295 (1997) (collectively, "Section 20 Orders"). Compliance with the revenue limitation shall be calculated in accordance with the method stated in the Section Orders, as modified by the Order Approving Modifications to the Section 20 Orders, 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 751 (1989), and 10 Percent Revenue Limit on Bank-Ineligible Activities of Subsidiaries of Bank Holding Companies Engaged in Underwriting and Dealing in Securities, 61 Federal Register 48,953 (1996), and Revenue Limit on Bank-Ineligible Activities of Subsidiaries of Bank Holding Companies Engaged in Underwriting and Dealing in Securities, 61 Federal Register 68,750 (1996) (collectively, "Modification Orders"). Company may provide services that are necessary incidents to the proposed underwriting and dealing activities. Unless First Union receives specific approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act to conduct the activities independently, Company must treat any revenues from the incidental activities as bank-ineligible revenues subject to the Board's revenue limitation. 12 C.F.R. 225.200. See 12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(6), (7), and (8). Wheat First also engages in certain real estate and insurance activities that are not permissible for a bank holding company under section 4 of the BHC Act. First Union has committed that it will conform the real estate activities of Wheat First to the requirements of section 4 of the BHC Act within two years after consummation of the proposal, and will cease making any impermissible real estate investments immediately on consummation of the proposal. First Union also has committed that it will conform the insurance activities of Wheat First to the requirements of section 4 of the BHC Act within two years after consummation of the proposal, and will cease selling new insurance policies or annuities within six months after consummation of the proposal. First Union also has committed that it will conform its investment in certain limited partnerships that serve as investment vehicles for certain Wheat First employees to the requirements of section 4 of the BHC Act within two years after consummation of the proposal, and will terminate the mutual fund distribution activities currently conducted by Wheat First immediately on consummation of the proposal. See 12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8). See 12 C.F.R. 225.26. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan and Governors Kelley, Phillips, Ferguson, and Gramlich. Absent and not voting: Vice Chair Rivlin and Governor Meyer.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice filed by U.S. Bancorp to engage de novo , through its wholly owned subsidiary, U.S. Bancorp Investments, Inc., both of Minneapolis, Minnesota, in a variety of securities-related activities, including underwriting and dealing in, to a limited extent, certain types of bank-ineligible securities. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. U.S. Bancorp Minneapolis, Minnesota Order Approving Notice to Engage in Nonbanking Activities U.S. Bancorp, Minneapolis, Minnesota ("USB"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1843(c)(8)) and section 225.24 of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.24) to engage de novo through its wholly owned subsidiary, U.S. Bancorp Investments, Inc., Minneapolis, Minnesota ("Company"), in the following activities: (1) Underwriting and dealing in, to a limited extent, certain municipal revenue bonds (including certain unrated municipal revenue bonds), 1-4 family mortgage-related securities, consumer receivable-related securities, and commercial paper (collectively, "bank-ineligible securities"); (2) Providing financial and investment advisory services, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(6) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(6)); (3) Providing securities brokerage, private placement, riskless principal, futures commission merchant, and other transactional services, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(7) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(7)); and (4) Providing investing and trading services, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(8) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(8)). In addition, USB proposes that Company engage in lending and loan servicing, activities related to lending, lease financing, management consulting, and insurance agency activities that are related to Company's underwriting and dealing, private placement, riskless principal, and other securities activities. These activities would be conducted in accordance with the Board's Regulation Y. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (62 Federal Register 53,784 (1997)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the notice and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. USB, with total consolidated assets of approximately $71.8 billion, is the 14th largest banking organization in the United States. USB operates bank subsidiaries in 17 states, and engages through subsidiaries in a broad range of permissible nonbanking activities. Company is and, following consummation of the proposal, will continue to be registered as a broker-dealer with the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. ï¿½ 78a et seq. ) ("1934 Act") and a member of the National Association of Securities Dealers, Inc. ("NASD"). Accordingly, Company is and will remain subject to the recordkeeping and reporting obligations, fiduciary standards, and other requirements of the 1934 Act, the SEC, and the NASD. Following consummation of the proposal, Company also would be registered as a futures commission merchant with the Commodity Futures Trading Commission ("CFTC") and would be subject to the recordkeeping and reporting obligations, fiduciary standards, and other requirements of the Commodity Exchange Act (7 U.S.C. ï¿½ 2 et seq. ) and the CFTC. Underwriting and Dealing Activities The Board has determined -- subject to the framework of prudential limitations to address the potential for conflicts of interests, unsound banking practices, or other adverse effects -- that the proposed activities of underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities are so closely related to banking as to be a proper incident thereto within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. The Board also has determined that conduct of the proposed activities is consistent with section 20 of the Glass-Steagall Act (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 377), provided that the company engaged in underwriting and dealing activities derives no more than 25 percent of its gross revenues from underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities over a two-year period. USB has committed that Company will conduct its bank-ineligible securities underwriting and dealing activities subject to the Board's 25-percent revenue limit. As a condition of this order, USB also would be required to conduct its bank-ineligible securities activities subject to the Operating Standards for section 20 subsidiaries. Other Activities Approved by Regulation The Board previously has determined by regulation that extending credit and servicing loans; activities related to extending credit; leasing personal or real property; financial and investment advisory activities; securities brokerage, riskless principal, private placement, futures commission merchant, and other transactional services; investment and trading services; management consulting; and insurance agency activities are closely related to banking within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. USB has committed that it will conduct each of these activities in accordance with the BHC Act, Regulation Y, and the relevant Board interpretations and orders. Proper Incident to Banking Standard In order to approve the proposal, the Board also must determine that the proposed activities are a proper incident to banking, that is, that the proposed transaction "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public . . . that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices." As part of its evaluation of these factors, the Board considers the financial condition and managerial resources of the notificant and its subsidiaries and the effect the transaction would have on such resources. The Board has carefully examined the financial resources, management expertise, and risk management policies of USB and its subsidiaries. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that financial and managerial considerations are consistent with approval. The Board expects that the de novo entry of Company into the market for the proposed services would provide added convenience to USB's customers and would increase the level of competition among existing providers of these services. As noted above, USB has committed that Company will conduct its bank-ineligible securities underwriting and dealing activities in accordance with the prudential framework established by the Board's Section 20 Orders. Under the framework and conditions established in this order, the Section 20 Orders, and the Modification Orders, the Board concludes that Company's proposed limited conduct of underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities is not likely to result in significantly adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices that would outweigh the public benefits. Similarly, the Board finds no evidence that Company's riskless principal, private placement, and other nonbanking activities -- conducted under the framework and conditions established in this order and Regulation Y -- would likely result in any significantly adverse effects that would outweigh the public benefits of the proposal. Accordingly, the Board has determined that performance of the proposed activities by USB is a proper incident to banking for purposes of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Conclusion On the basis of all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the notice should be, and hereby is, approved, subject to all the terms and conditions in this order and the Section 20 Orders, as modified by the Modification Orders. The Board's approval of the proposal extends only to activities conducted within the limitations of those orders and this order, including the Board's reservation of authority to establish additional limitations to ensure that USB's activities are consistent with safety and soundness, avoidance of conflicts of interests, and other relevant considerations under the BHC Act. Underwriting and dealing in any manner other than as approved in this order and the Section 20 Orders (as modified by the Modification Orders) is not within the scope of the Board's approval and is not authorized for USB. The Board's determination is subject to all the terms and conditions set forth in Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.25(c) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.7 and 225.25(c)), and to the Board's authority to require such modification or termination of the activities of a bank holding company or any of its subsidiaries as the Board finds necessary to ensure compliance with, and to prevent evasion of, the provisions of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders issued thereunder. The Board's decision is specifically conditioned on compliance with all the commitments made in connection with this notice, including the commitments discussed in this order, and the conditions set forth in this order and the above-noted Board regulations and orders. These commitments and conditions are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decisions, and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The proposal shall not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective November 26, 1997. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes Company currently is a wholly owned subsidiary of USB's lead bank subsidiary, U.S. Bank National Association, Minneapolis, Minnesota ("US Bank"). USB is authorized to engage in insurance agency activities pursuant to section 4(c)(8)(G) of the BHC Act, which authorizes those bank holding companies that engaged in insurance agency activities prior to 1971 with Board approval to engage in insurance agency activities. Section 225.28(b)(1), (2), (3), (9), and (11)(vii) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R 225.28(b)(1), (2), (3), (9), and (11)(vii)). Asset and ranking data are as of June 30, 1997. See Citicorp, et al., 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 473 (1987), aff'd sub nom. Securities Industry Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 839 F.2d 47 (2d Cir. 1988), cert. denied, 486 U.S. 1059 (1988); as modified by Review of Restrictions on Director, Officer and Employee Interlocks, Cross-Marketing Activities, and the Purchase and Sale of Financial Assets between a Section 20 Subsidiary and an Affiliated Bank or Thrift, 61 Federal Register 57,679 (1996), and Amendments to Restrictions in the Board's Section 20 Orders, 62 Federal Register 45,295 (1997) (collectively, "Section 20 Orders"). Compliance with the revenue limitation shall be calculated in accordance with the method stated in the Section Orders, as modified by the Order Approving Modifications to the Section 20 Orders, 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 751 (1989), and 10 Percent Revenue Limit on Bank-Ineligible Activities of Subsidiaries of Bank Holding Companies Engaged in Underwriting and Dealing in Securities, 61 Federal Register 48,953 (1996), and Revenue Limit on Bank-Ineligible Activities of Subsidiaries of Bank Holding Companies Engaged in Underwriting and Dealing in Securities, 61 Federal Register 68,750 (1996) (collectively, "Modification Orders"). Company may provide services that are necessary incidents to the proposed underwriting and dealing activities. Unless USB receives specific approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act to conduct the activities independently, Company must treat any revenues from the incidental activities as ineligible revenues subject to the Board's revenue limitation. 12 C.F.R. 225.200. See 12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(1), (2), (3), (6), (7), (8), (9), and (11)(vii). See 12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1843(c)(8). See 12 C.F.R. 225.26. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan and Governors Kelley, Phillips, Ferguson, and Gramlich. Absent and not voting: Vice Chair Rivlin and Governor Meyer.