For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of a combined Order to Cease and Desist and Order of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty against Mark Yale, a former employee and institution-affiliated party of Bankers Trust New York Corporation and BT Securities Corporation, New York. Mr. Yale, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the order in connection with his alleged involvement in the provision of a valuation for leveraged derivative transactions to a customer of the bank holding company and its subsidiaries. Mr. Yale paid a civil money penalty of $25,000. A copy of the order is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of an Order to Cease and Desist against Brian Gager, a former foreign exchange trader and institution-affiliated party of the New York branch of The Nippon Credit Bank, Ltd., Tokyo, Japan. Mr. Gager, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the order in connection with his alleged improper trading activities. A copy of the order is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of a combined Order to Cease and Desist and Order of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty against Roberto A.F. Roberts, a former officer and institution-affiliated party of IBJ Schroder International Bank, Miami, Florida. Mr. Roberts, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the order in connection with his alleged unsafe and unsound practices and breaches of fiduciary duties regarding his management of certain discretionary cash management accounts. Mr. Roberts paid a civil money penalty of $15,000. A copy of the order is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the availability of a video designed to assist individuals with their saving and investing. This videotape is a by-product of a live teleseminar entitled "It's Your Money", which aired on November 9, 1996 and was jointly sponsored by the Board and the Securities and Exchange Commission. The hour-long program, designed to give individuals from all age groups basic information about the saving and investing process, featured key federal financial regulators such as Alice Rivlin, Vice Chair of the Federal Reserve Board, and Arthur Levitt, Chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission. In addition, a group of experts lent their expertise to this effort. The group of experts included: Kelvin Boston, author of Smart Money Moves for African Americans Thomas Jones, Vice Chairman and President of TIAA-CREF Beth Kobliner, author of Get a Financial Life Tyler Mathisen, Executive Editor of Money magazine Grace Weinstein, author of The Lifetime Book of Money Management The live program was made available to community colleges, cooperative extension services, and private business networks. In addition, the program was provided free of charge to public access, cable, and PBS stations throughout the country. Through these distribution outlets, the teleseminar had a potential audience of 32 million households. During the course of the program, some of the basic information discussed included tips on how to save given a limited budget; some of the best investment choices; how to hedge against inflation; how to avoid risk; the importance of saving early and the benefits of compounding.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve today made available for public inspection transcripts of meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee that were held during 1991. The package includes transcripts of eight regularly scheduled meetings and eleven telephone conference calls. Procedures adopted by the FOMC provide for the public release of transcripts for an entire year with a five-year lag. Minutes of each meeting are issued with an approximate six-week lag while decisions made at each meeting are announced on the day of the meeting. The 1991 transcripts have been lightly edited to enhance readability and to redact confidential material such as information pertaining to individual foreign central banks and private business information. Copies of the transcripts are available from the Board's Freedom of Information Office, Room MP-500, Federal Reserve Board, Washington, DC 20551 (telephone 202-452-3684).
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today requested comment on removing a majority of the prudential limitations or firewalls that currently apply to bank holding companies engaged in securities underwriting and dealing activities through section 20 subsidiaries. The Board is proposing to retain as operating standards for section 20 subsidiaries a limited number of restrictions adapted from the current firewalls. Comment is requested by March 10, 1997 . The Board also announced that it is eliminating immediately a firewall requiring bank holding companies to seek approval prior to providing funds to their section 20 companies. The Board's notice is attached. |
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the applications and notices of Norwest Corporation, Minneapolis, Minnesota, to acquire (1) all the voting shares of Central Bancorporation, Inc., Ft. Worth, Texas ("Central Bancorp"); Central Bancorporation of Delaware, Inc., Wilmington, Delaware; and Central Bank and Trust Company, Ft. Worth, Texas; and (2) the nonbanking businesses of Central Bancorp and thereby engage in securities brokerage and mortgage lending activities. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Norwest Corporation Minneapolis, Minnesota Order Approving the Acquisition of a Bank Holding Company Norwest Corporation, Minneapolis, Minnesota ("Norwest"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 3 of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1842) to acquire all the voting shares of Central Bancorporation, Inc. ("Central Bancorp"), and its wholly owned subsidiary bank, Central Bank and Trust Company ("Central Bank"), both of Fort Worth, Texas. Norwest also has requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8)) and section 225.23 of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.23) to acquire the nonbanking businesses of Central Bancorp and thereby engage in securities brokerage and mortgage lending activities. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published in accordance with the Board's rules (61 Federal Register 57,432 and 68,266 (1996)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the proposal and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in sections 3 and 4 of the BHC Act. Norwest, with total consolidated assets of $78.4 billion, operates subsidiary banks in 16 states: Arizona, Colorado, Iowa, Illinois, Indiana, Minnesota, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New Mexico, North Dakota, Ohio, South Dakota, Texas, Wisconsin, and Wyoming. Norwest is the 12th largest commercial banking organization in the United States, controlling deposits of $46.3 billion, and the fourth largest in Texas, controlling deposits of $6.2 billion in the state. Norwest also engages in a number of permissible nonbanking activities nationwide. Central Bancorp, with total consolidated assets of $1.1 billion, is the 15th largest commercial banking organization in Texas, controlling deposits of $961.5 million, representing less than 1 percent of total deposits in commercial banks in the state. After consummation of the proposal, Norwest would remain the fourth largest commercial banking organization in Texas, controlling deposits of $7.2 billion, representing 4.7 percent of total deposits in the state. Norwest also would control 1.4 percent of the total deposits in banks and savings associations insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. Interstate Analysis Section 3(d) of the BHC Act, as amended by section 101 of the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act of 1994, allows the Board to approve an application by a bank holding company to acquire control of a bank located in a state other than the home state of such bank holding company if certain conditions are met. For purposes of the BHC Act, the home state of Norwest is Minnesota, and Norwest proposes to acquire a bank in Texas. The conditions for an interstate acquisition enumerated in section 3(d) are met in this case. In view of the facts of record, the Board is permitted to approve this proposal under section 3(d) of the BHC Act. Competitive Considerations The BHC Act prohibits the Board from approving an application under section 3 of the BHC Act if the proposal would result in a monopoly, or would substantially lessen competition in any relevant banking market, unless the Board finds that the anticompetitive effects of the proposal are clearly outweighed in the public interest by the probable effect of the proposal in meeting the convenience and needs of the community to be served. Norwest and Central Bancorp do not compete directly in any relevant banking market. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposal would not result in any significantly adverse effects on competition or the concentration of banking resources in any relevant banking market. Other Factors Under the BHC Act The BHC Act also requires the Board to consider the financial and managerial resources of the companies and banks involved, the convenience and needs of the communities to be served, and certain other supervisory factors. A. Supervisory Factors The Board has carefully considered the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of Norwest, Central Bancorp, and their respective subsidiaries, and other supervisory factors in light of all the facts of record. The facts include supervisory reports of examination assessing the financial and managerial resources of the organizations and confidential financial information provided by Norwest. Based on these and all the other facts of record, the Board concludes that all the supervisory factors under the BHC Act, including financial and managerial resources, weigh in favor of approving the proposal. B. Convenience and Needs Factor The Board also has carefully considered the effect of the proposed acquisition on the convenience and needs of the community to be served in light of all the facts of record. As part of that review, the Board has considered comments from the Minnesota Association of Organizations for Reform Now ("Protestant") contending that Norwest has engaged in banking practices in the Minneapolis/St. Paul, Minnesota, area that discriminate against low- and moderate-income ("LMI") consumers. Protestant alleges that Norwest's lead bank, Norwest Bank Minnesota, N.A., Minneapolis, Minnesota ("Norwest Minnesota"), has unreasonable fees for certain consumer accounts and services that disadvantage LMI consumers or discourage LMI consumers from using the bank's services; that Norwest Minnesota's Minneapolis/St. Paul branches have banking hours that discriminate against LMI consumers; and that Norwest's consumer finance subsidiary, Community Credit Co., Edina, Minnesota ("Community Credit"), engages in improper credit practices. Norwest provides a full range of financial services through its bank and nonbank subsidiaries, including commercial and retail banking, insurance agency, venture capital, mortgage, consumer finance, trust, international trade finance, leasing, asset-backed lending, and corporate and investment banking services. Norwest has stated that the proposed acquisition would result in these services, some of which are not available through Central Bancorp, being offered in the markets currently served by Central Bancorp. Performance Examinations The Board has long held that consideration of the convenience and needs factor includes a review of the records of the relevant depository institutions under the Community Reinvestment Act (12 U.S.C. § 2901 et seq.) ("CRA"). As provided in the CRA, the Board evaluates this factor in light of examinations by the primary federal supervisor of the CRA performance records of the relevant institutions. An institution's most recent CRA performance evaluation is a particularly important consideration in the applications process because it represents a detailed on-site evaluation of the institution's overall record of performance under the CRA by its primary federal supervisor. All of Norwest's subsidiary banks have received CRA performance ratings of "satisfactory" or "outstanding" in their most recent evaluations by their primary federal supervisors. Specifically, Norwest Minnesota received an "outstanding" rating in each of its last three examinations, the most recent of which was conducted in October 1996 by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency ("OCC"), the bank's primary federal supervisor. The October 1996 examination noted that Norwest Minnesota offered a full range of credit products to address the housing, small business, and consumer credit needs of the community. A substantial majority of Norwest Minnesota's loans, when measured either as a percentage of the total number of loans or as a percentage of the total dollar amounts of loans, are within its assessment area. The examination also indicated that Norwest Minnesota, and its affiliate, Norwest Mortgage, Inc., showed a good distribution of loans within and throughout its delineated community, including in LMI areas. Examiners also found that Norwest Minnesota's community outreach efforts were effective in attempting to reach all parts of the bank's delineated community. According to the October 1996 examination, for example, Norwest Minnesota received ongoing information on community credit needs through a process that incorporated surveys, focus groups, and direct contacts with representatives of LMI neighborhoods, housing services, and small business, community development, and government agencies. The OCC found that Norwest Minnesota also had developed a sound marketing plan to reach all segments of the bank's service community. Norwest Minnesota sponsored radio advertisements specifically adapted to reach the African-American and Spanish-speaking communities; printed advertisements in American Indian, Hmong, and Spanish language publications; and printed brochures in languages other than English. Many of the bank's branches have bilingual staff to meet the needs of non-English speaking customers. The October 1996 examination evaluated Norwest Minnesota's branch locations and hours, and concluded that the bank's offices are readily accessible to all segments of the community. Examiners found that, as of December 1995, Norwest Minnesota operated 76 branches throughout its delineated community, of which 13 (or 17 percent) were in LMI areas. The examination also found that Norwest Minnesota ensured that branch hours met local community needs through a regular management review process. In addition, the examination stated that Norwest Minnesota offers 24-hour toll-free telephone services for taking loan applications, making deposits, and conducting limited credit transactions. Community Credit Protestant contends, without substantiation, that Norwest Minnesota deliberately denies credit to low-income customers and routinely "steers" low-income credit applicants to Community Credit, which charges higher loan rates than its affiliated bank. Norwest denies this allegation and states that, if a loan is denied by Norwest Minnesota, the credit applicant is asked whether he or she would like to be referred to Community Credit. If the applicant agrees to the referral and meets Community Credit's lending criteria, Community Credit will approve the loan. Protestant has not alleged, nor is there any evidence in the record to indicate, that Norwest denies credit to applicants based on any prohibited factor, such as gender or race. The October 1996 examination of Norwest Minnesota found no practices intended to discourage applications for any type of credit. Examiners also found no evidence of discrimination in the credit decision process. Rather, examiners found that Norwest Minnesota solicits applications from all portions of its community, including LMI neighborhoods, and that all employees within the lending function receive appropriate and comprehensive training on fair lending regulations. Conclusion on the Convenience and Needs Factor The Board has carefully considered the entire record in its review of the convenience and needs factor under section 3 of the BHC Act, including all the information provided by Protestant. Based on all the facts of record, and for the reasons discussed above, the Board concludes that considerations relating to the convenience and needs factor, including the CRA performance records of Norwest Minnesota and Norwest's other banking subsidiaries, are consistent with approval of the proposal. Nonbanking Activities Norwest also has filed notices, pursuant to section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act, to acquire the nonbanking businesses of Central Bancorp and thereby to engage in providing full-service securities brokerage and mortgage lending services. The Board has determined that these activities are closely related to banking, and Norwest has committed to conduct the nonbanking activities in accordance with Regulation Y. In order to approve the proposal under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act, the Board also must determine that the proposed activities are a proper incident to banking, that is, that the proposal "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public, such as greater convenience, increased competition, or gains in efficiency that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices." As part of its evaluation of these factors, the Board considers the financial condition and managerial resources of the notificant and its subsidiaries, including the companies to be acquired, and the effect of the proposed transaction on those resources. As noted above, based on all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that financial and managerial considerations are consistent with approval of these notices. The Board also has concluded that the proposal would not have a significantly adverse effect on competition in any relevant market. In addition, the Board expects that the acquisition would provide added convenience to Central Bancorp's customers and the public. Norwest notes that consumers in the markets currently served by Central Bank would have access to a variety of securities brokerage and mortgage servicing and origination services through Norwest that are not available through Central Bancorp. Accordingly, based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the balance of public benefits is favorable under the proper incident to banking standard of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Conclusion Based on the foregoing, and in light of all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the application and notice should be, and hereby are, approved. Approval of this application and notice is specifically conditioned on compliance by Norwest with all the commitments made in connection with this proposal and with the conditions stated or referred to in this order. The Board's determination on the nonbanking activities also is subject to all the terms and conditions set forth in Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.23(b) (12 C.F.R. 225.7 and 225.23(b)), and to the Board's authority to require such modification or termination of the activities of a bank holding company or any of its subsidiaries as the Board finds necessary to ensure compliance with, and to prevent evasion of, the provisions of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders thereunder. For purposes of this transaction, the commitments and conditions referred to above shall be deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision, and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The acquisition of Central Bancorp shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day following the effective date of this order, and this proposal shall not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective January 13, 1997. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes Central Bancorp directly owns all the voting shares of Central Bancorporation of Delaware, Inc., a Delaware corporation, which owns all the voting shares of Central Bank. Norwest also has applied under section 3 of the BHC Act to acquire this Delaware bank holding company. Asset data are as of September 30, 1996. State deposit data and rankings are as of June 30, 1996. Pub. L. No. 103-328, 108 Stat. 2338 (1994). A bank holding company's home state is that state in which the operations of the bank holding company's banking subsidiaries were principally conducted on July 1, 1996, or the date on which the company became a bank holding company, whichever is later. 12 U.S.C. §§ 1842(d)(1)(A) and (B) and 1842(d)(2)(A) and (B). Norwest is adequately capitalized and adequately managed. Central Bancorp's subsidiary bank has been in existence and has continuously operated for more than five years, as required under Texas law. In addition, on consummation of the proposal, Norwest and its affiliates would control less than 10 percent of the total amount of deposits of insured depository institutions in the United States, and less than 20 percent of the total amount of deposits of insured depository institutions in Texas, as required by state law. The Statement of the Federal Financial Supervisory Agencies Regarding the Community Reinvestment Act (54 Federal Register 13,742 and 13,745 (1989)) ("Agency CRA Statement") provides that a CRA examination is an important and often controlling factor in the consideration of an institution's CRA record and that reports of these examinations will be given great weight in the applications process. Norwest Minnesota designated its community delineation to include all of Anoka, Washington, Ramsey, and Dakota Counties; a majority of Scott, Hennepin, and Carver Counties; and a portion of Isanti County. All the counties are within the Minneapolis/St. Paul Metropolitan Statistical Area. Examiners found that the community delineation was reasonable and did not arbitrarily exclude any LMI areas. Protestant contends that it has been excluded from Norwest Minnesota's Community Marketing Initiative ("CMI"), an annual planning process designed to assess the needs of the communities that the bank serves. Protestant also alleges that Norwest Minnesota is unwilling to address community needs that are brought to the bank's attention in the CMI process. The record indicates that meetings took place between Norwest Minnesota management and Protestant in 1996, and that Norwest Minnesota repeatedly has invited Protestant's members to participate in the CMI process. The OCC's October 1996 examination concluded that the Norwest Minnesota CMI planning process provided an adequate framework not only for determining community needs but also for developing the bank's response to those needs. Examiners noted that the CMI plan incorporates information such as demographic data, ascertainment efforts, marketing strategies, and lending goals; is prepared for each branch to respond to special local needs; and is monitored quarterly, and updated and approved regularly by Norwest Minnesota's board of directors. Protestant also contends that Norwest Minnesota charges excessive fees for checks returned due to insufficient funds and for checks the bank pays against a customer's overdraft, and assesses excessive fees for money orders to discourage LMI customers from using the bank's money order services. The Board believes that these comments provide an incomplete picture of Norwest Minnesota's products and services. As previously noted by the Board, Norwest Minnesota offers special accounts with no minimum deposit and no fees, and offers overdraft protection to all checking account customers based on underwriting criteria similar to that used for other unsecured extensions of credit. See Norwest Corporation , 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 667, 672 n.23 (1996). Although the Board has recognized that banks help serve the needs of their communities by offering basic services at nominal or no charge, the CRA does not impose any limitation on the fees or surcharges that can be charged for services. The record indicates that Norwest Minnesota offers a full range of banking services in its delineated community, and there is no evidence in the October 1996 examination of Norwest Minnesota, or in the record of this proposal, that the fees charged by Norwest Minnesota are discriminatory or based on any factor that would be prohibited by law. Protestant indicates that Norwest has not disclosed statistics on the number of referrals made by Norwest Minnesota to Community Credit or the bank's policy for making referrals to its consumer finance affiliate. Norwest indicates that Community Credit may make loans to consumers denied credit by Community Credit's affiliated bank because Community Credit is a consumer finance company in the business of lending to higher risk borrowers. Protestant also alleges that Norwest and Community Credit engage in other improper credit practices, including requiring borrowers to purchase credit life insurance in connection with loans; engaging in improper loan collection techniques; and failing to report timely loan payments of borrowers to credit bureaus. Norwest denies engaging in any illegal or improper practices and specifically denies that Community Credit requires its borrowers to purchase credit insurance. The Board has carefully considered Protestant's comments in light of all the facts of record, including reports of examination and other supervisory information from the Minnesota Department of Commerce, the state agency that regularly examines Community Credit for compliance with state and federal consumer protection laws. Based on all the facts, the Board concludes that Protestant's allegations do not warrant denial of the proposal. Protestant has requested that the Board hold a public hearing on the convenience and needs effects of the proposal. Section 3(b) of the BHC Act does not require the Board to hold a public meeting or hearing on an application unless the appropriate supervisory authority for the bank to be acquired makes a timely written recommendation of denial of the application. No supervisory agency has recommended denial in this case. In addition, under the Board's Rules of Procedure, the Board, in its discretion, may hold a public hearing or meeting on an application to clarify factual issues relating to the application and to provide an opportunity for testimony, if appropriate. 12 C.F.R. 262.3(e) and 262.25(d). Protestant has had an ample opportunity to present its views, and Protestant has submitted substantial written comments that have been carefully considered by the Board. Protestant has not demonstrated why its written submissions do not adequately present its allegations and what, if any, additional matters would be addressed at a hearing or meeting. For these reasons, and based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that a public hearing or meeting is not required or warranted to clarify the factual record in the proposal or otherwise warranted in this case. Accordingly, Protestant's request for a hearing on the proposal is denied. See 12 C.F.R. 225.25(b)(1) and (b)(15). See 12 C.F.R. 225.24; see also The Fuji Bank, Limited , 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 94 (1989); Bayerische Vereinsbank AG , 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 155 (1987). Voting for this action: Vice Chair Rivlin and Governors Kelley, Lindsey, Phillips, Yellen, and Meyer. Absent and not voting: Chairman Greenspan.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the termination of the following enforcement actions: United Mizrahi Bank, Ltd., Tel Aviv, Israel and its Los Angeles branch Cease and Desist Order dated September 30, 1993 Terminated December 16, 1996 Union Texas Bancorporation, Inc., Minneapolis, Minnesota Written Agreement dated June 12, 1992 Terminated December 24, 1996 American Express Bank International, New York Cease and Desist Order dated September 29, 1993 Terminated January 7, 1997
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today published for comment proposed amendments to its Regulation E (Electronic Fund Transfers) to carry out statutory amendments to the Electronic Fund Transfer Act. Comment is requested by February 19, 1997 . The proposed amendments to the regulation exempt certain "needs-tested" electronic benefit transfer (EBT) programs established or administered by state or local government agencies, such as the food stamp program, from requirements of the Electronic Fund Transfer Act. The modified regulatory requirements that the Board established in its 1994 rulemaking would continue to apply to federally administered EBT programs and state and local employment-related EBT programs, such as state pension programs. Generally, EBT programs involve the issuance of access cards and personal identification numbers to recipients of government benefits so that they can obtain their benefits through automated teller machines and point-of-sale terminals. The Board's notice is attached. FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM 12 CFR Part 205 [Regulation E; Docket No. R-0959] Electronic Fund Transfers AGENCY : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. ACTION : Proposed rule. SUMMARY : The Board is publishing for comment proposed amendments to Regulation E (Electronic Fund Transfers). The proposed revisions implement an amendment to the Electronic Fund Transfer Act (EFTA), contained in the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996, that exempts certain electronic benefit transfer (EBT) programs from the EFTA. Generally, EBT programs involve the issuance of access cards and personal identification numbers to recipients of government benefits so that they can obtain their benefits through automated teller machines and point-of-sale terminals. The Board's proposal exempts from Regulation E needs-tested EBT programs established or administered by state or local government agencies. Federally administered EBT programs and state and local employment-related EBT programs (such as state pension programs) would continue to be subject to modified requirements that recognize the special characteristics of EBT programs. EFFECTIVE DATE : Comments must be received on or before February 19, 1997 . ADDRESSES : Comments should refer to Docket No. R-0959, and may be mailed to William W. Wiles, Secretary, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 20th Street and Constitution Avenue, N.W., Washington, DC 20551. Comments also may be delivered to Room B-2222 of the Eccles Building between 8:45 a.m. and 5:15 p.m. weekdays, or to the guard station in the Eccles Building courtyard on 20th Street, N.W. (between Constitution Avenue and C Street) at any time. Comments may be inspected in Room MP-500 of the Martin Building between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. weekdays, except as provided in 12 CFR 261.8 of the Board's rules regarding the availability of information. FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT : Jane Jensen Gell, Staff Attorney, Division of Consumer and Community Affairs, at (202) 452-2412 or (202) 452-3667; for users of Telecommunications Device for the Deaf (TDD) only , contact Dorothea Thompson at (202) 452-3544. SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION : I. Background EFT Act and Regulation E Regulation E implements the Electronic Fund Transfer Act (EFTA). The act and regulation cover any consumer electronic fund transfer initiated through an automated teller machine (ATM), point-of-sale (POS) terminal, automated clearinghouse, telephone bill-payment system, or home-banking program; and provide rules that govern these and other electronic transfers. The regulation sets rules for issuance of ATM cards and other access devices; disclosure of terms and conditions of an EFT service; documentation of electronic fund transfers by means of terminal receipts and account statements; limitations on consumer liability for unauthorized transfers; procedures for error resolution; and certain rights related to preauthorized transfers. The EFTA is not limited to traditional financial institutions holding consumers' accounts. For EFT services made available by entities other than an account-holding financial institution, the act directs the Board to assure, by regulation, that the provisions of the act are made applicable. The regulation also applies to entities that issue access devices and enter into agreements with consumers to provide EFT services. Electronic Benefit Transfer Programs Electronic benefit transfer (EBT) programs are designed to deliver government benefits such as Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC), food stamps, Supplemental Security Income (SSI) and social security. These systems function much like commercial systems for EFT. Eligible recipients receive plastic magnetic-stripe cards and personal identification numbers (PINs) and they access benefits through electronic terminals. In the case of cash benefits such as AFDC or SSI, the terminals may include ATMs that are part of existing commercial networks; for food stamp benefits, POS terminals in grocery stores are typically used. EBT offers numerous advantages over paper-based delivery systems, both for recipients and for program agencies. For recipients, these advantages include faster access to benefits, greater convenience in terms of times and locations for obtaining benefits, improved security because funds may be accessed as needed, lower costs because recipients avoid check-cashing fees, and greater privacy and dignity. For agencies, EBT programs offer a system that can more efficiently deliver benefits for both state and federal programs by reducing the cost of benefit delivery, facilitating the management of program funds, and helping to reduce fraud. In March 1994, the Board amended Regulation E to bring EBT programs expressly within its coverage. 59 FR 10678 (March 7, 1994). The special provisions, contained in § 205.15, applied most of the requirements of the regulation--including those relating to liability for unauthorized transactions and error resolution--with some modifications. The major exception related to the requirement to provide periodic statements of account activity: EBT programs need not provide periodic statements as long as (1) account balance information is made available to benefit recipients via telephone and electronic terminals and (2) a written account history is given upon request. The basic premise underlying the Board's 1994 amendments to Regulation E was that all consumers using EFT services should receive substantially the same protection under the EFTA and Regulation E. To enable states that are interested in EBT to test and implement their programs, the Board delayed the date of mandatory compliance to March 1, 1997. II. Proposed Regulatory Provisions On August 22, 1996, the Congress enacted the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996, a comprehensive welfare reform law (Pub. L.104-193, 110 Stat. 2105) ("the 1996 Act"). The 1996 Act contains amendments to the EFTA that exempt "needs-tested" EBT programs established or administered under state or local law (for example, benefits such as the food stamp and AFDC programs). The 1996 amendments were enacted by the Congress at the urging of state officials, who expressed concern about the costs of compliance with the EFTA and Regulation E. In particular, the states believed that the EFTA provisions limiting a recipient's liability for unauthorized transfers could raise serious budgetary problems at the state level. The proposed amendments to Regulation E implement the amendments to the EFTA. Federally administered EBT programs and employment-related programs established by federal, state, or local governments (such as state pension programs) would continue to be subject to the modified rules established by the Board's 1994 rulemaking. III. Section-by-Section Analysis of Proposed Amendments SECTION 205.15 -- Electronic fund transfers of government benefits Section 205.15 contains the rules that apply to EBT programs as defined by the regulation. It provides modified rules on the issuance of access devices, periodic statements, initial disclosures, liability for unauthorized use, and error resolution notices. Employment-related benefit programs established by federal, state, or local governments (as well as federally administered programs) remain subject to these modified rules. 15(a) Government agency subject to regulation 15(a)(1) The act and regulation define coverage in terms of "financial institution," a term that is broadly construed. Coverage applies to entities that provide EFT services to consumers whether these entities are banks, other depository institutions, or other types of organizations entirely. Paragraph (a)(1) specifies when a government agency is a financial institution for purposes of the act and regulation. Under the Board's proposal, this provision has been revised to exclude needs-tested benefits in a program established under state or local law or administered by a state or local agency, consistent with the 1996 statutory amendments. 15(a)(2) The term "account" is defined generally in § 205.2(b). For purposes of EBT programs, "account" is defined in § 205.15(a)(2) to mean an account established by a government agency for distributing benefits to a consumer electronically, such as through ATMs or POS terminals, whether or not the account is directly held by the agency or a bank or other depository institution. For example, an "account" under this section includes the use of a database containing the consumer's name and record of benefit transfers that is accessed for verification purposes before a particular transaction is approved. Under the Board's proposal, the definition would be revised to exclude needs-tested benefits in a program established under state or local law or administered by a state or local agency, consistent with the 1996 amendments to the EFTA. Government benefits that would remain covered include federally administered benefits such as social security and SSI and state and local benefits that are employment-related such as retirement and unemployment benefits. IV. Form of Comment Letters Comment letters should refer to Docket No. R-0959. The Board requests that, when possible, comments be prepared using a standard courier typeface with a type size of 10 or 12 characters per inch. This will enable the Board to convert the text into machine-readable form through electronic scanning, and will facilitate automated retrieval of comments for review. Comments also may be submitted on 3.5 or 5.25 inch computer diskettes, in any IBM-compatible DOS-based format. Comments on computer diskettes must be accompanied by a paper version. V. Regulatory Flexibility Analysis In accordance with section 3(a) of the Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 603), the Board's Office of the Secretary has reviewed the proposed amendments to Regulation E. The amendments, which establish an exemption for certain EBT programs established or administered by a state or local agency, are not expected to have a significant impact on small entities. A final regulatory flexibility analysis will be conducted after consideration of comments received during the public comment period. VI. Paperwork Reduction Act In accordance with the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 (44 U.S.C. 3506; 5 CFR 1320 Appendix A.1), the Board reviewed the proposed rule under the authority delegated to the Board by the Office of Management and Budget. Comments on the collections of information should be sent to the Office of Management and Budget, Paperwork Reduction Project (7100-0200), Washington, DC 20503, with copies of such comments to be sent to Mary M. McLaughlin, Chief, Financial Reports Section, Division of Research and Statistics, Mail Stop 97, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, DC 20551. An agency may not conduct or sponsor, and an organization is not required to respond to, this information collection unless it displays a currently valid OMB control number. The OMB control number for Regulation E is 7100-0200. The disclosures required by this regulation are found in 12 CFR Part 205 and are required to ensure adequate disclosure of basic terms, costs, and rights relating to electronic fund transfer services provided to consumers. The recordkeepers are providers of these services. Records must be retained for 24 months. Regulation E applies to all types of institutions that offer EFT services, not just state member banks. Under the Paperwork Reduction Act, however, the Federal Reserve accounts for the paperwork burden associated with Regulation E only for state member banks. Any estimates of paperwork burden for institutions other than state member banks are provided by the federal agency or agencies that supervise those institutions. There are 1,042 state member banks that are covered by Regulation E requirements, with an average frequency of 85,808 responses per year per bank. The total annual burden for all state member banks is estimated to be 478,804 hours; the combined annual cost is estimated to be $9,496,080. The proposed amendments provide an exemption for state-administered or state-established electronic benefit transfer (EBT) programs; the amendments are not expected to increase the hour burden that the regulation imposes on state member banks or on other institutions. The disclosures to consumers under Regulation E are mandatory. Because the records would be maintained at state member banks, no issue of confidentiality under the Freedom of Information Act arises. Disclosures relating to specific transactions or accounts are not publicly available. Comments are invited on: (a) whether the proposed collection of information is necessary for the proper performance of the Federal Reserve's functions, including whether the information has practical utility; (b) the accuracy of the Federal Reserve's estimate of the burden of the proposed information collection, including the cost of compliance; (c) ways to enhance the quality, utility, and clarity of the information to be collected; and (d) ways to minimize the burden of information collection on respondents, including through the use of automated collection techniques or other forms of information technology. List of Subjects in 12 CFR Part 205 Consumer protection, Electronic fund transfers, Federal Reserve System, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements. Text of Proposed Revisions Certain conventions have been used to highlight the proposed changes to Regulation E. New language is shown inside bold-faced arrows. For the reasons set forth in the preamble, the Board proposes to amend 12 CFR Part 205 as set forth below: PART 205 -- ELECTRONIC FUND TRANSFERS (REGULATION E) 1. The authority citation for Part 205 continues to read as follows: Authority: 15 U.S.C. 1693-1693r. 2. Section 205.15 would be amended by revising paragraphs (a)(1) and (a)(2) to read as follows: § 205.15 Electronic fund transfer of government benefits . (a) Government agency subject to regulation . (1) A government agency is deemed to be a financial institution for purposes of the act and regulation if directly or indirectly it issues an access device to a consumer for use in initiating an electronic fund transfer of government benefits from an account , other than needs-tested benefits in a program established under state or local law or administered by a state or local agency . The agency shall comply with all applicable requirements of the act and regulation, except as provided in this section. (2) For purposes of this section, the term account means an account established by a government agency for distributing government benefits to a consumer electronically, such as through automated teller machines or point-of-sale terminals , but does not include an account for distributing needs-tested benefits in a program established under state or local law or administered by a state or local agency. By order of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January 15, 1997. (signed) William W. Wiles William W. Wiles Secretary of the Board Billing code 6210-01-P
For immediate release
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today its approval of the application of Swiss Bank Corporation, Basle, Switzerland, to establish a state-licensed branch in Stamford, Connecticut. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Swiss Bank Corporation Basle, Switzerland Order Approving Establishment of a Branch Swiss Bank Corporation ("Bank"), Basle, Switzerland, a foreign bank within the meaning of the International Banking Act ("IBA"), has applied under section 7(d) of the IBA (12 U.S.C. § 3105(d)) to establish a state-licensed branch in Stamford, Connecticut. The Foreign Bank Supervision Enhancement Act of 1991 ("FBSEA"), which amended the IBA, provides that a foreign bank must obtain the approval of the Board to establish a branch in the United States. Notice of the application, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published in a newspaper of general circulation in Stamford, Connecticut ( The Advocate , October 25, 1996). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered all comments received. Bank, with total consolidated assets of approximately $247.5 billion, is the third largest bank in Switzerland, providing commercial and investment banking services worldwide. The shares of Bank are publicly traded and widely held. In the United States, Bank operates branches in New York, New York; Chicago, Illinois; and San Francisco, California; an agency in Miami, Florida; and representative offices in Los Angeles, California; and Houston, Texas. Bank also engages in a full range of securities activities permissible for bank holding companies through its section 20 subsidiary, SBC Warburg Inc. (formerly SBC Capital Markets Inc.), New York, New York, and several other nonbanking subsidiaries. Bank's primary purpose for establishing the proposed branch in Connecticut is to relocate and consolidate certain of the existing operations of its New York branches, as well as certain of the operations of its nonbanking subsidiaries. The Connecticut branch would serve as Bank's North American regional headquarters and would take over the trading operations currently conducted in one of Bank's New York branches. The proposed Connecticut branch would engage in all of the activities currently conducted by the New York branches except private banking. Bank's current home state under the IBA and Regulation K is California. On approval of the proposed branch by the Board and the State of Connecticut Department of Banking, Bank would change its home state to Connecticut. The Swiss Federal Banking Commission has no objection to the establishment of the proposed branch. In order to approve an application by a foreign bank to establish a branch in the United States, the IBA and Regulation K require the Board to determine that the foreign bank applicant engages directly in the business of banking outside of the United States, and has furnished to the Board the information it needs to assess the application adequately. The Board also must determine that the foreign bank is subject to comprehensive supervision or regulation on a consolidated basis by its home country supervisor (12 U.S.C. § 3105(d)(2); 12 C.F.R. 211.24). The Board may also take into account additional standards as set forth in the IBA and Regulation K (12 U.S.C. § 3105(d)(3)-(4); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)). As noted above, Bank engages directly in the business of banking outside of the United States. Bank also has provided the Board with the information necessary to assess the application through submissions that address the relevant issues. Regulation K provides that a foreign bank will be considered to be subject to comprehensive supervision or regulation on a consolidated basis if the Board determines that the bank is supervised and regulated in such a manner that its home country supervisor receives sufficient information on the foreign bank's worldwide operations, including the relationship of the foreign bank to any affiliate, to assess the overall financial condition of the foreign bank and its compliance with law and regulation (12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)(1)). With respect to the issue of supervision by home country authorities, the Board has considered the following information. Bank is supervised and regulated by the Swiss Federal Banking Commission ("SFBC"). The SFBC is responsible for the prudential supervision and regulation of credit institutions. Bank also provided additional information regarding the supervision and regulation of Bank's activities by entities other than the SFBC. The Board previously has determined that Bank is subject to comprehensive supervision and regulation on a consolidated basis by its home country supervisors. The Board also has taken into account the additional standards set forth in section 7 of the IBA (see 12 U.S.C. § 3105(d)(3)-(4); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)(2)). In this regard, the SFBC has approved the establishment of the proposed branch. Switzerland is a signatory to the Basle risk-based capital standards, and Swiss risk-based capital standards meet those established by the Basle Capital Accord ("Accord"). Bank's capital is in excess of the minimum levels required by the Accord and is considered equivalent to capital that would be required of a U.S. banking organization. Managerial and other financial resources of Bank also are consistent with approval of the proposed branch, and Bank appears to have the experience and capacity to support the proposed branch. Bank has established controls and procedures for the proposed branch to ensure compliance with U.S. law, as well as controls and procedures for its worldwide operations. Finally, the Board has reviewed the restrictions on disclosure in relevant jurisdictions in which Bank operates and has communicated with relevant government authorities about access to information. Bank has committed to make available to the Board such information on the operations of Bank and any affiliate of Bank that the Board deems necessary to determine and enforce compliance with the IBA, the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956, as amended, and other applicable Federal law. To the extent that the provision of such information is prohibited or impeded by law, Bank has committed to cooperate with the Board to obtain any necessary consents or waivers that might be required from third parties in connection with disclosure of such information. In addition, subject to certain conditions, the SFBC may share information on Bank's operations with other supervisors, including the Board. In light of these commitments and other facts of record, and subject to the condition described below, the Board concludes that Bank has provided adequate assurances of access to any necessary information the Board may request. On the basis of all the facts of record, and subject to the commitments made by Bank, as well as the terms and conditions set forth in this order, the Board has determined that Bank's application to establish a state-licensed branch should be, and hereby is, approved. Should any restrictions on access to information on the operations or activities of Bank or its affiliates subsequently interfere with the Board's ability to obtain information to determine and enforce compliance by Bank or its affiliates with applicable federal statutes, the Board may require termination of any of Bank's direct or indirect activities in the United States. Approval of the application is also specifically conditioned on Bank's compliance with the commitments made in connection with the application, and with the conditions in this order. The commitments and conditions referred to above are conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its decision, and may be enforced in proceedings under 12 U.S.C. § 1818 or 12 U.S.C. § 1847 against Bank, its offices, and its affiliates. By order of the Board of Governors, effective January 21, 1997. (signed) William W. Wiles William W. Wiles Secretary of the Board Footnotes Asset data are as of June 30, 1996. Countries in which Bank provides banking services include Switzerland, the United Kingdom, Japan, Germany, Hong Kong, and Singapore. The largest shareholder of Bank owns 5 percent of Bank's shares. Bank's other U.S. nonbanking subsidiaries include SBC Warburg Futures (formerly SBC Derivatives Inc.), Chicago, Illinois; SBC Brinson (formerly SBC Portfolio Management International Inc.), and SBC Resources Management Inc., each of New York, New York; a commercial paper subsidiary; and subsidiaries incorporated to hold property acquired in satisfaction of debts previously contracted. Generally, a foreign bank may not establish a branch outside its home state except in conformity with section 5 of the IBA. Under Regulation K, which implements section 5, a foreign bank may change its home state once, provided domestic branches established and investments in banks acquired in reliance on its original home state selection are conformed to those that would have been permissible had the new home state been selected as its home state originally. See 12 C.F.R. 211.22(b). Under state law, Bank must designate Connecticut as its home state to conduct the business of banking in Connecticut. Conn. Gen. Stat. § 36a-425 (Supp. 1996). As noted, Bank's current home state is California. In order to establish the proposed branch in Connecticut consistent with state and federal law, Bank must change its home state to Connecticut. Bank has not previously changed its home state. Upon the change of Bank's home state to Connecticut, Bank must limit the deposits accepted by its California office to only such deposits as are permissible for a corporation organized under section 25A of the Federal Reserve Act (an "Edge corporation")(12 U.S.C. 611 et seq.). The California branch would thus become a limited branch, which a foreign bank may operate outside its home state consistent with the IBA and Regulation K. Bank may also retain and operate its branches in New York and Chicago, which are grandfathered under section 5(b) of the IBA (12 U.S.C. 3103(b)). In assessing this standard, the Board considers, among other factors, the extent to which the home country supervisors: (i) ensure that the bank has adequate procedures for monitoring and controlling its activities worldwide; (ii) obtain information on the condition of the bank and its subsidiaries and offices through regular examination reports, audit reports, or otherwise; (iii) obtain information on the dealings with and relationship between the bank and its affiliates, both foreign and domestic; (iv) receive from the bank financial reports that are consolidated on a worldwide basis, or comparable information that permits analysis of the bank's financial condition on a worldwide consolidated basis; and (v) evaluate prudential standards, such as capital adequacy and risk asset exposure, on a worldwide basis. These are indicia of comprehensive, consolidated supervision. No single factor is essential, and other elements may inform the Board's determination. Swiss Bank Corporation , 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 690 (1996). See also Coutts & Co. , AG, 79 Federal Reserve Bulletin 636 (1993); Union Bank of Switzerland , 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 370 (1996). The Board's authority to approve the establishment of the proposed branch parallels the continuing authority of the State of Connecticut Department of Banking ("Department") to license offices of a foreign bank. The Board's approval of the application does not supplant the authority of the State of Connecticut, and its agent, the Department, to license the proposed branch of Bank in accordance with any terms or conditions that the Department may impose. Voting for this action: Vice Chair Rivlin and Governors Kelley, Lindsey, Phillips, Yellen, and Meyer. Absent and not voting: Chairman Greenspan.
For immediate release The Basle Committee on Banking Supervision, with the agreement of the central bank Governors of the Group of Ten countries, is today issuing for public comment a paper containing a set of Principles for the Management of Interest Rate Risk. This paper emphasizes the need for banks to maintain adequate risk management practices and identifies specific, agreed upon principles that supervisors will consider in evaluating a bank's management of interest rate risk. The document addresses the importance of board of director and senior management oversight of a comprehensive risk management process that effectively identifies, measures, monitors, and controls a bank's risk exposure. It is fully consistent with the Joint Agency Policy Statement on Interest Rate Risk issued in the United States in June 1996 by the federal banking agencies and circulated to all U.S. insured commercial banks. U.S. banks should continue to comply with that joint agency statement. Copies of the Committee's proposal are available at the offices of the Federal Reserve, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. The statement is also available on the World Wide Web site of the Bank for International Settlements at . Comments are requested by April 15, 1997, and may be sent directly to the Basle Committee Secretariat at the BIS or to any of the three bank regulatory agencies.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board, along with the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of Thrift Supervision, today issued an interim rule and requested comment on a proposal to expand the examination frequency cycle for certain financial institutions. The interim rule is effective January 30, 1997. Comment is requested by March 31, 1997 . Implementation of this ruling will expand the eligibility for the 18-month examination cycle for "2" rated, well managed banks from the current asset size limit of $100 million to a new limit of $250 million. The ruling will implement section 306 of the Riegle Community Development and Regulatory Improvement Act of 1994, and section 2221 of the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act of 1996. The interagency notice is attached. |
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today its approval of the application of Industrial and Commercial Bank of China, Beijing, People's Republic of China, to establish a representative office in New York, New York. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Industrial and Commercial Bank of China Beijing, People's Republic of China Order Approving Establishment of a Representative Office Industrial and Commercial Bank of China ("Bank"), Beijing, People's Republic of China, a foreign bank within the meaning of the International Banking Act ("IBA"), has applied under section 10(a) of the IBA (12 U.S.C. § 3107(a)) to establish a representative office in New York, New York. The Foreign Bank Supervision Enhancement Act of 1991, which amended the IBA, provides that a foreign bank must obtain the approval of the Board to establish a representative office in the United States. Notice of the application, affording interested persons an opportunity to comment, has been published in a newspaper of general circulation in New York ( The New York Times , October 9, 1996). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the application and all comments received. As of June 30, 1996, Bank had total assets of approximately $400 billion. Bank is the largest of four specialized banks in the People's Republic of China and is wholly owned by the Chinese government. Bank operates more than 32,000 offices and a number of subsidiaries in China. Outside China, Bank operates bank subsidiaries in Kazakhstan and Hong Kong, branches in Singapore and Hong Kong, and representative offices in Seoul, Korea; Tokyo, Japan; and London, England. Until recently, one of Bank's primary activities was receiving funds from China's federal, regional, and local authorities and lending such funds on a medium- and long-term basis to state-owned enterprises to support urban industrial development. In connection with ongoing efforts to modernize China's financial system, however, Bank now engages in more traditional commercial banking activities. The activities of Bank's representative office would include general marketing or promotional activities, research and consulting, and acting as liaison between Bank's customers and correspondent and investment banks. In addition, the representative office would engage in certain loan solicitation and servicing activities. All decisions regarding such loans would be made by Bank's head office and the representative office would not act as payment or collection agent in connection with its loan servicing activities. In acting on an application to establish a representative office, the IBA and Regulation K provide that the Board shall take into account whether the foreign bank engages directly in the business of banking outside of the United States, has furnished to the Board the information it needs to assess the application adequately, is subject to comprehensive supervision or regulation on a consolidated basis by its home country supervisor, and has provided adequate assurances of access to information on the operations of the bank and its affiliates to determine compliance with U.S. laws. (12 U.S.C. § 3107(a); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(d)). The Board also may take into account additional standards as set forth in the IBA (12 U.S.C. § 3105(d)(3)-(4)) and Regulation K (12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)). The Board previously has stated that the standards that apply to the establishment of a branch or agency need not in every case apply to the establishment of a representative office, because representative offices do not engage in a banking business and cannot take deposits or make loans. In evaluating an application to establish a representative office under the IBA and Regulation K, the Board will take into account the standards that apply to the establishment of branches and agencies, subject generally to the following considerations. With respect to supervision by home country authorities, a foreign bank that proposes to establish a representative office should be subject to a significant degree of supervision by its home country supervisor. A foreign bank's financial and managerial resources will be reviewed to determine whether its financial condition and performance demonstrate that it is capable of complying with applicable laws and has an operating record that would be consistent with the establishment of a representative office in the United States. Finally, all foreign banks, whether operating through branches, agencies or representative offices, will be required to provide adequate assurances of access to information on the operations of the bank and its affiliates necessary to determine compliance with U.S. laws. The Board has considered the following information with respect to home country supervision of Bank. The People's Bank of China (the "PBOC") is the licensing, regulatory, and supervisory authority for banks and all other financial institutions in China and, as such, is the home country supervisor of Bank. Although regulation of the specialized banks by the PBOC historically has focused on the banks' compliance with state economic and financial goals, in the last several years the Chinese authorities have taken steps to develop a more market-oriented bank supervisory program placing greater emphasis on prudential standards. Under the new supervisory regime currently being implemented, the PBOC establishes capital, liquidity and asset quality requirements, regulates the investments of banks in other companies, establishes internal auditing standards for Chinese banks, and monitors Chinese banks for adherence to Chinese laws and regulations. The PBOC, which has authorized Bank to establish the proposed representative office, supervises the foreign and domestic activities of Bank and its subsidiaries. The PBOC monitors the operations of Bank through on-site examinations and the review of periodic reports from Bank. The PBOC conducts both regular and limited ad hoc on-site examinations. On-site examinations generally focus on compliance with financial regulations, as well as Bank's internal controls, asset quality, capital, liquidity, profitability, and execution of economic and financial policies. Bank is required to submit various periodic financial and regulatory reports to the PBOC, including balance sheets, income statements, analyses of classified loans and external debt, reports on foreign exchange risk, and reports on deposits, borrowings, guarantees, and securities and investments. Bank also is required to publish its financial statements and audit report annually. The PBOC's examinations and general supervisory oversight of Bank are carried out by the head office and various of the more than 2,500 local offices of the PBOC. Bank's internal audit department conducts biannual and annual internal audits of Bank, and ad hoc audits of particular areas of Bank's operations at least four times each year. Each major department or activity of Bank is subject to one or more internal audits annually. Internal audits generally review Bank's internal guidelines, operating and financial plans, budgets, and financial statements, as well as compliance with governmental and Bank's own policies. Bank's foreign branches and subsidiaries are required to submit periodic reports to Bank's head office and are audited on-site annually. The results of Bank's internal audits are provided to the PBOC. Bank proposes to monitor and control the activities of the representative office through a similar combination of periodic reports and annual internal audits, as well as through meetings between staff of the representative office and Bank's head office. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that factors relating to the supervision of Bank by its home country supervisor are consistent with approval of the proposed representative office. The Board also has determined that, for purposes of the IBA and Regulation K, Bank engages directly in the business of banking outside of the United States through its operations in China. Bank has provided the Board with the information necessary to assess the application through submissions that address relevant issues. The Board also has taken into account the additional standards set forth in section 7 of the IBA and Regulation K ( see 12 U.S.C. § 3105(d)(3),(4); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)(2)). As noted above, the PBOC has authorized Bank to establish the proposed representative office. Taking into consideration Bank's record of operations in its home country, its overall financial resources, and its standing with its home country supervisors, the Board also has determined that financial and managerial factors are consistent with approval of the proposed representative office. Bank appears to have the experience and capacity to support the proposed representative office and also has established controls and procedures for the proposed representative office to ensure compliance with U.S. law. Finally, with respect to access to information on Bank's operations, the Board has reviewed the relevant provisions of law in China and has communicated with appropriate government authorities regarding access to information. Bank has committed to make available to the Board such information on the operations of Bank and any of its affiliates that the Board deems necessary to determine and enforce compliance with the IBA, the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956, as amended, and other applicable federal law. To the extent that the provision of such information to the Board may be prohibited or impeded by law, Bank has committed to cooperate with the Board to obtain any necessary consents or waivers that might be required from third parties in connection with disclosure of such information. In addition, subject to certain conditions, the PBOC may share information on Bank's operations with other supervisors, including the Board. In light of the commitments provided by Bank and other facts of record, and subject to the condition described below, the Board concludes that Bank has provided adequate assurances of access to any necessary information the Board may request. On the basis of all the facts of record, and subject to the commitments made by Bank, as well as the terms and conditions set forth in this order, the Board has determined that Bank's application to establish a representative office should be, and hereby is, approved. Should any restrictions on access to information on the operations or activities of Bank or any of its affiliates subsequently interfere with the Board's ability to determine the compliance by Bank or its affiliates with applicable federal statutes, the Board may require termination of any of Bank's direct or indirect activities in the United States. Approval of the application is also specifically conditioned on compliance by Bank with the commitments made in connection with the application and with the conditions in this order. The commitments and conditions referred to above are conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its decision, and may be enforced in proceedings under 12 U.S.C. § 1818 against Bank and its affiliates. By order of the Board of Governors, effective January 27, 1997. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes See 58 Federal Register 6348, 6351 (1993). See Citizens National Bank , 79 Federal Reserve Bulletin 805 (1993). See also Promstroybank of Russia , 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 599 (1996) (addressing standards applicable to representative offices with limited activities). The Board's authority to approve the establishment of the proposed representative office parallels the continuing authority of the State of New York to license offices of a foreign bank. The Board's approval of this application does not supplant the authority of the State of New York and its agent, the New York State Banking Department (Department), to license the proposed representative office of Bank in accordance with any terms or conditions that the Department may impose. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Lindsey, Phillips, Yellen, and Meyer.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced that information about the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA), including ratings of state member banks examined by the Federal Reserve, is now available on the Internet. CRA information on the Board's World Wide Web site can be accessed by bank name, city and state, bank examination date, and the CRA rating category. Ratings from July 1990 to July 1996 are available and new rating information will be provided monthly. Also available are approved strategic plans, quarterly examination schedules and wholesale and limited purpose designations. Public evaluation portions of examinations and additional strategic plans will be added later. Other new items on the Board's site include staff legal interpretations, a link to the Federal Reserve System National Information Center on banking, and the report submitted to Congress on funds availability and check fraud. The Board's home page can be accessed at .
Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan The consumer price index Before the Committee on Finance, United States Senate January 30, 1997 Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee, I appreciate the opportunity to appear before you today. The Committee is faced with a number of complex policy issues that will have an important bearing on the fiscal health of the nation and the welfare of our people well into the next century. I will be happy to respond to questions relating to any of those issues, but in my formal comments this morning I intend to focus on the accuracy of the consumer price index. I would like to begin by commending this Committee for having done so much to bring the issue of possible bias in the CPI to the attention of the Congress and of the nation in general. The hearings conducted by this Committee in 1995, as well as the report produced by the advisory commission that was sponsored by this Committee, have advanced the discussion considerably. These efforts, along with the continuing contributions of the Bureau of Labor Statistics' research staff, have added importantly to our understanding of the sources of measurement error in the CPI. Any index that endeavors to measure the cost of living should aim to be unbiased . That is, a serious examination of all available evidence should yield the conclusion that there is just as great a chance that the index under states the rate of growth of the target concept as there is that it over states the truth. The present-day consumer price index does not meet this standard. In fact, the best available evidence suggests that there is virtually no chance that the CPI as currently published under states the rate of growth of the appropriate concept. In other words, there is almost a 100 percent probability that we are overcompensating the average social security recipient for increases in the cost of living, and almost a 100 percent probability that we are causing the inflation-adjusted burden of the income tax system to decline more rapidly than I presume the Congress intends. A major reason for this is that consumers respond to changes in relative prices by changing the composition of their actual marketbasket. At present, however, the marketbasket used in constructing the CPI changes only once every decade or so. Moreover, new goods and services deliver value to consumers even at the relatively elevated prices that often prevail early in their life cycles; currently, that value is not reflected in the CPI. For that and other reasons outlined in the Boskin Commission report and other studies, we know with near certainty that the current CPI is off. We do not know precisely by how much, however. There is, nonetheless, a very high probability that the upward bias ranges between 1/2 percentage point per year and 1-1/2 percentage points per year. Although this range happens to coincide with the one I gave two years ago, it does reflect both the improvements in the index that the BLS has implemented since then and the emergence of evidence suggesting that the initial problem was of a slightly greater dimension than had previously been estimated. This estimate is consistent with a number of microstatistical studies as well as an independently derived macroevaluation by staff at the Federal Reserve Board, which I will discuss shortly. In judging these evaluations, it is incumbent upon us to resist the evident strong inclination to believe that precision is the equivalent of accuracy in price bias estimation. If we cannot find a precise estimate for a certain bias, we should not implicitly choose zero as though that was a more scientifically supportable estimate. There is no sharp dividing line between a pristine estimate of a price and one that is not. All of the estimates in the CPI are approximations, in some cases very rough approximations. Further, even very rough approximations can give us a far better judgment of the cost of living, than holding to a false precision of accuracy. We would be far better served following the wise admonition of John Maynard Keynes that "it is better to be roughly right than precisely wrong." Estimates of the magnitude of the bias in our price measures are available from a number of sources. Most have been developed from detailed examinations of the microstatistical evidence. However, recent work by staff economists at the Federal Reserve Board has added strong corroborating evidence of price mismeasurement using a macroeconomic approach that is essentially independent of the exercises performed by other researchers, including those on the Boskin Commission. In particular, employing the statistical system from which the Commerce Department estimates the national income and product accounts, the research finds that measured real output and productivity in the service sector are implausibly weak, given that the return to owners of businesses in that sector apparently has been well-maintained. Taken at face value, the published data indicate that the level of output per hour in a number of service-producing industries has been falling for more than two decades. In other words, the data imply that firms in these industries have been becoming less and less efficient for more than twenty years. These circumstances simply are not credible. On the reasonable assumption that nominal output and hours worked and paid of the various industries are accurately measured, faulty price statistics are almost surely the likely cause of the implausible productivity trends. The source of a very large segment of these prices is the CPI. For this exercise, the study used the GDP chain-weight price measures. Although these price measures are based on many of the same individual price indexes included in the CPI, they do not suffer from upper-level substitution bias. Hence, the price mismeasurement revealed by this data system largely reflects shortcomings in quality adjustment and in the treatment of new goods and services. If, instead of declining, productivity in these selected service industries was flat, to up a modest 1 percentage point per year, the implicit aggregate price bias associated with these service industries alone would be on the order of 1/2 percentage point or so per annum in recent years--very similar in magnitude to the Boskin Commission estimate of total quality adjustment and new products bias. To be sure, it is theoretically possible that some of the measured productivity declines in these service industries merely reflect mispricing of intermediate transfers among various industries. Such an occurrence would cause an understatement of productivity in some sectors, but a corresponding overstatement in others. But the available evidence suggests that for these particular service industries this theoretical possibility is not of a sufficiently large empirical magnitude to overturn the basic conclusion that there are serious measurement problems in our price statistics. Moreover, the study did not attempt to evaluate possible quality and new products bias in other industries. Some observers who are skeptical that the bias in the CPI could be very large have noted that the evidence on the magnitude of unmeasured quality change and the importance of new items bias is incomplete and inconclusive. Without a doubt, quality change and new items are among the most difficult of the problems currently confronting the BLS. But since I raised this issue two years ago in my testimony before this committee, a number of studies have documented significant new examples of cases in which the current treatment in the CPI results in an overstatement of the rate of growth of the cost of living. There doubtless are certain components of the CPI that are biased downward because quality change is handled inappropriately. One instance in which there may well be a problem in this regard pertains to new vehicles, where it may be more appropriate to treat pollution control and mandatory safety equipment, at least in part, as raising price to a consumer rather than improving quality, as is the present practice. But the potential downward bias introduced by current methodology for such equipment can only be slight. We should be prepared to embrace credible new research on quality adjustment, regardless of whether that research points to additional sources of upward bias or previously undetected instances of downward bias. Nonetheless, currently available evidence very strongly supports the view that, on balance , the bias is decidedly toward failing to appropriately capture quality improvements in our price indexes. There is little reason to believe that this conclusion will change unless we alter our procedures. A more difficult quality related issue is whether to reflect changes in broad environmental and social conditions in price measures that are used for indexing various components of federal outlays and receipts. That is, should the CPI reflect the influence of factors such as the level of crime, air and water quality, and the emergence of new diseases, which are not specifically related to products that consumers purchase? There is little in the record to suggest that, when it enacted the indexation of social security benefits in 1972, the Congress intended for the beneficiaries of that program to be compensated for changes in such environmental and social factors. Nor do these issues appear to have been raised when Congress debated the indexation of various tax parameters during the 1980s. Taking account of such conditions, particularly those that lie outside of the markets for goods and services, would be an interesting exercise in its own right, but would appear to extend well beyond the original intent of the Congress. A considerable professional consensus already exists for at least two actions that would almost surely bring the CPI into closer alignment with a true cost-of-living index. First, we should move away from the concept of a fixed marketbasket at the upper level of aggregation, and move toward an aggregation formula that takes into account the tendency of consumers to alter the composition of their purchases in response to changes in relative prices. The BLS already calculates such an index on an experimental basis with a lag of about a year. If the Bureau adopts the Boskin Commission's recommendation that it publish a "best practice" version of the CPI with a lag of a year, it should, without question, build that index on the foundation of a variable marketbasket. There is a somewhat more difficult issue as to whether the concept of a variable marketbasket can be applied in "real time," that is, with the same degree of timeliness that characterizes the current CPI. It is not possible to implement the textbook versions of any of the so-called "superlative" index formulas in real time, because those formulas require contemporaneous data on expenditures, and those data are not presently available until about a year after the fact. However, this hardly forecloses the possibility of implementing an approximation to a superlative formula, and work should continue on the development of such an approximation. A second area that will require attention is the aggregation of prices at the most detailed level of the index. This is a highly technical area, and an important example of how research by the staff at the BLS has advanced our knowledge. Without going into the details of the matter, it is sufficient to say that a selective move away from the current aggregation formula is warranted, and would probably make a modest further contribution to bringing the index more in line with the concept of a cost-of-living index. Beyond these rather limited steps, most of the needed developments will require time, effort, and quite possibly additional resources. It is important that the Congress provide the Bureau with sufficient resources to pursue the agenda vigorously. These are difficult problems, and they cannot be solved tomorrow or next week. But with adequate support and diligent effort, the pace of improvement should quicken. Moreover, an accelerated pace of BLS activity, and heightened congressional interest should galvanize analysts outside the government to contribute to the research effort. Where will this longer-term effort be required? One of the key areas, by all accounts, is quality adjustment. As the Bureau has rightly noted, they do indeed already employ a variety of methods to control for quality change, but available evidence suggests that these are not sufficient to the task. Unfortunately, making improvements on this front will be difficult: Each item will have to be considered on its own, and there may well be limited transfer of knowledge from one item to the next. Another key area on the longer-term agenda will be the estimation of the value of new products to consumers. Significant innovations, such as the personal computer, the cellular telephone, and the heart bypass operation create value for consumers, even at their typically high initial prices; moreover, this value is even greater at the much lower prices that often prevail when new products are, in fact, introduced into the CPI. A true cost-of-living index would reflect this value and its implication for the true rate of growth of the cost of living. The CPI does not reflect it, and accordingly fails to capture a significant offset to price rises in other products. Deriving an estimate of this value and building it into the CPI will not be an easy undertaking. But conceptually, it is unquestionably the right direction to be heading, and some recent research suggests that it could measurably affect the index. Over time, we will need to investigate alternative sources of data. Already, there is interesting work being done to develop techniques for processing data collected from bar-code scanners at the check-out counter. Scanner data will allow the BLS to track not just a small sample of products, but virtually the entire universe of products in selected lines of business and, perhaps most importantly, virtually the universe of transactions, regardless of whether those transactions happen on a weekday, at night, or on a holiday. We should also move to improve our understanding of the value that consumers place on their own time. Absent such knowledge, it will be impossible for the BLS to estimate the value of many goods and services that mainly serve to enhance convenience and save time. Finally, we will have to attempt to build an understanding of why consumers shop at the places they do: What characteristics of an outlet are important, and how much so? Location, hours of operation, inventory, and quality of service all are likely influences on the value that consumers place on their shopping experience, and all will be important in helping the BLS to develop a more sophisticated statistical method for dealing with the appearance of new consumer outlets, including those that operate over the Internet. Even if the BLS moves aggressively, some upward bias will almost surely remain in the CPI, at least for the next several years. Two years ago, in testimony before this committee, I suggested that a workable structure for dealing with this situation might involve a two-track approach. That suggestion still seems to me to make sense. The first track would involve action by the BLS to address those aspects of the bias that can be dealt with in relatively short order, say within the next year. The second track would involve the establishment of an independent national commission to set annual cost-of-living adjustment factors for federal receipt and outlay programs. The Commission would examine available evidence on a periodic basis, and estimate the bias in the CPI taking into account both the latest research on the sources and magnitudes of the bias, and any corrective actions that had been taken by the BLS. This type of approach would have the benefit of being objective, nonpartisan, and sufficiently flexible to take full account of the latest information. Moreover, there is no reason why the two tracks could not proceed in parallel. Without the second track, we are implicitly assuming, contrary to overwhelming evidence, that the most accurate estimate of the bias is zero. There has been considerable objection that such a second track procedure would be a political fix. To the contrary, assuming zero for the remaining bias is the political fix. On this issue, we should let evidence, not politics, drive policy. We have an overarching national interest in building a better measure of consumer prices and in implementing more rational indexation procedures. Through these efforts, we are most likely to ensure that the original intent of the relevant pieces of legislation will be fulfilled in insulating taxpayers and benefit recipients from the effects of ongoing changes in the cost of living. At present this objective is not being met.