For immediate release The Federal Reserve announced today the production of a videotape designed to heighten awareness among lenders about the business opportunities available to them in lending to businesses owned by women. Businesses owned by women represent one of the fastest growing sectors of the nation's economy. Between 1987 and 1996, the number of women-owned businesses grew 78% nationwide, outpacing overall business growth by nearly 2 to 1. Through testimonials, the videotape entitled, To Their Credit: Women-Owned Businesses, features successful women business owners describing their experiences in obtaining bank credit. To potential entrepreneurs, the tape stresses the need for future commercial borrowers to build a relationship with the lender and to have a comprehensive business plan prepared prior to approaching a lender. To potential lenders, the tape focuses on the profitability this fast-growing segment of the economy offers financial institutions. During the 30-minute program, future women entrepreneurs should recognize the many informational resources available to help them including: Women's Business Development Centers Small Business Administration Women's Business Centers Federal Reserve Bank's Community Affairs Offices The videotape is available through FVS Media for a nominal fee. The telephone number is 800-555-5471. The Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago and the Women's Business Development Center also produced a publication that covers access to credit issues. The publication, Access to Credit: A Guide for Lenders and Women Owners of Small Businesses, can be obtained by contacting the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago's Public Affairs Office at 312-322-5111. For more information regarding the video contact the Community Affairs Offices at your local Federal Reserve Bank.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced plans for providing an enhanced settlement service to depository institutions. The enhanced service combines and improves selected features from the Reserve Banks' existing net settlement services. Under the enhanced service beginning March 29, 1999, the Federal Reserve Banks will offer a fully automated settlement service that provides participants in clearing arrangements with finality of settlement intraday on the settlement date. The service will provide the settling participants with an on-line mechanism to submit an electronic file of settlement information to the Federal Reserve. In addition to increasing operational efficiency, the enhanced service is intended to facilitate a reduction in the duration of settlement risk for private-sector clearing arrangements. The Board's notice is attached. |
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced continued price reductions in fees for electronic payment services provided to depository institutions by the Federal Reserve Banks. Most of the new fees become effective January 4, 1999. Prices across all electronic payment services will decline 17.5 percent in 1999, reflecting lower prices for Fedwire® and automated clearing house (ACH) transactions. In large part, the savings reflect the efficiencies gained from the successful completion of a five-year project to consolidate the Federal Reserve's computer facilities. For 1999, Reserve Banks will reduce the basic fee for a Fedwire funds transfer and a Fedwire securities transfer by almost 30 percent and 25 percent, respectively. The Reserve Banks will eliminate some ACH fees and reduce other fees for their ACH customers, including the fee for items received, which will decline by more than 12 percent. Fees for paper check products, which include forward processed, fine sort and returned checks, will increase about 2.6 percent on a volume-weighted basis (a 3.7 percent increase from January 1998 fee levels). This increase is driven primarily by increases in fine sort and returned check fees. Fees for forward-processed items will remain stable. Fees for payor bank services, which include electronic check products, will increase about 0.6 percent (a 1.2 percent increase from January 1998 fee levels). In addition to these fee changes, the Reserve Banks will implement a volume-based fee structure for the Fedwire funds transfer service and a new fee structure for the Fedwire securities transfer service. These structure changes become effective February 1, 1999. During the first quarter of 1999, the Reserve Banks also will implement an enhanced multilateral settlement service that will allow participants in settlement arrangements to submit settlement files to the Federal Reserve electronically, improving operational efficiency over current methods. The fees and fee structure for the new and existing multilateral settlement services have been revised by lowering the per-entry fee, introducing a settlement file fee, and increasing the off-line surcharge. Working with other industry participants, the Reserve Banks also plan to expand their efforts to educate depository institutions and end users about the benefits of the ACH. This campaign, coupled with ACH fee decreases for 1999, is expected to spur commercial ACH growth and help broaden the use of electronic payment systems. The Monetary Control Act of 1980 requires the Federal Reserve to recover the costs of providing certain payment services over the long term. During the period 1988 to 1997, the Reserve Banks recovered 99.6 percent of the costs of priced services. The Reserve Banks project that they will recover 101.0 percent of their priced services costs for 1999, including imputed expenses and targeted return on equity, generating a net income of $64.2 million. The Reserve Banks estimate that they will recover 102.2 percent of their costs in 1998. The Board today also approved the 1999 private sector adjustment factor (PSAF) for Reserve Bank priced services of $115.8 million, an increase of $7.3 million or 6.7 percent from the 1998 targeted PSAF of $108.5 million. The PSAF is an allowance for taxes and other imputed expenses that would have been paid and return on capital that would have been earned had the Federal Reserve's priced services been provided by a private business firm. The Board's notice is attached. |
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan The structure of the international financial system At the Annual Meeting of the Securities Industry Association, Boca Raton, Florida November 5, 1998 This afternoon I intend to address a subject that ten years ago would have been sleep inducing. Today it is a cage rattler: the structure of the international financial system. Functioning well, most participants take it for granted. Functioning poorly, it becomes a vehicle for financial contagion and a threat to the franchises of many in this room. Dramatic advances in computer and telecommunications technologies in recent years have enabled a broad unbundling of risks through innovative financial engineering. The financial instruments of a bygone era, common stocks and debt obligations, have been augmented by a vast array of complex hybrid financial products, which allow risks to be isolated, but which, in many cases, seemingly challenge human understanding. The consequence doubtless has been a far more efficient financial system. The price-setting functions of the market economy in the United States, for example, have become increasingly sensitive to subtle changes in consumer choice and capital efficiencies, and the resulting set of product and asset market prices and interest rates have enabled producers to direct scarce capital to those productive facilities that most effectively cater to consumer preferences. Thus, despite a rate of capital investment far short of that of many other advanced industrial countries, the efficiency of that capital has facilitated the creation of an economy whose vitality is unmatched throughout the world. These same new technologies and financial products have challenged the ability of inward looking and protectionist economies to maintain effective barriers, which, along with the superior performance of their more open trading partners, has led over the past decade to a major dismantling of impediments to the free flow of trade and capital. The new international financial system that has evolved as a consequence has been, despite recent setbacks, a major factor in the marked increase in living standards for those economies that have chosen to participate in it. It has done so by facilitating cross-border trade in goods and services that has enhanced competition and expanded the benefits of the international division of labor. Indeed, the growing importance of finance in fostering those rising living standards, especially in the United States, is the major reason the share of national incomes accruing to finance has been increasing since the mid-1970s. Notwithstanding the demonstrable advantages of the new international financial system, the Mexican financial breakdown in late 1994 and, of course, the most recent episodes in East Asia and elsewhere have raised questions about the inherent stability of this new system. The Mexican crisis had many of the characteristics of earlier financial disorders, primarily a very large current account deficit, but the intensity of the disruption, and certainly the size of official financing employed to quell it, seemed larger relative to the underlying causes than comparable previous episodes. Many of the more recent crises, from Thailand to Russia, have the conventional causes--fiscal and trade imbalances, and/or imprudent borrowing denominated in foreign currencies. But again the size of the breakdowns and required official finance to counter them is of a different order of magnitude than in the past. This is especially the case when we consider how outsized the distortions were in Latin America in the early 1980s, relative to the remedies that were employed. But why did a relatively conventional slowdown in capital investments and capital outflows to East Asia over the past year and a half induce such a wrenching adjustment in individual economies and why has the degree of contagion been so large? The answer appears to lie in the very same technologies that have brought so marked an increase in the efficiency of our new international financial structure. That financial structure, which has induced such dramatic increases in productive capital flows, has also exhibited significantly improved capacities to transmit ill-advised investments. One can scarcely imagine the size of losses of a single trader employing modern techniques that contributed to the demise of Barings in 1995 being accomplished in the paper-trade environment of earlier decades. Clearly, our productivity to create losses has improved measurably in recent years. The system is thus both productive of increased standards of living and more sensitive to capital misuse. It is a system more calibrated than before to not only reward innovation but also to discipline the mistakes of private investment or public policy--once they become evident. As I have pointed out before, the huge flows of capital into debt and equity markets, premised on overly optimistic assessments of risk or returns, drove asset prices to unsustainable levels that only worsened the subsequent correction. Hence, the recent crises, while sharing many, if not most, of the characteristics of past episodes, nonetheless, appear different. Market discipline today is clearly far more draconian and less forgiving than twenty or thirty years ago. Owing to greater information and more opportunities, capital now shifts more readily and increasingly to those ventures or economies that appear to excel. A measure of the broader sensitivity of current technologies relative to those of a bygone era is reflected, for example, in the impact of "collars" on program trading on the New York Stock Exchange. In the aftermath of the October 1987 crash, electronic submission of index arbitrage trades was suspended when the Dow Jones Industrial Average moved inordinately in a day. Analyses of trading when that collar was in effect indicated that S&P futures and cash indices converged far more slowly than when electronic order submission was permitted. In effect, we had an experiment in the comparative market responsiveness of a modern technology and an older paper-based system that was used prior to 1976, when electronic order routing was first introduced. The collar was revised in 1988 to allow electronic order submission, but another anachronism, the requirement that these orders be executed only on stabilizing upticks or downticks, now has the same effect. The faster reaction time has not only accelerated the pace of domestic capital flows to ferret out the increasingly more subtle differences among investments, it has also markedly accelerated international capital flows. Cross-border bank lending, for example, has doubled in the past decade. Daily foreign exchange transactions have more than doubled and now stand at $1.5 trillion. The crises seem to reflect, arguably, an inability of people to come to grips with the vastly accelerated pace of financial activity--its complexity and its volume. In the throes of the 1990s' virtuous cycle that propelled asset prices higher and risk premiums lower, the accelerated pace of competitive pressures, until the crises struck, was hardly likely to appear threatening. But the inevitable reversal engendered fear and retrenchment. While this was evident in Asia a year ago, it became particularly pronounced in the remarkable increase in risk aversion and an increased propensity for liquidity protection in both the United States and Europe in recent months without significant signs of underlying erosion in our real economies, tightened monetary policy, or higher inflation. This is virtually unprecedented in our post World War II experience. In the wake of the Russian debt moratorium on August 17, demand for risky assets, which had already declined somewhat, suddenly dried up. This, in the United States, induced dramatic increases in yield spreads across the risk matrix. In Europe spreads have moved less, apparently owing to widespread reliance on relationship finance. Volumes in risk markets, however, have declined sharply. Even more startling is the surge for liquidity protection that has manifested itself through significant differentiation in yields among riskless assets according to their degree of liquidity. We are all familiar with the dramatic rise in late September in the illiquidity premium for off-the-run Treasury securities, or the spreads on government sponsored agency issues. The surge toward less risky assets reflected dramatic increases in uncertainty, but still a risk differentiation judgment among various assets. The surge toward liquidity protection, however, is a step beyond, since it implies that any commitment is perceived as so tentative that the ability to easily reverse the decision is accorded a high premium. Risk differentiation, despite its recent abruptness, is, of course, a straight-forward feature of well-functioning capital markets. The enhanced demand for liquidity protection, however, reflected a markedly decreased willingness to deal with uncertainty--that is a tendency to disengage from risk-taking to a highly unusual degree. It is, of course, plausible that the current episode of investor fright will dissipate, and yield spreads and liquidity premiums will soon fall into more normal ranges. Indeed we are already seeing significant signs of some reversals. But that leaves unanswered the question of why such episodes erupted in the first place. It has become evident time and again that when events become too complex and move too rapidly as appears to be the case today, human beings become demonstrably less able to cope. The failure of the ability to comprehend external events almost invariably induces disengagement from an activity, whether it be fear of entering a dark room, or of market volatility. And disengagement from markets that are net long, the most general case, means bids are hit and prices fall. Over the long run, perhaps, people can adjust to a state of frenetic change with equanimity. Certainly our teenagers seem far more adaptive to the newer technologies than their parents and grandparents. But I have my doubts that newer generations' human response to change will differ in any material way from earlier ones. That leaves us with the challenge: how can we harness burgeoning international financial flows in a manner that does not strain human evaluation capacities? First let me stipulate that capital controls, which worked in part to contain international flows earlier in this post war period, are unlikely to be effective over the longer run given the vast increase in technical capabilities to evade them. But more importantly, should controls nonetheless succeed, they would cut off capital investment inflow to an economy, and the higher level of technology and standards of living that normally accompany access to such flows. Restricting controls to short-term capital inflows, as is often recommended, is not a solution. They will invariably also restrict direct investment that requires short-term capital to facilitate it. Clearly, to live with enhanced global finance, it has become necessary to find ways to buttress our financial institutions to be able to weather the dramatic increase in capital flows, both domestic and cross-border, before they strain human capacities. It has taken the longstanding participants in the international financial community many decades to build sophisticated financial and legal infrastructures that can buffer the shocks of such flows. But even they, on rare occasions, run into trouble (for example, Sweden in 1992). Those advanced infrastructures generally have been able to discourage speculative attacks against a well-entrenched currency because their financial systems are robust and are able to withstand large and rapid capital outflows of foreign currency instruments, and the often vigorous policy responses required to stem such attacks. For the more recent participants in global finance, their institutions, had not yet been tested against the rigors of major league pitching, to use a baseball analogy. Many emerging market economies have tried to fix their exchange rates against the dollar and, in recent years, many borrowed dollars excessively, unhedged, to finance unproductive capital projects. Eventually their currencies became overvalued and their financial systems, under the increasing strain of the unhedged debt, broke down. But such behavior need not undermine financial systems that are otherwise sound. Last month's unprecedented three-day weakening in the dollar, relative to the yen, reportedly as a consequence of a large scale unwinding of the so-called yen carry trade, has not induced spasms in the U.S. financial markets, nor for that matter in Japan, despite its severe banking problems. The heightened sensitivity of exchange rates of emerging market economies under stress would be of less concern if banks and other financial institutions in those economies were strong and well capitalized. Developed countries' banks are, to be sure, highly leveraged, but subject to sufficiently effective supervision that local banking problems do not generally escalate into international financial crises. Most banks in emerging market economies are also highly leveraged, but their supervision often has not proved adequate to forestall failures and general financial crisis. The failure of some banks is highly contagious to other banks and businesses, both domestic and international, that deal with them. This weakness in banking supervision in emerging market economies was not a major problem for the rest of the world prior to those economies' growing participation in the international finance system over the past decade or so. Exposure of an economy to short-term foreign currency capital inflows, before its financial system is sufficiently sturdy to handle a large unanticipated withdrawal, is a highly risky venture. A key conclusion stemming from our most recent crises is that economies cannot enjoy the advantages of a sophisticated international financial system without the internal discipline that enables such economies to adjust without crisis to changing circumstances. Between our Civil War and World War I when international capital flows were, as they are today, largely uninhibited, that discipline was more or less automatic. Where gold standard rules were tight and liquidity constrained, adverse flows were quickly reflected in rapid increases in interest rates and the cost of capital generally. This tended to delimit the misuse of capital and its consequences. Imbalances were generally aborted before they got out of hand. But following World War I, such tight restraints on economies were seen as too inflexible to meet the economic policy goals of the twentieth century. From the 1930s through the 1960s and beyond, capital controls in many countries, including most industrial countries, inhibited international capital flows and to some extent the associated financial instability--presumably, however, at the cost of significant shortfalls in economic growth and misallocated resources. There were innumerable episodes, of course, where individual economies experienced severe exchange rate crises. Contagion, however, was generally limited by the existence of restrictions on capital movements that were at least marginally effective, in that period of paper-based transactions. In the 1970s and 1980s, recognition of the inefficiencies associated with controls, along with newer technologies and the deregulation they fostered, gradually restored the free flow of international capital prevalent a century earlier. In the late twentieth century, however, fiat currency regimes have replaced the rigid automaticity of the gold standard in its heyday. More elastic currencies and markets, arguably, have augmented the scale of potential capital misallocation. It takes discretionary countervailing--and often unpopular--policy actions by fiscal and monetary authorities to make needed adjustments. Where those are delayed, imbalances build and market contagion across national borders has consequently been more prevalent and faster in today's international financial markets than appears to have been the case a century ago under comparable circumstances. The international financial system was not as technologically responsive then as now. Contagion cannot fester where financial interconnectiveness is weak or lacking. Moreover, contagion is clearly enhanced by leverage, and while leverage is not demonstrably greater today than in earlier post World War II decades, the degree of leverage that was viable then apparently no longer appears appropriate in today's more volatile financial environment. If financial asset prices are more variable, firms need to protect themselves against unexpected adverse market conditions by having more robust financial structures. New instruments, like derivatives, afford the opportunity to reduce risk, but they also afford opportunities to become more vulnerable. Borrowers, lenders, and regulators need to improve their understanding of the risk characteristics of the new instruments under a variety of circumstances--some extreme. As the financial system becomes ever more sensitive to change, consideration needs to be given to discourage excess leverage by financial intermediaries worldwide. The events of the past year have doubtless already induced a readjustment in optimum debt-equity balance on the part of all investors and borrowers. Nonfinancial corporate leverage in Asia especially urgently needs to be addressed. Higher nonfinancial debt levels have significantly increased inflexible debt service requirements, especially those denominated in foreign currencies. Such trends have been particularly instrumental in inducing financial system breakdowns in East Asia. Presumably, Asian borrowers will be less inclined to high leverage in the future. Perhaps the most effective tool to reduce leverage in emerging market economies is to remove the debt guarantees, both explicit and implicit, by central banks and governments. Another challenge confronting the international financial system is establishing and retaining more robust currency regimes. The defining characteristic of the latest set of crises is the extraordinary collapse of exchange rates among emerging market economies. Those adjustments brought such havoc to balance sheets of both financial and nonfinancial entities in those economies that deep recessions inevitably ensued. The increasingly global character of investment--largely technologically induced--spread contagion. Of course, at the end of the day the issue is not the stability of currencies, but the underlying policies that engender stable currencies. Open economies, governed by a rule of law with sound monetary, trade, and fiscal policies, rarely experience exchange rate problems that destabilize those economies to the degree we have seen in Asia. Problems have arisen in recent years when an economy without a history of sound finance endeavored to "rent it," so to speak, by locking its domestic currency into one of the stable currencies of long-time participants in the international financial system, such as the dollar and the DM. There is nothing wrong with these linkages provided the tied currency is set at a competitive level and is supported by sound policies and flexible economies. Too often they are not, with widespread consequences, as recent history amply illustrates. In hoping to gain the benefits of sound economic systems without incurring the policy costs, many emerging market economies have tried a number of technical devices: the fixed rate peg, varieties of crawling peg, currency boards, and even dollarization. The success has been mixed. Where successful, they have been backed by sound policies. Even dollarization, or its equivalent in other key currencies, is not a source of stability if underlying policies are unsound. It is questionable whether a sovereign nation, otherwise inclined to economic policies that are "off the wagon," can force itself into "sobriety" by dollarization. Dollarization, fully adhered to, eliminates the possibility of costless printing of money and restricts budget deficits to an economy's ability to borrow in dollars. While dollar currency circulating in such a country is credibly backed by the U.S. government, any domestic dollar deposits or other claims are subject to the whim of the domestic government that could with the stroke of a pen abolish their legal status. Hence, dollar deposits in such a political environment would tend to sell at a discount to dollar currency. Dollar interest rates in that economy could rise to debilitating levels, if fear of de-dollarization rose inordinately. Thus, there is no shortcut to sound fundamentals. If we are going to have a sophisticated high-tech international financial system, the lessons of recent years make it clear that all participants must follow the policies that make it possible. There is already under way a number of initiatives that, if effectively implemented, should significantly tighten international financial system discipline. These initiatives include: endeavors to promulgate standards of bank supervision on a global basis, initiatives to markedly increase transparency of central bank accounts, more prompt and detailed data on global lending, compliance with codes for fiscal transparency, plus moves toward ensuring sound corporate governance and accounting standards. Areas crucial to increased discipline, where consensus has yet to be reached, include appropriate bankruptcy and workout procedures for defaulting private sector entities, new arrangements for risk sharing between debtors and creditors, and ways to limit explicit and implicit government guarantees of private debt. Central banks that fall short of the "best practice" requirements to be full participants in the international financial system would doubtless be under exceptional pressure to improve. It is important to remember--when we contemplate the regulatory interface with the new international financial system--the system that is relevant is not solely the one we confront today. There is no evidence of which I am aware that suggests that the transition to the new advanced technology-based international financial system is now complete. Doubtless, tomorrow's complexities will dwarf even today's. It is, thus, all the more important to recognize that twenty-first century financial regulation is going to increasingly have to rely on private counterparty surveillance to achieve safety and soundness. There is no credible way to envision most government financial regulation being other than oversight of process. As the complexity of financial intermediation on a worldwide scale continues to increase, the conventional regulatory examination process will become progressively obsolescent--at least for the more complex banking systems. Overall, endeavors to stabilize the international financial system, and keep it that way, will require perseverance. Until the current crisis is resolved, transition support by the international financial community to emerging market economies in difficulty will, doubtless, be required. But in doing so we must remember that the major advances in technologically sophisticated financial products in recent years have imparted a discipline on market participants, excluding a few glaring exceptions, not seen in nearly a century. Hence, the international financial assistance provided must be carefully shaped not to undermine that discipline. As a consequence, any temporary financial assistance must be carefully tailored to be conditional and not encourage undue moral hazard. Finally, there is somewhat of a silver lining, if one can call it that, in the debilitating set of crises we have experienced in the past eighteen months. First, while over the longer run, it will be essential to have significantly improved systems to oversee lending and borrowing by financial intermediaries, and incentives to dissuade excess leverage in general, in the short run, there will be little need. If anything, lenders are likely to be overcautious. I remember at the onset of the American credit crunch of a decade ago, my joshing with one of my colleagues in bank supervision and regulation about his going on a long overdue vacation. I suggested he could safely sail around the world since there was very little chance of bad bank loans being made over the following year. (I was concerned, however, whether anyone would make any good loans either.) Secondly, some of the spectacular equity-driven American and European capital gains of the middle 1990s diversified as unproductive capital flows to some emerging market economies. Such capital flows, arguably a key factor in the crisis, are unlikely to be repeated in the near future. That both excesses have likely descended into hibernation is fortunate since the type of international financial restructuring that our new technologies require will take several years. Assuming we successfully resolve the current crisis, we will have time to restructure. I fear only that when available delay becomes evident, we will fall back into inaction, raising the stakes of the next crisis.
Remarks by Governor Edward M. Gramlich At Widener University, Chester, Pennsylvania November 6, 1998 Footnotes Press release on the availability of 1997 Reinvestment Act data, Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC), August 24, 1998. Memorandum, Robert Avery and others to the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August 21, 1997. George J. Benston, "Discrimination in Mortgage Lending: Why HMDA and CRA Should be Repealed," Journal of Retail Banking Services, vol. 19 (Autumn 1997), pp. 47-57. Helen F. Ladd, "Evidence on Discrimination in Mortgage Lending, Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 12 (Spring 1998), pp. 41-62. Raphael W. Bostic, "The Role of Race in Mortage Lending: Revisiting the Boston Fed Study," Finance and Economic Discussion Series 1997-2 (Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Divisions of Research and Statistics and Monetary Affairs, January 1997). Press release on availability of data on 1997 mortgage lending activity, FFIEC, August 6, 1998. Ladd, 1998. Michael LaCour-Little, "Does the CRA Make Mortgage Credit More Widely Available? Some New Evidence Based on the Performance of CRA Mortgage Credits" (unpublished paper, Citicorp Mortgage, Inc., May 4, 1998). Consumer Bankers Association, Affordable Mortgage Program: An Analysis of the July 1995 Survey (1995). Larry Meeker and Forest Myers, "Community Reinvestment Act Lending: Is it Profitable?" Journal of Financial Industry Perspectives (December 1996), pp. 13-35. Alex Schwartz, "Bank Lending to Minority and Low-Income Households and Neighborhoods: Do Community Reinvestment Agreements Make a Difference? Journal of Urban Affairs, vol. 20 (1998), pp. 269-301.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the applications of CFBanc Holdings, Inc., and CFBanc Corporation to become bank holding companies by acquiring control of City First Bank of D.C., all in Washington, D.C. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. CFBanc Holdings, Inc. Washington, D.C. CFBanc Corporation Washington, D.C. Order Approving Formation of Bank Holding Companies and Acquisition of a Bank CFBanc Holdings, Inc. ("Holdings") and CFBanc Corporation ("Corporation") have requested the Board's approval under section 3(a)(1) of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act") (12 U.S.C. § 1842(a)(1)) to become bank holding companies by acquiring control of more than 25 percent of the voting shares of City First Bank of D.C., Washington, D.C. ("Bank"), a de novo national bank that will operate with a community development focus. Corporation would acquire all of the voting shares of Bank, and Holdings, a nonstock, nonprofit corporation organized under the laws of the District of Columbia, would acquire approximately 48 percent of the voting shares of Corporation. Notice of the applications, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (63 Federal Register 29,996 (1998)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the applications and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 3 of the BHC Act. Holdings and Corporation are nonoperating corporations formed for the purpose of acquiring control of Bank, a de novo institution. The Board previously has noted that the establishment of a de novo bank enhances competition in the relevant banking market and is a positive consideration in an application under section 3 of the BHC Act. Accordingly, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposal would not have a significantly adverse effect on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in any relevant banking market and that competitive considerations are consistent with approval. In light of all the facts of record, the Board also concludes that the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of Holdings, Corporation, and Bank, and the other supervisory factors that the Board is required to consider under section 3 of the BHC Act are consistent with approval of the proposal. Bank intends to operate with a community development focus and to seek to increase the availability of credit, capital, and financial services in low- and moderate-income neighborhoods and to low- and moderate-income individuals in the District of Columbia. Bank intends to serve the identified credit and banking needs of low- and moderate-income areas in the District of Columbia by offering a range of commercial, real estate, and consumer loans, as well as checking, savings, and other traditional deposit products. In light of Bank's objectives and all other facts of record, the Board concludes that convenience and needs are consistent with approval of the proposal. Based on the foregoing and all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the applications should be, and hereby are, approved. The Board's approval is expressly conditioned on compliance by all relevant parties with the commitments made in connection with the applications. For purposes of this action, the commitments and conditions relied on by the Board in reaching this decision are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision, and as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The transaction shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day following the effective date of this order, or later than three months following the effective date of this order, unless such periods are extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective November 9, 1998. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Footnotes Bank would engage primarily in lending and other activities designed to promote the welfare of low- and moderate-income neighborhoods and individuals in the District of Columbia. Georgetown University and the National Community Investment Fund ("NCIF"), a community development fund sponsored by Shorebank Corporation, Chicago, Illinois ("Shorebank"), propose to make investments in Corporation. Georgetown University, NCIF, and Shorebank have made a number of commitments, including commitments that the Board has relied on in previous cases, to limit the ability of these companies to exercise a controlling influence over Corporation or Bank. Based on these commitments, the fact that Holdings (which is a company independent of the other investors in Corporation) will control nearly 50 percent of the voting shares of Corporation, the purpose and nature of the activities of Bank, and all the other facts of record, the Board concludes that the facts do not warrant a conclusion at this time that Georgetown, NCIF, or Shorebank would control Corporation or Bank for purposes of the BHC Act. The Board expressly retains its authority to initiate a control proceeding if the facts presented at a later date indicate that any such entity in fact controls Corporation or Bank for purposes of the BHC Act. The Federal National Mortgage Association ("Fannie Mae") proposes to acquire up to 4.9 percent of the voting shares and up to 9.9 percent of the total equity of Corporation. Section 18(s) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act ("FDI Act") prohibits depository institutions from being an affiliate of, sponsored by, or accepting financial support directly or indirectly from Fannie Mae or any other Government-sponsored enterprise. 12 U.S.C. § 1828(s)(1). Section 18(s)(3), however, permits a Government-sponsored enterprise to provide financial assistance to a depository institution as permitted by the statutes governing the enterprise. See id. at § 1828(s)(3). In this case, Fannie Mae has not sponsored and would not be an affiliate of Bank. Fannie Mae also asserts that its purchase of Corporation stock is permissible under section 18(s)(3) of the FDI Act because the proposed investment is authorized under, and consistent with, the purposes of the Fannie Mae Charter Act. See 12 U.S.C. § § 1716, 1723a(a); 62 Federal Register 68,060 (1997). Fannie Mae's purchase of a noncontrolling interest in Corporation would increase the resources of Bank available for residential mortgage financing and, thus, appears consistent with the purposes of the Charter Act. See id. at § 1716. The Board notes, moreover, that Bank intends to focus its lending efforts on low- and moderate-income areas, and that Federal law encourages Fannie Mae to assist primary lenders to make housing credit available in areas with concentrations of low-income and minority families. See id. at § 4565(a). In light of all the facts of record, and after consulting with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Board concludes that Fannie Mae's proposed investment in Corporation is permitted under section 18(s)(3) of the FDI Act. See Wilson Bank Holding Company, 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 568 (1996). Voting for this action: Vice Chair Rivlin and Governors Kelley, Meyer, Ferguson, and Gramlich. Absent and not voting: Chairman Greenspan.
Remarks by Governor Laurence H. Meyer Before the Financial Institutions Practice Group, The Federalist Society, Washington, D.C. November 12, 1998 Modernizing Financial Services Regulation It is very important that we modernize our banking laws. Technology has hastened the evolution--some would say has started a revolution--in our financial markets. The distinction between financial products is blurring, as financial institutions have broadened the activities they engage in to take advantage of opportunities created by new technology and the synergies among financial activities and to compete with other financial institutions. In the United States, these market developments are occurring within a legal framework that was largely established in a different era. Indeed, much of our legal framework has remained essentially unchanged since the 1930s. As a result, there is broad consensus that our banking laws need to be updated to reflect significant market changes. However, as opposed to being on the fast track, I believe we can all agree that, in the United States, reform of our legal framework for banking regulation and supervision has been on the slow track. The result has been a relentless search for loopholes by financial institutions and efforts by regulatory authorities to find ways within their charter to permit new activities in order to preserve the competitiveness of the institutions under their charge. This process is not only inefficient, but creates new inequities, institutions that may be producing unintended risks, and the misallocation of resources. That is why my colleagues and I are such strong supporters of H.R. 10, the Financial Services Act of 1998, which the House passed and the Senate Banking Committee approved in modified form. H.R. 10 would bring our financial institutions into the 21st century by creating a framework that minimizes risks and inequities. The task it sets for itself is not easy. First and foremost the bill would finally let banks affiliate with a full range of financial organizations and thus widen the scope and range over which these organizations can compete for the public's business. Mind you, this is not a statement that says financial supermarkets and/or larger institutions will be better or more successful than specialized and/or smaller institutions. But the benefit is that the public, not regulators, will decide which will prosper as competitors all bend their efforts to serve the consumer. That is the bottom line. It's the reason why there should be financial modernization. But the bill also establishes a structure of bank supervision that is consistent both with efficient resource allocation and with minimizing risk to the stability of the economy and the taxpayer. The key elements to that structure are a blending of functional regulation and umbrella supervision, focus on the holding company framework for permitting new activities, and limitations on mixing banking and commerce. Holding Company Framework Both the House and Senate bills would require that organizations that conduct banking and other financial businesses organize in a holding company form where the bank and the other activities are subsidiaries of the holding company. Profits and losses of the business lines accrue to the holding company and thus do not directly benefit nor endanger the bank, the federal safety net, or the taxpayer. The safety net subsidy--which I will describe in a minute--is not directly available to the holding company or its nondepository affiliates and competition is thus more balanced. Moreover, traditional regulators like the SEC and the state insurance commissioners still regulate the entities engaged in nonbank activities as if they were independent firms. In principle, functional regulation could also be applied to operating subsidiaries of banks, but, as I will discuss in a moment, the safety net would soon create regulatory conflict with that structure. The House agreed in an overwhelming vote that new activities and affiliations should not take place through subsidiaries of banks (so-called, "operating subsidiaries" or "op subs"). The Senate seems in agreement with the House on this issue. The sponsor of an operating subsidiary amendment in the Senate Banking Committee withdrew a proposed amendment because of lack of support in that Committee. The reasons for preferring the holding company framework to the universal bank approach represented by op sub proposals are numerous and relate to our national policies that provide a safety net for depository institutions. Banks have a lower cost of funds than other financial entities because of the safety net. This federal safety net, and the subsidy that goes along with it, is provided by the government in order to buy systemic stability. But it has a cost: increased risk taking by banks, reduced market discipline, and consequently the need for more onerous bank supervision in order to balance the resultant moral hazard. The last thing we should want is to extend that subsidy over a wider range of activities, which is, I believe, exactly what would happen if bank op subs could engage in wider nonbank financial activities. Not only would that increase moral hazard--and need for bank-like supervision--but it would also unbalance the competitive playing field between bank subs and independent firms engaging in the same business, a strange result for legislation whose ultimate purpose is to increase competition for financial services. Because of these concerns, both the House and the Senate versions of H.R. 10 would permit banks to conduct in their own subsidiaries the same activities that they may already conduct in the bank, and would expand those activities to include financial agency activities. This expansion is appropriate because, by their nature, financial agency activities require minimal funding and create minimal risk. The H.R. 10 approach, it seems to me, strikes a reasonable balance between expanding the activities of banks while at the same time preserving the integrity of the federal safety net and ensuring a level competitive playing field for independent competitors. Functional Regulation It is important that expanded activities occur in a framework that maintains the safety and soundness of our financial system, and the banking system in particular, without imposing unnecessary regulatory burden or intrusion. Strong functional regulation and meaningful--but not bank-like--umbrella oversight of financial holding companies can serve that purpose. Functional regulation is important because it makes good use of the special expertise and regulatory schemes that have developed to address the unique types of risks and conflicts presented by different activities. At the same time, the financial supervisors around the world have agreed on the need for an umbrella supervisor that can monitor the cross-industry and cross-border risks taken by global financial conglomerates and that can help coordinate the specialized supervision of functional regulators around the world. There was some controversy in the United States about the need for an umbrella supervisor in past debates about modernizing our financial laws. But, as represented by H.R. 10, both the full House and the Senate Banking Committee have agreed that meaningful umbrella supervision is needed. The role of the umbrella supervisor under H.R. 10 would be to assure that some agency has a complete view of, and accountability for, financial holding companies and is able to serve a facilitating role in relationships among functional regulators. The Board is already the umbrella supervisor for companies that own banks. H.R. 10 would preserve that role, with some modifications to reflect the strong role of functional regulators in supervising, in particular, securities firms and insurance companies, which we all know are already subject to detailed rules and supervision. The Board believes that the modifications to our authority as umbrella supervisor contained in H.R. 10 are reasonable and do not compromise our ability to monitor and address the safety and soundness of the holding company organization. The modifications reduce overlapping examinations and the potential for conflicting capital requirements, and they enhance the coordination between the Board and various functional regulators. This approach lets the SEC, the state insurance regulators, the federal and state banking agencies and the Board each do their job in a coordinated fashion, making the most of the expertise of each. In fact, we have been experimenting with this approach in connection with our supervision of so-called section 20 affiliates--subsidiaries of holding companies that engage in securities underwriting and dealing activities. Importantly, section 20 affiliates are subject to only one set of capital rules--those established by the SEC. We also rely on the SEC to examine section 20 affiliates for compliance with the securities laws and rely heavily on the focus reports and other reports filed by section 20 affiliates with the SEC. We limit our examination of section 20 affiliates to reviewing systems designed to assure compliance with the Board's revenue test and operating standards and the federal banking laws. We also coordinate our examinations with the SEC, and have entered into an agreement with the NASD under which we refer potential securities laws problems to them for review and correction and they refer banking law matters to us for review. This approach has been working well and has reduced regulatory overlap without, we believe, limiting in any meaningful way our ability to monitor and address safety and soundness issues at the section 20 affiliate. The holding company framework is a better vehicle for capitalizing on the strengths of functional regulation. The added insulation of the holding company, the less direct connection between the bank and its affiliates, and the fact that losses in an affiliate do not flow through the holding company to the bank in the same manner that they do for direct subsidiaries of banks allow for an umbrella supervisor that relies on and complements the strengths of functional regulation without imposing the costs and inefficiencies of excessive regulation. CRA As you know, there were many perils in the ultimately unsuccessful effort to navigate H.R. 10 through Congress. However, along the way important compromises were struck to address concerns of the banking, securities, and insurance industries, as well as the SEC, state insurance supervisors, the Board, the Treasury and consumer advocates. At the end of the Congressional session, though, H.R. 10 foundered on an unexpected shoal: CRA. H.R. 10 was drafted to allow broader affiliations only by financial holding companies whose subsidiary depository institutions all achieve and maintain at least a satisfactory CRA rating. Under current law, CRA performance is an important part of the review of all proposals to expand banks, whether by branching, merger or acquisition. However, currently, CRA by its terms does not apply to nonbanking proposals. The argument that held up H.R. 10 was that it represented an expansion of CRA because it allowed the Board to take enforcement actions against organizations that opted for new powers but failed to maintain satisfactory CRA ratings at all of their depository institutions. In particular, there was concern that the Board could require these organizations to stop their new financial activities or terminate their broad financial affiliations based on CRA performance. As a practical matter, it seems inconceivable that a financial organization that has determined to engage in broad financial affiliations would let its CRA rating slip below the satisfactory level. Even under current law, organizations that have unsatisfactory CRA ratings have not generally been permitted to open new branches or acquire additional banks. Plus, CRA ratings are public, and unsatisfactory CRA ratings draw significant adverse publicity to the organization. As a result, there are already strong incentives for banks to achieve and maintain satisfactory CRA ratings. In fact, many banking organizations that are expansion minded have set as their goal achieving an outstanding CRA rating. I think that explains why the banking organizations that are most interested in H.R. 10 were not concerned about the CRA provisions of H.R. 10. They already live in practice by the regime that H.R. 10 proposed to put in place. Clearly there are strongly held views on both sides of this issue. Hopefully, Congress will revisit and resolve concerns about the CRA provisions early in the new session and thus enable the passage of H.R. 10. Banking and Commerce Importantly, both the House and the Senate version of H.R. 10 would prohibit commercial affiliations with banks. There is no doubt that it is becoming increasingly difficult to draw a bright line that separates financial services from nonfinancial businesses; it will only become more difficult to do so. But, the truth is that we are not sure enough of the implications of combining banking and commerce--potential conflicts of interest, concentration of power, and safety net and stability concerns--to move forward in this area. The events in Asia during the past few months have highlighted the potential risks of allowing banks to become closely affiliated with commercial enterprises. These types of connections have the potential to restrict the free flow of credit and to create conflicts of interest and tensions as banks consider whether to extend credit to an affiliate or a competitor of an affiliate. While these conflicts exist any time a bank is permitted to affiliate with anyone, the potential dangers to a healthy economy broaden as affiliations are allowed to broaden to include commercial and industrial enterprises. Because of these potential risks, it is better, I think, to digest financial reform before considering whether to allow commercial affiliations that will be very difficult to reverse if problems arise. Conclusion Only Congress has the ability to fix the over-arching framework of our financial laws in a way that is fair to all of the industry players and protects the taxpayer. The difficulties over the past year in reaching the compromises in H.R. 10 show that this is not an easy task. Congress missed an historic opportunity to enact H.R. 10 last month. It did so once before in another banking area--interstate banking. Hopefully, Congress will do as it did there, and quickly enact legislation upon its return.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice of Bank One Corporation, Chicago, Illinois, to acquire 50 percent of the voting interest in EquiServe Limited Partnership, a Delaware limited partnership, and thereby perform functions or activities that may be performed by a trust company. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Bank One Corporation Chicago, Illinois Order Approving Investment in a Company that Performs Trust Company Activities Bank One Corporation ("Bank One"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8)) and section 225.24 of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.24) to acquire 50 percent of the voting interests in EquiServe Limited Partnership ("EquiServe"), a Delaware limited partnership, and thereby perform functions or activities that may be performed by a trust company. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (63 Federal Register 23,044 (1998)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the proposal and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 4 of the BHC Act. Bank One, with total consolidated assets of approximately $231.7 billion, is the fifth largest commercial banking organization in the United States. Bank One controls subsidiary banks that operate in 14 states, and engages in a broad range of nonbanking activities. After consummation of this proposal, EquiServe would offer shareholder services nationwide. These shareholder services would include maintenance of records of shareholders in publicly traded companies and related services, such as acting as dividend disbursement and reinvestment agent, registrar, transfer agent, redemption agent, rights agent, exchange agent, tender agent, and reorganization agent; proxy mailing and tabulation; and annual and interim report distribution. The Board previously has determined by regulation that the performance of functions or activities, such as shareholder servicing, that may be performed by a trust company is closely related to banking and permissible for bank holding companies under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Bank One has committed to conduct these activities subject to the limitations set forth in Regulation Y. In order to approve the proposal, the Board also must find that the performance of the proposed activities by Bank One "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public . . . that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices." As a part of its evaluation of these factors, the Board considers the financial condition and managerial resources of the notificant and its subsidiaries and the effect the transaction would have on such resources. On the basis of all the facts of record, including relevant reports of examination and consultation with other relevant federal and state supervisory agencies, the Board has concluded that financial and managerial considerations are consistent with approval of the notice. The Board also has carefully considered the competitive effects of the proposed joint venture. Both FCTC and Boston EquiServe currently engage in the activities to be conducted by the joint venture, EquiServe. On consummation of this proposal, EquiServe would become the largest shareholder servicing operation in the United States, serving approximately 1400 companies. The Board notes that the market for shareholder services is a national market, which is currently moderately concentrated. FCTC is the second largest shareholder servicing operation in the United States, managing approximately 12.1 million shareholder accounts, representing approximately 17.2 percent of total accounts in the United States. Boston EquiServe is the third largest shareholder servicing operation in the United States, managing approximately 11.5 million shareholder accounts, representing approximately 16.3 percent of total accounts in the United States. On consummation of this proposal, EquiServe would become the largest shareholder servicing operation in the United States, managing approximately 23.6 million accounts, representing approximately 33.5 percent of total accounts in the United States. The structure of the market for shareholder services mitigates the adverse effects of this proposal. Many companies choose to be self-providers of shareholder services. Thus, the market indexes tend to overstate the relative market share controlled by specialized providers, such as Boston EquiServe and FCTC. Moreover, the decision by several large companies that currently are self-providers to outsource the function could significantly change the market share of a successful bidder for that business. In addition, there are numerous potential entrants into this market. Currently, more than 200 firms specialize in providing shareholder services to groups of affiliated investment companies. Although only a few firms provide shareholder services to industrial or financial companies and to investment company groups, many of the activities and organizational features of the types of firms that provide shareholder services to investment company groups are similar to those activities of firms providing these services to industrial or financial companies. The investment company shareholder servicers appear to be fully capable of entering the commercial services industry with little difficulty. Many investment company shareholder servicers possess the technology, workforce, and experience that would enable them to manage the volume of transactions currently processed by commercial providers. Based on these and other facts of record, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposed transaction would not have a significantly adverse effect on competition in any relevant market. The Board concludes that the proposed transaction would increase the ability of EquiServe to serve the needs of its customers and would allow the joint venture to provide existing and new customers with a broader range of products and services at lower costs. The Board also expects that combining the expertise and technology of FCTC and Boston EquiServe would enable EquiServe to become a more effective competitor in the market. Based on the foregoing and all the other facts of record, including the commitments and representations made by Bank One, the Board has determined that the performance of the proposed activity by the joint venture can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public that would outweigh any possible adverse effects under the proper incident to banking standard of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. On the basis of all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the notice should be, and hereby is, approved. This determination is subject to all the conditions set forth in the Board's Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.25(c) (12 C.F.R. 225.7 and 225.25(c)) and to the Board's authority to require modification or termination of the activities of a bank holding company or any of its subsidiaries as the Board finds necessary to assure compliance with, or to prevent evasion of, the provisions and purposes of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders issued thereunder. The Board's approval of the proposal is specifically conditioned on compliance with all the commitments made in connection with this notice. The commitments, representations and conditions relied on in reaching this decision shall be deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. This transaction shall not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective November 16, 1998. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Footnotes Bank One would acquire an interest in EquiServe in exchange for contributing to the joint venture substantially all the assets of the shareholder services business conducted by its wholly owned subsidiary, First Chicago Trust Company of New York ("FCTC"). The remaining voting interests in EquiServe are held by Boston EquiServe Limited Partnership, Canton, Massachusetts ("Boston EquiServe"), a joint venture between BankBoston, N.A. and Boston Financial Data Services, Inc. ("BFDS"). BFDS is owned by State Street Corporation and DST Systems, Inc. ("DST"). See 12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(5). See 12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8). See 12 C.F.R. 225.26. Approximately 115 firms in the United States provide shareholder services commercially to companies issuing equity. These commercial shareholder services providers compete throughout the United States, and the Board previously has determined that the geographic market for this industry is national in scope. See Chemical Banking Corporation, 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 239, 270 (1996). The Board's analysis omits self-providers from the competitive analysis. As of December 31, 1997, an estimated 425 firms were providing their own shareholder servicing. These firms included some of the largest companies in the United States. The ability and willingness of many firms to provide their own shareholder servicing has contributed to strong price competition in the industry. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Meyer, Ferguson, and Gramlich.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notification of PNC Bank Corp., Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, to engage in underwriting and dealing, to a limited extent, in all types of debt and equity securities through its subsidiary, PNC Capital Markets, Inc., Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. PNC Bank Corp. Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania Order Approving Notice to Engage in Underwriting and Dealing in All Types of Debt and Equity Securities on a Limited Basis PNC Bank Corp. ("PNC"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8)) and section 225.24 of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.24) to expand the activities of its section 20 subsidiary, PNC Capital Markets, Inc., Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania ("Company"), to include underwriting and dealing in, to a limited extent, all types of debt and equity securities except ownership interests in open-end investment companies. PNC seeks approval for Company to conduct the proposed underwriting and dealing activities worldwide. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (63 Federal Register 50,914 (1998)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the notice and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. PNC, with total consolidated assets of approximately $75.9 billion, is the 14th largest banking organization in the United States. PNC's subsidiary depository institutions operate in nine states, and PNC engages through other subsidiaries in a broad range of permissible nonbanking activities. Company currently engages in limited underwriting and dealing in certain types of bank-ineligible securities as permitted under section 20 of the Glass-Steagall Act (12 U.S.C. § 377). Company is, and will continue to be, registered as a broker-dealer with the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. § 78a et seq. ) and is a member of the National Association of Securities Dealers, Inc. ("NASD"). Company, therefore, is subject to the record-keeping and reporting obligations, fiduciary standards, and other requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the SEC, and the NASD. Underwriting and Dealing in Bank-Ineligible Securities The Board has determined that, subject to the framework of prudential limitations established in previous decisions to address the potential for conflicts of interests, unsound banking practices, or other adverse effects, underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities is so closely related to banking as to be a proper incident thereto within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. The Board also has determined that underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities is consistent with section 20 of the Glass-Steagall Act (12 U.S.C. § 377), provided that the company engaged in the activity derives no more than 25 percent of its gross revenues from underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities. PNC has committed that Company will conduct its underwriting and dealing activities using the methods and procedures and subject to the prudential limitations established by the Board in the Section 20 Orders. PNC also has committed that Company will conduct its bank-ineligible securities underwriting and dealing activities subject to the Board's revenue restriction. As a condition of this order, PNC is required to conduct its bank-ineligible securities activities subject to the revenue restriction and Operating Standards established for section 20 subsidiaries. Other Considerations In order to approve this notice, the Board also must determine that performance of the proposed activities is a proper incident to banking, that is, the proposed activities "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public, such as greater convenience, increased competition, or gains in efficiency, that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices." The Board expects that consummation of the proposal would provide added convenience to PNC's customers, lead to improved methods of meeting customers' financing needs, increase the level of competition among existing providers of these services, and improve the operating efficiency of Company. As part of its review of the statutory factors, the Board considers the financial and managerial resources of the notificant and its subsidiaries and the effect the transaction would have on such resources. In considering the financial resources of the notificant, the Board has reviewed the capitalization of PNC and Company in accordance with the standards set forth in the Section 20 Orders and finds the capitalization of each to be consistent with approval. This determination is based on all the facts of record, including PNC's projections of the volume of Company's underwriting and dealing activities in bank-ineligible securities. The Board also has reviewed the managerial resources of each of the entities involved in this proposal in light of examination reports and other supervisory information. PNC requested that the Board perform a debt-only infrastructure review of Company and stated that it later would request that the Board perform an equity infrastructure review of Company. In connection with the proposal, the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland ("Reserve Bank") has reviewed the policies and procedures of Company for underwriting and dealing in all types of debt securities, including Company's operational and managerial infrastructure, computer, audit, and accounting systems and internal risk management procedures and controls. The Board has determined on the basis of the infrastructure review that Company has established policies and procedures to ensure compliance with this order and the Section 20 Orders for underwriting and dealing in debt securities. As discussed below, a satisfactory infrastructure review of Company related to underwriting and dealing in all types of equity securities must be completed before Company may engage in these activities. On the basis of the Reserve Bank's review of Company's debt underwriting and dealing policies and procedures and all other facts of record, including the commitments provided in this case and the proposed managerial and risk management systems of Company, and subject to the completion of a satisfactory infrastructure review of Company related to underwriting and dealing in all types of equity securities, the Board has concluded that financial and managerial considerations are consistent with approval of the notice. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that performance of the proposed activities by PNC, under the framework established in this and prior decisions, can reasonably be expected to produce public benefits that outweigh any adverse effects of the proposal. Accordingly, the Board has determined that the performance of the proposed activities by PNC is a proper incident to banking for purposes of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Conclusion On the basis of all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the notice should be, and hereby is, approved, subject to all the terms and conditions described in this order. The Board's approval of the proposal extends only to activities conducted within the limitations of this order, including the Board's reservation of authority to establish additional limitations to ensure that Company's activities are consistent with safety and soundness, avoidance of conflicts of interests, and other relevant considerations under the BHC Act. Underwriting and dealing in any manner other than as approved in this order is not within the scope of the Board's approval and is not authorized for Company. Company may commence underwriting and dealing in all types of debt securities immediately. The Board's approval of the proposed underwriting and dealing in all types of equity securities, however, is conditioned on a future determination by the Board that Company has established policies and procedures for equity underwriting and dealing to ensure compliance with the requirements of this order, the Section 20 Orders, and the Modification Orders, including Company's operational and managerial infrastructure, computer, audit, and accounting systems and internal risk management procedures and controls. After notification by the Board that this condition has been satisfied, Company may commence the proposed equity underwriting and dealing activities, subject to the other conditions of this order, the Section 20 Orders, and the Modification Orders. The Board's determination also is subject to all the terms and conditions set forth in Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.25(c) (12 C.F.R. 225.7 and 225.25(c)), and to the Board's authority to require modification or termination of the activities of a bank holding company or any of its subsidiaries as the Board finds necessary to ensure compliance with, or to prevent evasion of, the provisions and purposes of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders issued thereunder. The Board's decision is specifically conditioned on compliance with all the commitments made in connection with this notice, including the commitments discussed in this order and the conditions set forth in this order and the Board regulations and orders noted above. The commitments and conditions are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. This proposal shall not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or the Reserve Bank, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective November 16, 1998. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Footnotes Asset and ranking data are as of June 30, 1998. As used in this order, "bank-ineligible securities" refers to all types of debt and equity securities that a bank may not underwrite or deal in directly under section 16 of the Glass-Steagall Act (12 U.S.C. § 24(7)). Company has authority to underwrite and deal in, to a limited extent, certain municipal revenue bonds, 1-4 family mortgage-related securities, commercial paper, and consumer-receivable-related securities. See PNC Financial Corp., 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 742 (1987), and PNC Financial Corp., 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 396 (1989). Company also is authorized to engage in a variety of other nonbanking activities. See J.P. Morgan & Co. Inc., et al., 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 192 (1989), aff'd sub nom. Securities Industry Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 900 F.2d 360 (D.C. Cir. 1990); Citicorp, 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 473 (1987), aff'd sub nom. Securities Industry Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 839 F.2d 47 (2d Cir.), cert. denied, 486 U.S. 1059 (1988), as modified by Review of Restrictions on Director, Officer and Employee Interlocks, Cross-Marketing Activities, and the Purchase and Sale of Financial Assets Between a Section 20 Subsidiary and an Affiliated Bank or Thrift, 61 Federal Register 57,679 (1996); Amendments to Restrictions in the Board's Section 20 Orders, 62 Federal Register 45,295 (1997); and Clarification to the Board's Section 20 Orders, 63 Federal Register 14,803 (1998) (collectively, "Section 20 Orders"). See Section 20 Orders. Compliance with the revenue limitation shall be calculated in accordance with the method stated in the Section 20 Orders, as modified by the Order Approving Modifications to the Section 20 Orders, 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 751 (1989); 10 Percent Revenue Limit on Bank-Ineligible Activities of Subsidiaries of Bank Holding Companies Engaged in Underwriting and Dealing in Securities, 61 Federal Register 48,953 (1996); and Revenue Limit on Bank-Ineligible Activities of Subsidiaries of Bank Holding Companies Engaged in Underwriting and Dealing in Securities, 61 Federal Register 68,750 (1996) (collectively, "Modification Orders"). 12 C.F.R. 225.200. Company may provide services that are necessary incidents to the proposed underwriting and dealing activities. Unless Company receives specific approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act to conduct the activities independently, any revenues from the incidental activities must be treated as ineligible revenues subject to the Board's revenue limitation. 12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8). See 12 C.F.R. 225.26. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Meyer, Ferguson, and Gramlich.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the proposal of Popular, Inc, Banco Popular de Puerto Rico, Popular Transition Bank, all of Hato Rey, Puerto Rico, and Banco Popular, New York, New York, New York, to reorganize the banking operations of Popular, Inc., under two de novo banks that would become members of the Federal Reserve System; to establish a branch and an agency in the United States; and to establish three agreement corporations. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Popular, Inc. Hato Rey, Puerto Rico Banco Popular de Puerto Rico Hato Rey, Puerto Rico Popular Transition Bank Hato Rey, Puerto Rico Banco Popular, New York New York, New York Order Approving the Acquisition of Banks, Merger of Banks, Establishment of Branches and an Agency, and Membership in the Federal Reserve System Popular, Inc., Hato Rey, Puerto Rico ("Popular"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), and its subsidiaries propose to reorganize their holdings in a manner that requires the Board's approval under section 3 of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1842) and section 18(c) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. § 1828(c)) ("Bank Merger Act"). As part of this proposal, Popular would reorganize its banking operations under two de novo banks, one organized under the laws of Puerto Rico and the other organized under the laws of New York, that propose to become members of the Federal Reserve System pursuant to sections 9 and 19(h) of the Federal Reserve Act ("FRA") (12 U.S.C. § § 321 and 466). The Puerto Rican de novo bank, Popular Transition Bank, Hato Rey, Puerto Rico ("New Banco Popular"), also proposes to operate a branch and agency in the United States pursuant to section 7(d) of the International Banking Act ("IBA") (12 U.S.C. § 3105(d)), and to establish three agreement corporations pursuant to section 25 of the FRA. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (60 Federal Register 52,273 (1998)). As required by the Bank Merger Act, reports on the competitive effects of the merger were requested from the U.S. Attorney General, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency ("OCC"), and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the applications and notices and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in the Bank Merger Act, the BHC Act, the FRA, and the IBA. Popular, the top-tier parent holding company of Banco Popular de Puerto Rico, Hato Rey, Puerto Rico ("Banco Popular"), has total consolidated assets of approximately $20 billion and total consolidated deposits of approximately $12 billion. Banco Popular, with total consolidated assets of approximately $16 billion, is the largest commercial banking organization in Puerto Rico, controlling total consolidated deposits of approximately $8 billion, representing approximately 35 percent of total deposits in Puerto Rico. Banco Popular has approximately 200 branches in Puerto Rico, as well as branches in the U.S. Virgin Islands and the British Virgin Islands. Banco Popular's U.S. banking operations include branches in New York State and an agency in Chicago, Illinois (the "Chicago Agency"). In addition to Banco Popular, Popular controls nine insured depository institutions in California, Florida, Illinois, New Jersey, and Texas. As part of the reorganization, Popular proposes to merge certain of its current U.S. banking operations into a single state-chartered bank, Banco Popular, New York ("Banco Popular-New York"). Popular also proposes to transfer Banco Popular's current operations in Puerto Rico, the U.S. Virgin Islands and the British Virgin Islands, and a proposed state-licensed branch in New York, New York (the "New NY Branch"), and the Chicago Agency (collectively, the "Purchased Operations"), to New Banco Popular. Both Banco Popular-New York and New Banco Popular have requested approval to become members of the Federal Reserve System. Interstate Analysis Under the proposal, Banco Popular-New York would operate branches in its home state of New York and in California, Florida, Illinois, and New Jersey at locations where the bank's predecessors currently operate branches. Under section 9 of the FRA and section 44 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act ("FDI Act"), a state member bank may acquire and operate branches outside the bank's home state provided certain conditions are met. None of the home states of the depository institutions involved in the proposed depository institution mergers have enacted laws that prohibit the proposed mergers. In addition, the Board has determined that each bank involved in the proposal would be adequately capitalized and adequately managed on consummation of the transaction, and that all other applicable conditions of section 9 of the FRA and section 44 of the FDI Act are met by this proposal. Popular has notified the relevant state authorities in New York, California, Florida, Illinois, and New Jersey of its proposal to consolidate banking operations and provided a copy of its Bank Merger Act application to all the relevant state agencies. Representatives from all the states involved in the proposal have indicated that this transaction would comply with their state laws on interstate bank mergers. In light of the foregoing, it appears that the proposal complies with the interstate banking requirements of section 9 of the FRA and section 44 of the FDI Act. Under section 5(a)(7) of the IBA, a foreign bank, with the approval of the Board, may establish an agency outside its home state, provided the establishment and operation of the agency is expressly permitted by the state in which the agency is to be established. For purposes of the IBA, New Banco Popular's home state would be New York, and New Banco Popular proposes to operate the Chicago Agency as an agency of the bank. After a review of section 5 of the IBA and the relevant state law of Illinois, the Board has determined that New Banco Popular may operate the Chicago Agency at this location, subject to the condition that New Banco Popular also receive the approval of the OCC. Other Factors In reviewing this proposal under the FRA, the Bank Merger Act and section 3 of the BHC Act, the Board has considered the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the companies and banks involved, the convenience and needs of the communities to be served, and certain supervisory factors. The Board has reviewed these factors in light of the facts of record, including supervisory reports of examination assessing the financial and managerial resources of the organizations and financial information provided by Popular. The Board notes that the resulting institutions would be well-capitalized on consummation of the proposal. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the holding companies and their subsidiaries are consistent with approval, as are the other supervisory factors the Board must consider under the FRA, the Bank Merger Act and section 3 of the BHC Act. In considering the convenience and needs factor, the Board reviewed the records of the relevant depository institutions under the Community Reinvestment Act ("CRA"). As provided in the CRA, the Board has evaluated this factor in light of examinations by the primary federal supervisors of the relevant institutions. All the insured depository institutions controlled by Popular received "outstanding" or "satisfactory" CRA performance ratings in their most recent CRA examinations by their primary federal supervisors. Based on a review of the entire record, the Board concludes that convenience and needs considerations, including the CRA performance records of the institutions involved, are consistent with approval of the proposal. The Board also considered the competitive effects of the proposal as required by the Bank Merger Act and section 3 of the BHC Act. Based on all the facts of record, including the fact that this transaction is a corporate reorganization, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposal would not have a significantly adverse effect on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in any relevant banking market. Accordingly, the Board concludes that competitive considerations are consistent with approval. In addition, the Board has considered the factors it is required to evaluate under the IBA for New Banco Popular to operate the Chicago Agency and the New NY Branch. New Banco Popular would engage directly in the business of banking outside the United States through its banking operations in Puerto Rico and elsewhere. Popular has provided the Board with the information necessary to assess the application through submissions that address the relevant issues. In addition, New Banco Popular would be subject to comprehensive consolidated supervision by the appropriate federal and Puerto Rican bank supervisory agencies. The Board also has determined that the other standards required by the IBA are met in this case and that all factors under section 25 of the FRA are consistent with approval. Conclusion Based on the foregoing, including the commitments made to the Board by Popular and its subsidiaries in connection with these applications and notices, and in light of all the facts of record, the Board has determined that these applications and notices should be, and hereby are, approved. The Board's approval is specifically conditioned on compliance by the applicants with all commitments made in connection with these applications and notices and the conditions discussed in this order. The acquisition and merger of Popular's subsidiary banks shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day following the effective date of this order or later than three months following the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective November 16, 1998. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Appendix Applications and Notices Submitted to the Board in connection with the Reorganization of Popular, Inc. Membership of New Banco Popular in the Federal Reserve System under section 19(h) of the Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. § 466). Membership of Banco Popular-New York in the Federal Reserve System under section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. § 321). Acquisition by Popular and its intermediate holding companies of control of Banco Popular-New York under section 3(a)(3) of the Bank Holding Company Act (12 U.S.C. § 1842(a)(3)). Acquisition by Popular and its intermediate holding companies of control of New Banco Popular under section 3(a)(3) of the Bank Holding Company Act (12 U.S.C. § 1842(a)(3)). Retention of ownership by Popular and its intermediate holding companies, under section 3(a)(3) of the Bank Holding Company Act, of Banco Popular, F.S.B., after its conversion from a federal savings association to a national banking association (12 U.S.C. § 1842(a)(3)). Acquisition by Banco Popular North America, Inc. of control of Banco Popular, N.A. (Texas) under section 3(a)(3) of the Bank Holding Company Act (12 U.S.C. § 1842(a)(3)). Acquisition by New Banco Popular of the Purchased Operations from Banco Popular under the Bank Merger Act (12 U.S.C. § 1828(c)). Merger of Banco Popular (with only New York operations) with and into Banco Popular-New York under the Bank Merger Act (12 U.S.C. § 1828(c)). Merger of Banco Popular, F.S.B. (after its conversion to a national banking association) with and into Banco Popular-New York under the Bank Merger Act (12 U.S.C. § 1828(c)). Merger of Banco Popular, Illinois with and into Banco Popular-New York under the Bank Merger Act (12 U.S.C. § 1828(c)). Merger of Banco Popular, N.A. (California) with and into Banco Popular-New York under the Bank Merger Act (12 U.S.C. § 1828(c)). Merger of Banco Popular, N.A. (Florida) with and into Banco Popular-New York under the Bank Merger Act (12 U.S.C. § 1828(c)). Merger of First State Bank of Southern California with and into Banco Popular-New York under the Bank Merger Act (12 U.S.C. § 1828(c)). Merger of Bronson-Gore Bank with and into Banco Popular-New York under the Bank Merger Act (12 U.S.C. § 1828(c)). Merger of Irving Bank with and into Banco Popular-New York under the Bank Merger Act (12 U.S.C. § 1828(c)). Establishment of branches at the locations of the predecessor institutions of New Banco Popular and Banco Popular-New York under section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. § 321). Merger of Water Tower Bank with and into Banco Popular-New York under the Bank Merger Act (12 U.S.C. § 1828(c)). Establishment by New Banco Popular of an agency in Chicago, Illinois, under section 7(d) of the International Banking Act (12 U.S.C. § 3105(d)). Establishment by New Banco Popular of a branch in New York, New York, under section 7(d) of the International Banking Act (12 U.S.C. § 3105(d)). Redemption of capital stock and reduction of capital of Banco Popular under sections 9(6) and 9(11) of the Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. § § 324 and 329), resulting from a distribution to Popular consisting of all the outstanding shares of common stock of New Banco Popular. Reduction of capital of Banco Popular-New York, under sections 9(6) and 9(11) of the Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. § § 324 and 329), resulting from a dividend to Popular North America, Inc., consisting of all the outstanding shares of common stock of Equity One, Inc. Acquisition by New Banco Popular of all the outstanding shares of Popular Leasing & Rental, Inc., Popular Mortgage, Inc., and Popular Finance, Inc. as agreement corporations under section 211.4(f) of Regulation K (12 C.F.R. 211.4(f)). Establishment by Banco Popular-New York of an international banking facility under 12 C.F.R. 204.8(a)(1). Establishment by New Banco Popular of its first two branches in foreign countries, under section 25 of the Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. § 601) and section 211.3(a)(1) of Regulation K (12 C.F.R. 211.3(a)(1)). Footnotes For purposes of the application under the IBA, New Banco Popular is considered a "foreign bank" as defined in section 1(b)(7) of the IBA. See 12 U.S.C. § 3101(7). The applications filed with the Board in connection with the proposed reorganization are listed in the Notices of the various applications submitted in connection with the proposal were also published in newspapers of general circulation in the relevant communities. Asset and deposit data are as of June 30, 1998, unless otherwise noted. In September 1998, Popular received approval under the BHC Act to acquire First State Bank of Southern California, Sante Fe Springs, California, and Bronson-Gore Bancorp, and thereby acquire its subsidiary banks, Bronson-Gore Bank, Prospect Heights, Illinois; Irving Bank, Chicago, Illinois; and Water Tower Bank, Chicago, Illinois. Popular consummated these acquisitions on October 31, 1998. Banco Popular deposit data and ranking are as of June 30, 1997. New Banco Popular proposes to continue to operate branches in Puerto Rico at locations where Banco Popular currently operates branches. The following insured depository institutions would be merged into Banco Popular-New York: Banco Popular, N.A. (California), City of Commerce, California; First State Bank of Southern California, Santa Fe Springs, California; Banco Popular, N.A. (Florida), Sanford, Florida; Banco Popular, Illinois, Irving Bank, and Water Tower Bank, all of Chicago, Illinois; and Bronson-Gore Bank, Prospect Heights, Illinois. In addition, Popular proposes to merge Banco Popular, F.S.B., Newark, New Jersey ("BP-FSB"), into Banco Popular-New York through a series of steps that require approval under section 5(d)(3) of the FDI Act (12 U.S.C. § 1815(d)(3)). All the factors under section 5(d)(3) of the FDI Act are met in this proposal. See 12 U.S.C. § § 321 and 1831u. Section 9 of the FRA governs the locations where a bank that is or becomes a state member bank may establish and operate branches. That section incorporates the restrictions contained in section 44 of the FDI Act. Section 44 also governs branches that may be acquired by any state member bank in an interstate merger transaction. See Cal. Fin. Code § 3824 (West 1998); Fla. Stat. Ann. § 658.2953 (West 1998); 205 Ill. Comp. Stat. Ann. 5/21.1 (West 1998); and N.J. Stat. Ann. § 17:9A-133.1 (West 1998). See 12 U.S.C. § 1831u(b). All the conditions for an interstate acquisition enumerated in section 3(d) of the BHC Act also would be met in this case. See 12 U.S.C. § 3103(a)(7). 12 U.S.C. § 2901 et seq. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Meyer, Ferguson, and Gramlich.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of a Cease and Desist Order against the Frontier Bank of Laramie County, Cheyenne, Wyoming. The order, which includes provisions addressing Year 2000 readiness, was issued jointly with the Wyoming Department of Audit, Division of Banking. A copy of the Order is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of a Cease and Desist Order against William Shilstone, a former institution-affiliated party of the New York branch of Societe Generale, New York, New York. A copy of the Order is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today approved action by the Board of Directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco reducing the discount rate at that bank from 4-3/4 percent to 4-1/2 percent effective immediately.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today approved actions by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Richmond, Atlanta and Kansas City reducing the discount at those banks from 4-3/4 percent to 4-1/2 percent effective immediately. The Federal Reserve Board also today approved action by the Board of Directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis reducing the discount rate at that bank from 4-3/4 percent to 4-1/2 percent effective Thursday, November 19, 1998.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today approved actions by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland, Chicago and Minneapolis reducing the discount rate at those banks from 4-3/4 percent to 4-1/2 percent effective immediatly.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today its approval of the application of Credit Suisse, Zurich, Switzerland, to establish representative offices in Miami, Florida; New York, New York; and Houston, Texas. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Credit Suisse Zurich, Switzerland Order Approving Establishment of Representative Offices Credit Suisse, Zurich, Switzerland, a foreign bank within the meaning of the International Banking Act ("IBA") has applied under section 10(a) of the IBA (12 U.S.C. § 3107(a)) to establish representative offices in Miami, Florida; New York, New York; and Houston, Texas. The Foreign Bank Supervision Enhancement Act of 1991 ("FBSEA"), which amended the IBA, provides that a foreign bank must obtain the approval of the Board to establish a representative office in the United States. Notice of the application, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, was published on March 14, 1997, in a newspaper of general circulation in Houston (Houston Chronicle) , Miami (Miami Herald), and New York (New York Times). The time for filing comments has expired, and all comments have been considered. Credit Suisse, with total consolidated assets of approximately $89 billion, is part of the second largest banking group in Switzerland, and it engages in a wide range of banking activities worldwide directly and through subsidiaries. Credit Suisse Group, Zurich, Switzerland, a holding company that engages through subsidiaries in financial and nonfinancial activities worldwide, owns 99.9 percent of the shares of Credit Suisse. No single shareholder owns 5 percent or more of the shares of Credit Suisse Group. In the United States, Credit Suisse Group operates, through Credit Suisse First Boston ("CSFB"), Zurich, Switzerland, branches in New York, New York, and Los Angeles, California; and representative offices in San Francisco, California; Chicago, Illinois; and Houston, Texas. Credit Suisse and CSFB also engage in activities in the United States through several nonbanking subsidiaries. Credit Suisse proposes to establish the offices primarily to act as liaison with private banking clients, solicit private banking business, and provide information and advice on economic conditions and investment opportunities in Switzerland. The Houston office would report directly to the Miami office; the Miami and New York offices would report directly to Credit Suisse's head office in Switzerland. No funds would be received or disbursed at or through the representative offices. In acting on an application to establish a representative office, the IBA and Regulation K provide that the Board shall take into account whether the foreign bank engages directly in the business of banking outside of the United States, and has furnished to the Board the information it needs to assess the application adequately. The Board also shall take into account whether the foreign bank and any foreign bank parent is subject to comprehensive supervision or regulation on a consolidated basis by its home country supervisor (12 U.S.C. § 3107(a)(2); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(d)(2)). The Board also may take into account additional standards as set forth in the IBA and Regulation K (12 U.S.C. § 3105(d)(3)-(4); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)). As noted above, Credit Suisse engages directly in the business of banking outside of the United States. Credit Suisse also has provided the Board with the information necessary to assess the application through submissions that address the relevant issues. With respect to supervision by home country authorities, the Board previously has determined, in connection with applications involving other banks in Switzerland, that those banks were subject to home country supervision on a consolidated basis. Credit Suisse is supervised by the SFBC on substantially the same terms and conditions as those other banks. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that Credit Suisse is subject to comprehensive supervision and regulation on a consolidated basis by its home country supervisor. The Board also has taken into account the additional standards set forth in section 7 of the IBA and Regulation K (12 U.S.C. § 3105(d)(3)-(4); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)(2)). In this regard, the SFBC has no objection to the establishment of the proposed representative offices. With respect to the financial and managerial resources of Credit Suisse, taking into consideration Credit Suisse's record of operations in its home country, its overall financial resources, and its standing with its home country supervisors, the Board has also determined that financial and managerial factors are consistent with approval of the proposed representative offices. Credit Suisse appears to have the experience and capacity to support the proposed representative offices and has established controls and procedures for the proposed representative offices to ensure compliance with U.S. law. With respect to access to information about Credit Suisse's operations, the Board has reviewed the restrictions on disclosure in relevant jurisdictions in which Credit Suisse operates and has communicated with relevant government authorities regarding access to information. Credit Suisse and Credit Suisse Group have committed to make available to the Board such information on the operations of Credit Suisse and any of its affiliates that the Board deems necessary to determine and enforce compliance with the IBA, the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956, as amended, and other applicable federal law. To the extent that the provision of such information may be prohibited by law, Credit Suisse and Credit Suisse Group have committed to cooperate with the Board to obtain any necessary consents or waivers that might be required from third parties for disclosure of such information. In addition, subject to certain conditions, the SFBC may share information on Bank's operations with other supervisors, including the Board. In light of these commitments and other facts of record, and subject to the condition described below, the Board concludes that Credit Suisse has provided adequate assurances of access to any necessary information the Board may request. On the basis of all the facts of record, and subject to the commitments made by Credit Suisse and Credit Suisse Group, as well as the terms and conditions set forth in this order, the Board has determined that Credit Suisse's application to establish the representative offices should be, and hereby is, approved. Should any restrictions on access to information on the operations or activities of Credit Suisse and its affiliates subsequently interfere with the Board's ability to obtain information to determine and enforce compliance by Credit Suisse or its affiliates with applicable federal statutes, the Board may require termination of any of Credit Suisse's or its affiliates' direct or indirect activities in the United States. Approval of this application also is specifically conditioned on compliance by Credit Suisse and Credit Suisse Group with the commitments made in connection with this application, and with the conditions in this order. The commitments and conditions referred to above are conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its decision and may be enforced in proceedings under 12 U.S.C. § 1818 against Credit Suisse and its affiliates. By order of the Board of Governors, effective November 23, 1998. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Footnotes Asset data are as of June 30, 1998. CSFB also operates an agency and representative office in Miami. Those offices would be closed on the establishment of the Miami office of Credit Suisse. In assessing this standard, the Board considers, among other factors, the extent to which the home country supervisors: (i) ensure that the bank has adequate procedures for monitoring and controlling its activities worldwide; (ii) obtain information on the condition of the bank and its subsidiaries and offices through regular examination reports, audit reports, or otherwise; (iii) obtain information on the dealings with and relationship between the bank and its affiliates, both foreign and domestic; (iv) receive from the bank financial reports that are consolidated on a worldwide basis, or comparable information that permits analysis of the bank's financial condition on a worldwide consolidated basis; (v) evaluate prudential standards, such as capital adequacy and risk asset exposure, on a worldwide basis. These are indicia of comprehensive, consolidated supervision. No single factor is essential, and other elements may inform the Board's determination. See Coutts & Co., AG, 79 Federal Reserve Bulletin 636 (1993); Union Bank of Switzerland, 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 370 (1996); Swiss Bank Corporation, 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 690 (1996) and 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin 214 (1997); UBS AG/Union Bank of Switzerland, 84 Federal Reserve Bulletin 684 (1998). Credit Suisse Group, although not a bank, is also subject to consolidated supervision by the Swiss Federal Banking Commission ("SFBC"). The Board's authority to approve the establishment of the proposed representative offices parallels the continuing authority of the States of Florida, New York, and Texas to license offices of a foreign bank. The Board's approval of this application does not supplant the authority of those states to license the proposed offices of Credit Suisse in accordance with any terms or conditions that they may impose. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Ferguson, and Gramlich. Absent and not voting: Governor Meyer.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the proposal of Susquehanna Bancshares, Inc., Lititz, Pennsylvania, to acquire Cardinal Bancorp, Inc. ("Cardinal"), and indirectly acquire Cardinal's subsidiary bank, First American National Bank of Pennsylvania, both of Everett, Pennsylvania. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Susquehanna Bancshares, Inc. Lititz, Pennsylvania Order Approving Acquisition of a Bank Holding Company By order of the Board of Governors, effective November 23, 1998. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Footnotes All banking data are as of June 30, 1998. 12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 2901 et seq. NJCA also argues that Susquehanna has failed to meet with community groups to discuss the needs of the communities that Equity Bank serves. The Board previously has noted that, although communication by depository institutions with community groups provides a valuable method of assessing and determining how best to meet the credit needs of a community, neither the CRA nor the CRA regulations of the federal supervisory agencies require depository institutions to enter into agreements with any organization. See Fifth Third Bancorp, 80 Federal Reserve Bulletin 838 (1994). 12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 2801 et seq. See Susquehanna Bancshares, Inc., 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin 317 (1997) ("1997 Order"). According to Equity Bank's last examination, as of December 31, 1995, approximately 42 percent of the bank's loan portfolio consisted of small business loans in amounts of less than $1 million. Small business loans constituted 45.7 percent of the dollar volume of Equity Bank's loans through August 31, 1998. NJCA also requested that the Board hold a public meeting or hearing on the proposal. Section 3(b) of the BHC Act does not require the Board to hold a public hearing on an application unless the appropriate supervisory authority for the bank to be acquired makes a timely written recommendation of denial. The Board has not received such a recommendation from the appropriate supervisory authorities. Under its rules, the Board also may, in its discretion, hold a public meeting or hearing on an application to acquire a bank if a meeting or hearing is necessary or appropriate to clarify factual issues related to the application and to provide an opportunity for testimony, if appropriate. 12 C.F.R. 225.16(e). The Board has carefully considered NJCA's request in light of all the facts of record. In the Board's view, NJCA has had ample opportunity to submit its views, and did submitted written comments that have been carefully considered by the Board in acting on the proposal. NJCA's request fails to demonstrate why its written comments do not adequately present its evidence and fails to identify disputed issues of fact that are material to the Board's decision that would be clarified by a public meeting or hearing. For these reasons, and based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that a public meeting or hearing is not required or warranted in this case. Accordingly, the request is denied. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Ferguson, and Gramlich. Absent and not voting: Governor Meyer.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced a decrease from $47.8 million to $46.5 million in the net transaction accounts to which a 3 percent reserve requirement will apply in 1999. This adjustment is known as the low reserve tranche adjustment. The Board also changed from $4.7 million to $4.9 million the amount of reservable liabilities of each depository institution that is subject to a reserve requirement of zero percent. Additionally, the Board increased the deposit cutoff levels that are used in conjunction with the exemption level to determine the frequency and detail of deposit reporting required for each institution from $78.9 million to $81.9 million for nonexempt depository institutions and from $50.7 million to $52.6 million for exempt depository institutions. For depository institutions that report weekly, the low reserve tranche adjustment and the reservable liabilities exemption adjustment will apply to the reserve computation period that begins Tuesday, December 1, 1998, and the corresponding reserve maintenance period that begins Thursday, December 31, 1998. For institutions that report quarterly, the low reserve tranche adjustment and the reservable liabilities exemption adjustment will apply to the reserve computation period that begins Tuesday, December 15, 1998, and the corresponding reserve maintenance period that begins Thursday, January 14, 1999. The Board's notice is attached. |
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application of CAB Holding, LLC, Wilmington, Delaware, to become a bank holding company by acquiring 100 percent of the voting shares of The Chinese American Bank, New York, New York. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. CAB Holding, LLC Wilmington, Delaware Order Approving Formation of a Bank Holding Company CAB Holding LLC ("CAB") has requested the Board's approval under section 3(a)(1) of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act") (12 U.S.C. § 1842(a)(1)) to become a bank holding company by acquiring all the voting shares of The Chinese American Bank, New York, New York ("Bank"). Notice of the application, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (63 Federal Register 12,813 (1998)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the application and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 3 of the BHC Act. CAB is a newly formed nonoperating corporation that would become a bank holding company by the acquisition of Bank. Bank is the 122d largest commercial banking organization in New York, with deposits of $188 million, representing less than 1 percent of total deposits in commercial banking organizations in the state. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that consummation of the proposal would not have a significantly adverse effect on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in any relevant banking market and that competitive considerations are consistent with approval. Based on all the facts of record, including confidential supervisory information and other information concerning Bank and the sole shareholder of CAB, the Board concludes that considerations relating to the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of CAB and Bank, the convenience and needs of the communities to be served, and other supervisory factors that the Board is required to consider under section 3 of the BHC Act are consistent with approval of the proposal. In addition, the Board has received commitments that ensure the Board's access to information on the operations and activities of CAB and its affiliates, in order to permit the Board to determine and enforce compliance with the BHC Act and other federal banking laws. Based on the foregoing and all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the application should be, and hereby is, approved. The Board's approval is expressly conditioned on compliance with all the commitments made by CAB, Bank, and CAB's sole shareholder in connection with the application. For purposes of this action, the commitments and conditions relied on by the Board in reaching this decision are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The proposal shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day after the effective date of this order, or later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the.Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective November 30, 1998. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Footnotes Deposit and market data are as of June 30, 1997. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Meyer, Ferguson, and Gramlich.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application by City Holding Company, Charleston, West Virginia, to acquire Horizon Bancorp, Inc., Beckley, West Virginia, and its wholly owned subsidiary banks. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. City Holding Company Charleston, West Virginia Order Approving the Acquisition of a Bank Holding Company City Holding Company ("Applicant"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 3 of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1842) to acquire Horizon Bancorp, Inc., Beckley, West Virginia ("Horizon Bancorp"), and its wholly owned subsidiary banks, Bank of Raleigh, Beckley; First National Bank in Marlinton, Marlinton; Greenbrier Valley National Bank, Lewisburg; National Bank of Summers, Hinton; and The Twentieth Street Bank, Huntington, all in West Virginia. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (63 Federal Register 54,712 (1998)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the proposal and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 3 of the BHC Act. Applicant is the sixth largest depository institution in West Virginia, controlling approximately $916.9 million in deposits, representing approximately 4.8 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in the state ("state deposits"). Horizon Bancorp is the seventh largest depository institution in West Virginia, controlling approximately $831.8 million in deposits, representing 4.4 percent of state deposits. On consummation of the proposal, and accounting for the proposed divestitures, Applicant would be the fourth largest depository institution in West Virginia, controlling approximately $1.65 billion in deposits in the state, representing approximately 8.7 percent of state deposits. Competitive Considerations The BHC Act prohibits the Board from approving an application under section 3 of the BHC Act if the proposal would result in a monopoly or would be in furtherance of any attempt to monopolize the business of banking. The BHC Act also prohibits the Board from approving a proposed combination that would substantially lessen competition or tend to create a monopoly in any relevant banking market, unless the Board finds that the anticompetitive effects of the proposal are clearly outweighed in the public interest by the probable effect of the proposal in meeting the convenience and needs of the community to be served. Applicant and Horizon Bancorp compete directly in four banking markets in West Virginia: Beckley, Charleston, Greenbrier and Huntington. The Board has carefully reviewed the competitive effects of the proposal in these banking markets in light of all the facts of record, including the number of competitors that would remain in the markets, the characteristics of the markets, and the projected increase in the concentration of total deposits in depository institutions in the markets ("market deposits") as measured by the Herfindahl-Hirshman Index ("HHI") under the Department of Justice Merger Guidelines ("DOJ Guidelines"). Consummation of the proposal without divestitures would be consistent with the DOJ Guidelines and prior Board decisions in the Huntington and Charleston, banking markets. To mitigate the potential anticompetitive effects of the proposal in the Greenbrier banking market, Applicant has committed to divest one branch that controls approximately $37.8 million in deposits in the market. With the proposed divestitures, the concentration levels in the Greenbrier banking market as measured by the HHI would be consistent with the DOJ Guidelines after consummation of the proposal. The HHI would increase by approximately 88 points to not more than 2529, and five competitors would remain in the Greenbrier banking market. Applicant is the fifth largest commercial banking organization in the Beckley banking market, controlling deposits of $109.8 million, representing 8.8 percent of market deposits. Horizon Bancorp is the largest in the market, controlling $361.1 million of deposits, representing 29 percent of total market deposits. Applicant has committed to divest one branch that controls approximately $57 million in deposits and that represents approximately 4.6 percent of the market deposits. On consummation of the proposal and divestiture, Applicant would be the largest depository institution in the market, controlling $413.9 million in deposits, representing approximately 33.3 percent of market deposits. The post-merger HHI would increase by not more than 208 points to not more than 2132. Consummation of the transaction with the proposed divestiture would exceed the DOJ Guidelines, in the Beckley banking market. As the Board has indicated in previous cases, in a market in which the competitive effects of a proposal exceed the DOJ Guidelines, the Board will consider whether other factors tend to mitigate the competitive effects of the proposal. The number and strength of factors necessary to mitigate competitive effects depend on the level of market concentration and size of the increase in market concentration. The Beckley banking market has characteristics that make it attractive for entry when compared to similar counties in West Virginia. For example, from 1994 to 1997, the increase in population in the Beckley banking market was three times larger than the increase in population in comparable counties. In addition, the average number of residents per branch and amount of deposits per branch in the banking market exceeded those statistics for comparable counties in West Virginia. The entry of a commercial bank de novo in 1995 also appears to confirm the attractiveness of the Beckley banking market. The proposed divestiture of approximately 4.6 percent of market deposits to an out-of-market commercial banking organization would create another market entrant, and the number of depository institutions competing in the market would remain unchanged at nine competitors. These competitors include three large national and regional banking organizations that each have significant market shares. The Department of Justice has conducted a detailed review of the proposal and has advised the Board that, in light of the proposed divestitures, consummation of the proposal would not likely have a significantly adverse effect on competition in any relevant banking market. The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the West Virginia Commissioner of Banking also have been afforded an opportunity to comment and have not objected to consummation of the proposal. After carefully reviewing all the facts of record and for the reasons discussed in this order and appendices, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposal would not likely result in any significantly adverse effects on competition or on the concentration of banking markets in the Beckley, Charleston, Greenbrier and Huntington banking markets where Applicant and Horizon Bancorp compete or in any other relevant banking market. Accordingly, based on all of the facts of record and subject to completion of the proposed divestitures, the Board has determined that the competitive factor is consistent with approval of the proposal. Other Factors Under the BHC Act The BHC Act also requires the Board, in acting on an application, to consider the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the companies and banks involved in a proposal, the convenience and needs of the community to be served, and certain other supervisory factors. The Board has carefully considered the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of Applicant and Horizon Bancorp, and their respective subsidiary banks, and other supervisory factors in light of all the facts of record. As part of this consideration, the Board has reviewed relevant reports of examination and other supervisory information prepared by the Reserve Banks and other federal agencies. The Board notes that the bank holding companies and their subsidiary banks currently are well capitalized and are expected to remain so after consummation of the proposal. The Board also has considered other aspects of the financial condition and resources of the two organizations, the structure of the proposed transaction, and the managerial resources of each of the entities and the combined organization. Based on these and other facts of record, the Board concludes that considerations relating to the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of Applicant, Horizon Bancorp, and their respective subsidiaries are consistent with approval of the proposal, as are the other supervisory factors that the Board must consider under section 3 of the BHC Act. The Board has carefully considered the effect of the proposed acquisition on the convenience and needs of the community to be served in light of all the facts of record. All of Applicant's and Horizon's subsidiary banks have received "outstanding" or "satisfactory" ratings from their appropriate federal supervisors at the most recent examinations of their performance under the Community Reinvestment Act ("CRA") (12 U.S.C. § 2901 et seq. ). Based on all the facts of record, including the CRA performance records of the subsidiary banks of Applicant and Horizon Bancorp, the Board concludes that convenience and needs considerations are consistent with approval of the proposal. Conclusion Based on the foregoing, and in light of all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the application should be, and hereby is, approved. Approval of the application is specifically conditioned on compliance by Applicant with all the commitments made in connection with the proposal and with the conditions stated or referred to in this order, including Applicant's divestiture commitments. For purposes of this transaction, the commitments and conditions referred to in this order shall be deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The acquisition shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day after the effective date of this order, and the proposal shall not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective November 30, 1998. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Appendix A The Beckley, West Virginia, banking market is defined as the Beckley Ranally Metro Area ("RMA") and includes the town of Whitesville in Boone County, the remainder of Raleigh County, Summers County, and the portion of Fayette County that excludes the towns of Montgomery and Smithers. The Charleston, West Virginia, banking market is defined as the Charleston, West Virginia, RMA and includes the remainders of Kanawha and Putman Counties, and the towns of Montgomery and Smithers in Fayette County. The Greenbrier, West Virginia, banking market is defined as Greenbrier County, West Virginia. The Huntington banking market is defined as Huntington, West Virginia-Kentucky-Ohio RMA and the remainder of Boyd County, Kentucky; Lawrence County, Ohio; and Cabell and Wayne Counties, West Virginia. Appendix B In the Charleston, West Virginia, banking market applicant would control 13.8 percent of market deposits and would remain the second largest depository institution in the market after consummation of the proposal. The HHI would increase by 34 points to 1841. In the Huntington, West Virginia, banking market applicant would control 9.3 percent of the market deposits and would become the second largest depository institution in the market after consummation of the proposal. The HHI would increase by 25 points to 636. Footnotes State and market data are as of June 30, 1997, and are updated for merger activity as of October 23, 1998. 12 U.S.C. § 1842(c). The banking markets are described in . Market share data are based on calculations that include the deposits of thrift institutions at 50 percent. The Board previously has indicated that thrift institutions have become, or have the potential to become, significant competitors of commercial banks. See, e.g., Midwest Financial Group, 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 386 (1989); National City Corporation, 70 Federal Reserve Bulletin 743 (1984). Thus, the Board has regularly included thrift deposits in the calculation of market share on a 50-percent weighted basis. See, e.g., First Hawaiian Inc., 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 52 (1991). Under DOJ Guidelines, 49 Federal Register 26,823 (1984), a market in which the post-merger HHI is more than 1800 is considered highly concentrated. The Department of Justice has informed the Board that a bank merger or acquisition generally will not be challenged (in the absence of other factors indicating anticompetitive effects) unless the post-merger HHI is at least 1800 and the merger increases the HHI by more than 200 points. The Justice Department has stated that the higher than normal HHI thresholds for screening bank mergers for anticompetitive effects implicitly recognize the competitive effects of limited-purpose lenders and other nondepository financial institutions. Market data for these banking markets after consummation of the proposal are described in . With respect to each divestiture, Applicant has committed to execute a sales agreement for the proposed divestiture with a new market entrant prior to consummation of the proposal, and to complete the divestiture within 180 days of consummation. Applicant also has committed that, in the event it is unsuccessful in completing the divestiture within 180 days of consummation, it will transfer the unsold branch to an independent trustee that is acceptable to the Board and will instruct the trustee to sell the branch promptly to one or more alternative purchasers acceptable to the Board. See BankAmerica Corporation, 78 Federal Reserve Bulletin 338 (1992); United New Mexico Financial Corporation, 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 484 (1991). In the Beckley banking market, Applicant has committed that the purchaser of the divested branch of a one-branch bank would be given the option of retaining the name of that bank. See, e.g., First Union Corporation, 84 Federal Reserve Bulletin 489 (1998); NationsBank Corporation, 84 Federal Reserve Bulletin 129 (1998). Beckley is not a Metropolitan Statistical Area ("MSA"). Accordingly, the market characteristics of the Beckley banking market were compared with other non-MSA counties in West Virginia. A commenter has asserted that First National Bank in Marlinton ("Bank") is the subject of several lawsuits as a result of its business relationships with local public agencies. There have been no adjudications of wrongdoing by Bank in these proceedings, and each matter is before a forum that can provide adequate remedies if the allegations of wrongdoing can be sustained. Commenter also alleges, without providing any supporting information, that Bank is under investigation for the misuse of federal and state grants. In reviewing this case, the Board has contacted and considered the views of federal banking agencies and the Department of Justice. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Meyer, Ferguson and Gramlich.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application of Valley View Bancshares, Inc., Overland Park, Kansas, to acquire Paola-Citizens Bancshares, Inc., and thereby acquire control of its banking subsidiary, Citizens State Bank, both of Paola, Kansas. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Valley View Bancshares, Inc. Overland Park, Kansas Order Approving Application to Acquire a Bank Holding Company Valley View Bancshares, Inc. ("Valley View"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 3 of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1842) to acquire Paola-Citizens Bancshares, Inc. ("Paola"), and thereby acquire control of its subsidiary bank, Citizens State Bank ("Citizens Bank"), both of Paola, Kansas. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (63 Federal Register 53,672 (1998)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the proposal and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 3 of the BHC Act. Valley View, with total consolidated assets of approximately $1.7 billion, operates four subsidiary banks in Kansas and one subsidiary bank in Missouri. Valley View is the sixth largest commercial banking organization in Kansas, controlling approximately $1.4 billion in deposits, representing approximately 3.5 percent of total deposits in commercial banking organizations in the state ("state deposits"). Paola is the 167th largest commercial banking organization in Kansas, controlling approximately $37 million in deposits, representing less than 1 percent of state deposits. On consummation of the proposal, Valley View would remain the sixth largest commercial banking organization in Kansas, controlling deposits of approximately $1.4 billion, representing approximately 3.6 percent of state deposits. In reviewing the proposal under the BHC Act, the Board has considered the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the companies and banks involved, the convenience and needs of the communities to be served, and certain supervisory factors. The Board has reviewed these factors in light of the facts of record, including supervisory reports of examination assessing the financial and managerial resources of the organizations, discussions with other federal financial supervisory agencies, and confidential information provided by Valley View. The Board notes that Valley View management has adequate procedures in place to address the limited risks associated with the current activities of the holding company and its subsidiary banks. The Board further notes that the proposal represents a relatively small acquisition by Valley View, that Valley View would not incur or assume any debt in connection with the proposal, and that Valley View would remain well capitalized on consummation of the proposal. Based on the specific facts of record in this case, the Board concludes that the financial and managerial resources of Valley View, Paola, and their respective subsidiary banks and other supervisory factors are consistent with approval of the proposal. In considering the convenience and needs factor, the Board has reviewed the records of the relevant depository institutions under the Community Reinvestment Act ("CRA"). As provided in the CRA, the Board has evaluated this factor in light of examinations of the CRA performance records of the relevant institutions by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ("FDIC"), the institutions' appropriate federal banking supervisor. All the insured depository institutions controlled by Valley View received "satisfactory" CRA performance ratings at their most recent CRA examinations by the FDIC. Citizens Bank received an "outstanding" CRA performance rating at its most recent CRA examination by the FDIC. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that convenience and needs considerations, including the CRA performance records of the relevant institutions, are consistent with approval of the proposal. As required under the BHC Act, the Board also has considered the competitive effects of the proposal. Valley View and Paola do not compete with each other in any relevant banking market. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that the proposal would not have a significantly adverse effect on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in any relevant banking market. Accordingly, the Board concludes that competitive considerations are consistent with approval. Conclusion Based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that this application should be, and hereby is, approved. The Board's approval is specifically conditioned on compliance by Valley View with all the commitments made in connection with this proposal. The commitments and conditions relied on by the Board in reaching its decision are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decisions and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The proposed acquisition shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day after the effective date of this order, or later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective November 30, 1998. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Footnotes State asset and deposit data are as of June 30, 1998. 12 U.S.C. § 2901 et seq. A former shareholder of Paola has requested that the Board, as part of its review of the proposal, monitor a private undertaking by Paola's management to compensate former shareholders from the proceeds of the proposal. The limited jurisdiction of the Board to review applications under the specific statutory factors in the BHC Act does not authorize the Board to consider matters relating to general corporate governance, such as shareholder relations and the adequacy of shareholder compensation. See Western Bancshares, Inc. v. Board of Governors, 480 F.2d 749 (10th Cir. 1973). Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Meyer, Ferguson, and Gramlich.