For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today its approval of the application of WesBanco, Inc., Wheeling, West Virginia ("WesBanco"), to acquire Commercial BancShares, Inc., Parkersburg, West Virginia ("Commercial"), and thereby acquire the banking and nonbanking subsidiaries of Commercial. The Board also approved the applications of WesBanco's lead bank, WesBanco Bank Wheeling, Wheeling, West Virginia, to merge with The Bank of Paden City, Paden City, West Virginia, and Bank of McMechen, McMechen, West Virginia, and to establish branches at the current offices of these banks. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. WesBanco, Inc. Wheeling, West Virginia Order Approving Acquisition of Bank Holding Companies, Merger of Banks and Establishment of Branches WesBanco, Inc., Wheeling, West Virginia ("WesBanco"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under sections 3 and 4 of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ï¿½ 1842 and 1843(c)(8)) to acquire Commercial BancShares, Inc., Parkersburg, West Virginia ("Commercial"), and Gateway Bancshares, Inc., McMechen, West Virginia ("Gateway"), and thereby acquire their banking and nonbanking subsidiaries listed in the Appendix. WesBanco's lead bank, WesBanco Bank Wheeling, Wheeling, West Virginia ("WesBanco Wheeling"), also has requested the Board's approval under section 18(c) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (the "Bank Merger Act") (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1828(c)) to merge with Commercial's subsidiary bank, The Bank of Paden City, Paden City, West Virginia, and Gateway's subsidiary bank, Bank of McMechen, McMechen, West Virginia, and under section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act ("FRA") (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 321) to establish branches at the current offices of these banks listed in the Appendix. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (63 Federal Register 2393 (1998)) and has been given in accordance with the Bank Merger Act and the Board's Rules of Procedure (12 C.F.R. 262.3(b)). As required by the Bank Merger Act, reports on the competitive effects of the bank mergers were requested from the United States Attorney General, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency ("OCC"), and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ("FDIC"). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the proposal and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in the BHC Act, the Bank Merger Act, and the FRA. WesBanco operates six banks in West Virginia and one bank in Ohio. WesBanco is the fifth largest commercial banking organization in West Virginia, controlling approximately $1.3 billion in deposits, representing approximately 6.7 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in the state ("state deposits"). Commercial controls seven banks in West Virginia and one bank in Ohio. Commercial is the tenth largest depository institution in West Virginia, controlling approximately $348.7 million in deposits, representing approximately 1.8 percent of state deposits. On consummation of the proposal, and taking into account all proposed divestitures, WesBanco would remain the fifth largest commercial banking organization in West Virginia, controlling deposits of $1.6 billion, representing approximately 8.3 percent of state deposits. WesBanco is the 107th largest commercial banking organization in Ohio, controlling approximately $129.9 million in deposits, representing less than 1 percent of total deposits in commercial banking organizations in the state. Commercial is the 88th largest commercial banking organization in Ohio, controlling approximately $166.7 million in deposits, representing less than 1 percent of state deposits. On consummation of the proposal, WesBanco would become the 54th largest depository institution in Ohio, controlling $296.6 million in deposits, representing less than 1 percent of deposits in Ohio. Interstate Analysis Section 3(d) of the BHC Act, as amended by Section 101 of the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act of 1994 ("Riegle-Neal Act"), allows the Board to approve an application by a bank holding company to acquire control of a bank located in a state other than the home state of such bank holding company, if certain conditions are met. For purposes of the BHC Act, the home state of WesBanco is West Virginia, and it proposes to acquire a subsidiary bank of Commercial in Ohio. All of the conditions for an interstate acquisition enumerated in section 3(d) are met in this case. In view of all the facts of record, the Board is permitted to approve the proposal under section 3(d) of the BHC Act. Competitive Considerations The BHC Act and the Bank Merger Act prohibit the Board from approving a proposal if it would result in a monopoly or if the effect of the proposal may be substantially to lessen competition in any relevant market unless the Board finds that the anticompetitive effects of the proposed transaction are clearly outweighed in the public interest by the probable effect of the transaction in meeting the convenience and needs of the community to be served. WesBanco and Commercial compete directly in three West Virginia banking markets: Parkersburg/Marietta, Wheeling, and Tyler/Wetzel. Consummation of the proposal would be consistent with the Department of Justice Merger Guidelines ("DOJ Guidelines") and prior Board precedent in the Wheeling and Marietta/Parkersburg banking markets. In order to mitigate the potential anticompetitive effects in the Tyler/Wetzel banking market, WesBanco has committed to divest one of Commercial's subsidiary banks in the market, Union Bank of Tyler County, which controls approximately $33.3 million in deposits, to an out-of-market purchaser. After accounting for the proposed divestiture, WesBanco would become the largest depository institution in the Tyler/Wetzel banking market, controlling deposits of approximately $82.6 million, representing 36 percent of market deposits. Concentration in the market, as measured by the HHI, would increase by 225 points to 2077. Several mitigating considerations offset the proposal's effect on competition in the Tyler/Wetzel banking market. The proposal would not reduce the number of competitors in the market, and nine competitors would remain in the market after consummation. Two of the nine institutions are large regional banking organizations, and three of the nine institutions, including WesBanco, each would have a market share of at least 10 percent. Although measures of attractiveness of the Tyler/Wetzel market are mixed, the Board notes that there recently has been de novo entry by a commercial bank. The Board believes that these factors mitigate the potentially adverse effects of the proposal. The Justice Department reviewed the proposal and advised the Board that, in light of the proposed divestiture, consummation of the proposal would not likely have any significantly adverse competitive effects in the Tyler/Wetzel banking market or any other relevant banking market. The OCC and FDIC also have not objected to the proposal. Based on all the facts of record, and for the reasons discussed in this order, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposal is not likely to result in any significantly adverse effects on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in the Tyler/Wetzel banking market or any other relevant banking market. Other Considerations The BHC Act and the Bank Merger Act require the Board, in acting on an application, to consider the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the companies and banks involved, the convenience and needs of the communities to be served, and certain supervisory factors. The Board has reviewed these factors in light of the record, including supervisory reports of examination assessing the financial and managerial resources of the organizations and financial information provided by WesBanco. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that the financial and managerial resources and the future prospects of WesBanco, Commercial and their respective subsidiary banks are consistent with approval, as are the other supervisory factors the Board must consider under section 3 of the BHC Act. In addition, considerations related to the convenience and needs of the communities to be served, including the records of performance of the institutions under the Community Reinvestment Act, are consistent with approval of the proposal. WesBanco also has filed notice under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act to acquire the nonbanking subsidiaries of Commercial listed in the Appendix. The Board previously has determined by regulation that each of the activities described in the Appendix is closely related to banking within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act, and WesBanco proposes to conduct these activities in accordance with Regulation Y. In order to approve the proposal, the Board also must determine that the performance of the proposed activities is a proper incident to banking, that is, that the proposed transaction "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public . . . that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices." As part of its evaluation of these factors, the Board considers the financial and managerial resources of the notificant and its subsidiaries, including any company to be acquired, and the effect the transaction would have on such resources. As noted above, based on all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that financial and managerial considerations are consistent with approval of the notice. Each of the markets for the nonbanking services affected by the proposal is unconcentrated, and there are numerous providers of each service. As a result, consummation of the proposal is expected to have a de minimis effect on competition for the services. The Board expects, moreover, that the acquisition of Commercial by WesBanco would provide added convenience to Commercial's customers, and to the public by increasing operating efficiencies, improving convenience, and expanding the services available to customers of Commercial. Additionally, there are public benefits to be derived from permitting capital markets to operate so that bank holding companies may make potentially profitable investments in nonbanking companies when those investments are consistent, as in this case, with the relevant considerations under the BHC Act, and from permitting banking organizations to allocate their resources in the manner they believe is most efficient. Accordingly, based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the proposal can reasonably be expected to produce public benefits that outweigh any adverse effects under the proper incident to banking standard of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. The Board also has considered the factors it is required to consider when reviewing applications for establishing branches under section 9 of the FRA and concludes that these factors are consistent with approval of WesBanco Wheeling's application to establish branches at the locations listed in the Appendix. Conclusion Based on the foregoing, and in light of all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the applications and notice should be, and hereby are, approved. The Board's approval is specifically conditioned on compliance by WesBanco with all the commitments made in connection with these applications. For the purpose of this action, the commitments and conditions relied on by the Board in reaching its decisions are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The acquisition of the banks shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day following the effective date of this order, or later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective March 2, 1998. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes WesBanco would merge Commercial and Gateway with and into its wholly owned subsidiary, CBI Holding Company ("CBI"), that would be formed solely for the purpose of effecting the acquisitions. In connection with this proposal CBI has applied to become a bank holding company. State deposit data are as of June 30, 1997. In this context, depository institutions include commercial banks, savings banks, and savings associations. In December 1997, the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, acting under delegated authority, approved Commercial's application to acquire Gateway. Although Commercial has not consummated the acquisition, the deposits of Gateway have been attributed to Commercial in the deposit data. Pub. L. No. 103-328, 108 Stat. 2338 (1994). A bank holding company's home state is that state in which the operations of the bank holding company's banking subsidiaries were principally conducted on July 1, 1966, or the date on which the company became a bank holding company, whichever is later. 12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1841(o)(4)(C). See 12 U.S.C. ï¿½ï¿½ 1842(d)(1)(A) and (B) and 1842(d)(2)(A) and (B). WesBanco is adequately capitalized and adequately managed, as defined by the Riegle-Neal Act. Ohio law imposes no minimum period of existence and operation for an acquired bank. See generally Ohio Rev. Ann. ï¿½ 1115.05 (Anderson 1996). On consummation of the proposal, WesBanco would control less than 10 percent of the total amount of deposits of insured depository institutions in the United States and less than 30 percent of the total amount of deposits of insured depository institutions in West Virginia and Ohio. All other requirements of section 3(d) of the BHC Act also would be met on consummation of the proposal. 12 U.S.C. ï¿½ï¿½ 1842(c)(1)(B) and 1828(c)(5)(B). Market share data used to analyze the competitive effects of the proposal are as of June 30, 1996. These data are based on calculations in which the deposits of thrift institutions are included at 50 percent. The Board previously has indicated that thrift institutions have become, or have the potential to become, significant competitors of commercial banks. See Midwest Financial Group, 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 386 (1989); National City Corporation, 70 Federal Reserve Bulletin 743 (1984). Thus, the Board has regularly included thrift deposits in the calculation of market share on a 50-percent weighted basis. See, e.g., First Hawaiian, Inc., 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 52 (1991). The Parkersburg/Marietta banking market is approximated by Wood, Pleasants, Ritchie, and Wirt Counties in West Virginia; and Washington County, Ohio. The Wheeling banking market is approximated by Marshall and Ohio Counties in West Virginia; and Colerain, Pease, Pultney, Mead, York townships and the eastern two-thirds of Richland township in Belmont County, in Ohio. The Tyler/Wetzel banking market is defined as Tyler and Wetzel Counties in West Virginia. Under the revised DOJ Guidelines, 49 Federal Register 26,823 (June 29, 1984), a market in which the post-merger Herfindahl-Hirschman Index ("HHI") is above 1800 is considered highly concentrated. The Department of Justice has informed the Board that a bank merger or acquisition generally will not be challenged (in the absence of other factors indicating anticompetitive effects) unless the post-merger HHI is at least 1800 and the merger increases the HHI by more than 200 points. The Department of Justice has stated that the higher than normal HHI thresholds for screening bank mergers for anticompetitive effects implicitly recognize the competitive effect of limited-purpose lenders and other non-depository financial entities. On consummation of the proposal, WesBanco would become the largest depository institution in the Parkersburg/Marietta banking market and control $343.5 million in deposits, representing 18.7 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in the market ("market deposits"). The HHI would increase 145 points to 1122. WesBanco would remain the largest depository institution in the Wheeling banking market and control $362.4 million in deposits, representing 21.7 percent of market deposits. The HHI would increase 69 points to 1096. WesBanco has committed to execute a sales agreement with an out-of-market commercial banking organization prior to consummation of the proposal and to complete the divestiture within 180 days after consummation of the proposal. WesBanco also has committed that, in the event it is unsuccessful in completing the divestiture within 180 days of consummation, WesBanco will transfer any unsold office(s) to an independent trustee that is acceptable to the Board and that will be instructed to sell the office(s) promptly. See BankAmerica Corporation, 78 Federal Reserve Bulletin 338 (1992). See 12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(1), (6), (7) and (11). 12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1843(c)(8). See 12 C.F.R. 225.26. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Phillips, Meyer, Ferguson, and Gramlich.
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan Implications of recent Asian developments for community banking Before the Annual Convention of the Independent Bankers Association of America, Honolulu, Hawaii March 3, 1998 As always, it is a pleasure to address the Independent Bankers Association convention, even if by disembodied spirit at long distance. Distances in this information age, of course, are becoming increasingly meaningless, especially in financial markets where developments in Seoul, Bangkok, and Jakarta can have as much effect on your bank as developments in New York. Not quite, perhaps, but enough to get our attention. Accordingly this morning I should like to trace some implications of recent Asian developments for the business of U.S. banking, especially community banking. Events in Asia reinforce once more the fact that, while our burgeoning global system is efficient and makes a substantial contribution to standards of living worldwide, that same efficiency exposes and punishes underlying economic imprudence swiftly and decisively. Regrettably, the very efficiency that contributes so much to our global system also facilitates the transmission of financial disturbances far more effectively than ever before. Asian economies to varying degrees over the last half century have tried to combine rapid growth with a much higher mix of government-directed production than has been evident in the essentially market-driven economies of the West. Through government inducements, a number of select, more sophisticated manufacturing technologies borrowed from the advanced market economies were applied to these generally low-productivity and, hence, low-wage societies. Thus, for selected products, exports became competitive with those of the market economies, engendering rapid overall economic growth. Moreover, in their efforts to press the growth envelope, many companies sought to leverage their balance sheets, and were able to do so especially since to most investors governments were presumed to stand behind private debt. There was, however, an inevitable limit to how far this specialized Asian economic regime could develop. As the process broadened beyond a few select applications of advanced technologies, overall productivity continued to increase, and the associated rise in the average real wage in these economies pressed export-oriented industries' wages higher and thereby blunted somewhat the competitive advantage they enjoyed initially. The consequent slackening of export expansion--aggravated by losses in competitiveness because of exchange rates that were pegged to a strengthening dollar--slowed economic growth somewhat, even before the current crisis. Supplies of investment funds, meanwhile, had been enhanced in the 1990s as Western, especially American, investors diversified some of their huge capital gains into East Asian investments. For years, a substantial part of domestic savings and, more recently, the rapidly increasing capital inflows had been directed by governments into investments that banks were politically required to finance. Lacking market signals that are needed to shape productive investment, much of that investment was unprofitable. So long as growth driven by borrowed technologies was vigorous, however, the adverse consequences of this type of non-market allocation of resources and high fixed costs of leverage were masked. Moreover, in the context of pegged exchange rates that were presumed to continue, if not indefinitely, at least beyond the term of the loan, banks and nonbanks were willing to take the risk to borrow dollars (unhedged) to obtain the dollar-denominated interest rates that were invariably lower than those available in domestic currency. In hindsight, it is evident that those economies could not provide adequate profitable opportunities at reasonable risk to absorb the surge in funds and leverage. This surge, together with distortions caused by government planning, has resulted--some would say inevitably--in huge losses. As activity slowed, burdened by fixed-cost obligations which relied on growth, business losses and nonperforming bank loans surged. Banks, largely unfamiliar with cash flow lending, relied importantly on collateral, which in Asia is essentially commercial real estate. Moreover, with government in the background and substantial cross holdings of stock among members of conglomerates, lending was an issue largely of connections and the presumption of government support, not sound banking practice. As real estate collateral values fell across an overbuilt region, a phenomenon not uncommon in the West, banks' capital eroded rapidly and, as a consequence, funding sources have dried up as fears of defaults have risen dramatically. In an environment of weak financial systems, lax supervisory regimes, and vague guarantees about depositor or creditor protections, the state of confidence so necessary to the functioning of any banking system in the East or the West has been torn asunder. Bank runs have occurred in several countries and reached crisis proportions in Indonesia. Uncertainty and retrenchment have escalated. To summarize then, the consequent slowing in activity is exposing the high fixed costs of a leveraged economy, especially fixed obligations in foreign currencies. Failures to make payments have induced vicious cycles of contagious, ever rising, and reinforcing fears. Some exchange rates have fallen to levels that are understandable only in the context of a veritable collapse of confidence in the functioning of an economy. A similar breakdown was also evident in Mexico three years ago, albeit to a somewhat lesser degree. In late 1994, the government was rapidly losing dollar reserves in a vain effort to support a peso that had come under attack when the authorities failed to act expeditiously and convincingly to contain a burgeoning current account deficit financed in large part by substantial short-term flows denominated in dollars. These two recent crisis episodes have afforded us increasing insights into the dynamics of an evolving, essentially new, high-tech international financial system, though there is much we do not as yet understand. With the new more sophisticated financial markets punishing errant government policy behavior far more expeditiously than in the past, vicious cycles are evidently emerging more often. Once they are triggered, damage control is difficult. Once the web of confidence, which supports the financial system, is breached, it is difficult to restore quickly. The loss of confidence can trigger rapid and disruptive changes in the patterns of finance, which, in turn, feeds back on exchange rates and asset prices. Moreover, investor concerns that weaknesses revealed in one economy may be present in others that are similarly situated, means that the loss of confidence can quickly spread to other countries. At one point the economic system appears stable, the next it behaves as though a dam has been breached, and water (read, confidence) evacuates its reservoir. The abrupt onset of such implosions suggests the possibility that there is a marked dividing line for confidence. When crossed, prices slip into free fall before markets will stabilize. The immediate initiating causes, perhaps, are less important than the fact that an event suddenly casts doubt on expectations and attitudes that underlay the willingness of financial and nonfinancial participants to continue to take certain positions or continue certain behaviors. All bankers understand that the system rests on confidence. Deposits are held only so long as confidence in full repayment, from whatever source but generally on demand, is assured. Once that confidence is lost for any reason, a bank will undergo forced liquidation. What is becoming increasingly clear is that, in virtually all cases, what does turn otherwise seemingly minor imbalances into a crisis is an actual or anticipated disruption to the liquidity or solvency of the banking system, or at least of its major participants. That fact is of critical importance both for understanding the Asian and the previous Latin American crises. Depending on circumstances, the original impulse for the crisis may begin in the banking system or it may begin elsewhere and cause a problem in the banking system that converts an event into a crisis. While the banking system is critical for understanding crises, as I indicated earlier we are not yet sufficiently knowledgeable of the full complex dynamics of our increasingly developing high-tech financial system, a system whose evolution to date has shown no signs of slowing. Nevertheless, enough insights have been gleaned over the years, and most recently from the crises in Mexico and currently in Asia, to enable us to list some of the critical tendencies toward disequilibrium and vicious cycles that will have to be addressed if our new global economy is to limit the scope for disruptions in the future. I will list a number of elements, which have all, in times past, been factors in both domestic and international economic disturbances, but they appear more stark in today's market. Certainly in Korea, probably in Thailand, and possibly elsewhere, a high degree of leverage (the ratio of debt to equity) appears to be a place to start. While the key, and necessary, role of debt in bank balance sheets is obvious, its role in the effective functioning of the nonbank sector is also important. Nevertheless, very high leverage often is a symptom of excessive risk-taking that leaves financial systems and economies vulnerable to loss of confidence. It is not easy to imagine the cumulative cascading of debt instruments seeking safety in a crisis when assets are heavily funded with equity. The concern is particularly relevant to banks and many other financial intermediaries, whose assets typically are less liquid than their liabilities and so depend on confidence in the payment of liabilities for their continued viability. Moreover, both financial and nonfinancial businesses can employ high leverage to mask inadequate underlying return on equity and otherwise have inadequate capital cushions to match their volatile environments. Second, in many emerging countries, "industrial policy" imperatives override market forces and can hence ultimately engender disequilibrium. Such policy or politically driven loans rarely coincide with consumer, business, or foreign demand for the products financed. Policy loans, in the vast majority of cases, foster misuse of resources, unprofitable expansions, losses, and eventually loan defaults. In many cases, of course, these loans regrettably end up being guaranteed by governments. If denominated in local currency, they can be financed with the printing press--though with consequent risk of inflation. Too often, however, they are foreign-currency denominated, where governments face greater constraints on access to credit. A third element that can contribute to disequilibrium is interest rate and currency risk. Banks, when confronted with a generally rising yield curve, have a tendency to incur interest rate or liquidity risk by lending long and funding short. This exposes them to unwelcome surprises, especially those institutions that have low capital-asset ratios. When financial intermediaries, in addition, seek low-cost, unhedged, foreign currency funding, the dangers of depositor runs, following a fall in the domestic currency, escalate. Fourth, banks, as I noted, play a crucial role in the financial market infrastructure. When they are undercapitalized, have lax lending standards, and are subjected to weak supervision and regulation, they become an independent source of systemic risk both domestically and internationally. In this regard, it has become increasingly evident that nonperforming loans should be dealt with expeditiously. The expected values of the losses on these loans are, of course, a subtraction from capital. But since these estimates of losses are uncertain, the troubled assets embody an implicit charge associated with an additional risk premium that, in effect, reduces the markets' best estimate of the size of the equity cushion. It is, hence, far better to remove these dubious assets and their associated risk premium from bank balance sheets, and dispose of them separately, preferably promptly. In Asia the sooner dubious real estate collateral is sold and realistic prices established, the quicker will be the recovery in the regions' weakened real estate markets, the major source of nonperforming loans. A predicate to addressing nonperforming loans expeditiously is better supervision and regulation, which requires more knowledgeable bank examiners than, unfortunately, most developing economies enjoy. In all countries, we need independent bank examiners who understand banking, who could in effect, make sound loans themselves because they understand the process. Similarly, we need loan officers at banks that understand their customers' business--loan officers that could, in effect, step into the shoes of their customers. But, training personnel and developing adequate supervisory systems for emerging banking systems will all take time. Fifth, despite its importance for distributing savings to their most valued use, short-term interbank funding, especially cross border in foreign currencies, when carried to excess may turn out to be the Achilles' heel of an international financial system that is subject to wide variations in financial confidence. This phenomenon, which is all too common in our domestic experience, may be particularly dangerous in an international setting. Sixth, recent adverse banking experiences have emphasized the problems that can arise if banks are almost the sole source of intermediation. Their breakdown induces a sharp weakening in economic growth. A wider range of nonbank institutions, including viable debt and equity markets, are important safeguards of economic activity when banking fails. Seventh, markets cannot abide the uncertainty of capricious rules. An effective competitive market system requires a rule of law that severely delimits government's arbitrary intrusion into commercial disputes. Defaults and restructuring will not always be avoidable. Indeed "creative destruction," as Joseph Schumpeter put it, is often an important element of renewal in a dynamic market economy, but an efficient bankruptcy statute is required to aid in this process, including in the case of cross-border defaults. When such statutes are weak to nonexistent, foreign creditors are more apt to flee prematurely in a pending crisis for fear of being short-changed by domestic political authorities. Equal treatment is seen fostered by objective statutes. Another important element in past crises has been moral hazard. The expectation that monetary authorities or international financial institutions will come to the rescue of failing financial systems and unsound investments has clearly engendered a significant element of excessive risk-taking. The dividing line between public and private liabilities, too often, becomes blurred. Moreover, interest rate and currency risk-taking, excess leverage, weak financial systems, and interbank funding are all encouraged by the existence of a safety net. In the United States we endeavor to neutralize perverse incentives by constructing a regulatory structure that seeks to simulate the market incentives that would tend to control these financial excesses if there were no broad safety nets. It is certainly more difficult to achieve such a result internationally among sovereign governments operating out of different cultures. Thus, governments have developed a patchwork of arrangements and conventions governing the functioning of the international financial system that I believe will need to be thoroughly reviewed and altered as necessary to fit the needs of the new global environment. A review of supervision and regulation of private financial institutions, especially those that are supported by a safety net, is particularly pressing because those institutions have played so prominent a role in the emergence of recent crises. A ninth element contributing to disequilibrium is lack of transparency. I believe that, in this rapidly expanding international financial system, the primary protection from adverse financial disturbances is effective counterparty surveillance and, hence, government regulation and supervision should seek to produce an environment in which counterparties can most effectively oversee the credit risks of potential transactions. Here a major improvement in transparency, including both accounting and public disclosure, is essential. To be sure, counterparties often exchange otherwise confidential information as a condition of a transaction. But broader dissemination of detailed disclosures of governments, financial institutions, and business firms, is required if the risks inherent in our global financial structure are to be contained. A market system can approach an appropriate equilibrium only if the signals to which individual market participants respond are accurate and adequate to the needs of the adjustment process. Among the important market signals are product and asset prices, interest rates, debt by maturity, and detailed accounts of central banks and private enterprises. Blinded by faulty signals, a competitive free-market system cannot reach stable equilibrium except by chance. In today's rapidly changing market place, producers need sophisticated signals to hone production schedules and investment programs to respond to consumer demand. Finally, I will point to public policy. There is sufficient bias in political systems of all varieties to substitute hope (read, wishful thinking) for possibly difficult preemptive policy moves, both with respect to financial systems and economic policy. There is often denial and delay in instituting proper adjustments. (This, of course, is just as likely in developed as in developing economies.) It is very difficult for political leaders to incur what they perceive as large immediate political costs to contain problems that they see (often dimly) as only prospective. Reality eventually replaces hope, but the cost of delay is a more abrupt and disruptive adjustment than would have been required if action had been more preemptive. Increased transparency for businesses, financial institutions, and governments is a key ingredient in fostering more discipline on private transactors and on government policymakers. Increased transparency can counter political bias in part by exposing for all to see the risks to stability of current policies as they develop. Under such conditions, failure to act would also be perceived as having political costs. I suspect that recent political foot dragging by governments in both developed and developing countries to thwart greater transparency is credible evidence of the power and significance of increased disclosure to alter dubious policy behavior. * * * Stepping back from the present situation in Asia, it is clear that most of the elements of the Asian problem which I have described are not applicable to the United States or its banking system, and especially not to community banks. But before we get too comfortable, I think we should note some parallels that tend to look all too close to home. For example, our nation is enjoying an extraordinary expansion. Its duration and its apparent lack of significant distortions have, I believe, created a sense of tranquility, a reduction in spreads, and an associated competition among lenders for credits. We should all be aware that such an environment tends to reduce prudence. It is exactly in such a period that your competitors (I am being diplomatic) tend to take a little too much risk for too little return. All too often at this stage of the business cycle, the loans that banks extend, later make up a disproportionate share of total nonperforming loans. Community bankers may be in a better position than most to guard against such problems. The economic function of banks is to act as an intermediary, creating value and profiting from the banker's special knowledge about customers. Technology is, however, eroding the special knowledge that large banks have, as information about large customers becomes broadly available at reduced cost. Community banks, however, have not lost anywhere as much of the value of their information base as have the national and international banks. Community banks can still profit from their special customers' knowledge. As a result, you are in a much better position to evaluate--and hopefully price--your risk exposures. I trust you will continue to do so. * * * Footnotes Via videoconferencing from Washington, D.C.
Testimony of Governor Laurence H. Meyer The payment of interest on demand deposits and on required reserve balances Before the Committee on Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs, United States Senate March 3, 1998 I welcome the opportunity to testify on behalf of the Federal Reserve Board on proposals in S. 1405 to allow the payment of interest on demand deposits and on the required reserve balances of depositories at the Federal Reserve. The Federal Reserve strongly supports these measures. We have commented favorably on such proposals on a number of previous occasions over the years, and the reasons for those positions still hold today. We also believe the legislation should include a provision to allow the Federal Reserve to pay interest on excess reserves. These legislative proposals are important for economic efficiency: Unnecessary restrictions on the payment of interest on demand deposits and reserve balances distort market prices and lead to economically wasteful efforts to circumvent them. Because of recent financial market innovations, the proposals are also important for monetary policy. Balances that depository institutions must hold at Federal Reserve Banks to meet reserve requirements pay no interest. Reserve requirements are now 10 percent of all transaction deposits above a threshold level. Requirements may be satisfied either with vault cash or with balances held in accounts at Federal Reserve Banks. Depositories have naturally always attempted to reduce such non-interest-bearing balances to the minimum. For over two decades, some commercial banks have done so in part by sweeping the reservable transaction deposits of businesses into nonreservable instruments. These business sweeps not only avoid reserve requirements, but also allow firms to earn interest on instruments that are, effectively, equivalent to demand deposits. In recent years, developments in computer technology have allowed depositories to begin sweeping consumer transaction deposits into nonreservable accounts. In consequence, the balances that depositories hold at Reserve Banks to meet reserve requirements have fallen to quite low levels. These consumer sweep programs are expected to spread further, threatening to lower required reserve balances to levels that may begin to impair the implementation of monetary policy. Should this occur, the Federal Reserve would need to adapt its monetary policy instruments, which could involve disruptions and costs to private parties as well as to the Federal Reserve. However, if interest were allowed to be paid on required reserve balances and on demand deposits, changes in the procedures used for implementing monetary policy might not be needed. The prohibition of the payment of interest on demand deposits was enacted in the depression atmosphere of the mid-1930s. At that time, Congress was concerned that large money center banks might have earlier been bidding deposits away from country banks to make loans to stock market speculators, in the process depriving rural areas of financing. It is unclear whether the rationale for this prohibition was ever valid, and it is certainly no longer applicable today. Funds flow freely around the country, and among banks of all sizes, to find the most profitable lending opportunities, using a wide variety of market mechanisms, including the federal funds market. The absence of interest on demand deposits is no bar to the movement of funds from depositories with surpluses--whatever their size or location--to the markets where the funding can be profitably employed. In fact, small firms in rural areas are able to bypass their local banks and invest in money market mutual funds with transaction capabilities. Indeed, smaller banks complain that they are unable to compete for the deposits of businesses precisely because of their inability to offer interest on demand deposits. The prohibition of interest on demand deposits distorts the pricing of transaction deposits and associated bank services. In order to compete for the liquid assets of businesses, banks set up complicated procedures to pay implicit interest on what are called compensating balance accounts. These accounts, which represent a sizable fraction of demand deposits, earn credits that can be used to pay for a firm's use of other bank services. Banks also spend resources--and charge fees--for sweeping the excess demand deposits of businesses into money market investments on a nightly basis. To be sure, the progress of computer technology has reduced the cost of such systems over time. However, the expenses are not trivial, particularly when substantial efforts are needed to upgrade such automation systems or to integrate the diverse systems of merging banks. Such expenses waste the economy's resources--they would be unnecessary if interest were paid on both demand deposits and the reserve balances that must be held against them. The prohibition of interest on demand deposits also distorts the pricing of other bank products. Because banks cannot attract demand deposits through the payment of explicit interest, they often try to attract these deposits, aside from compensating balances, through the provision of services at little or no cost. When services are offered below cost, they tend to be overused--an additional waste of resources attributable partly to the prohibition of interest on demand deposits. However, the potential gains in economic efficiency cannot be fully realized by paying interest on demand deposits alone. As has been demonstrated in the case of the consumer checking accounts, on which interest is paid, the absence of interest on the reserve balances that must be held against such transaction deposits has in itself provided strong enough incentive for banks to start sweep programs. The costs that banks incur to design and maintain the automation systems needed to implement such sweep programs are another instance of economic waste. The payment of interest on required reserve balances could remove the incentives to engage in such reserve avoidance practices. In light of depositories' use of resources to try to circumvent reserve requirements, the reason for having such requirements might be questioned. Indeed, reserve requirements have been eliminated in a number of other industrialized countries. Let me review with you for a few moments the historical and current purposes served by reserve requirements. Although the English word "reserves" might imply an emergency store of liquidity, required reserves cannot actually be used for this purpose, since they represent a small and fixed fraction of a bank's transaction deposits. Reserve requirements have at times been employed as a means of controlling the growth of money. In the early 1980s, for example, the Federal Reserve used a reserve quantity procedure to control the growth of M1. For the most part, however, the Federal Reserve has looked to the price of reserves--the federal funds rate--rather than the quantity of reserves, as its key focus in implementing monetary policy. While reserve requirements no longer serve the primary purpose of monetary control, they continue to play an important role in the implementation of monetary policy in the United States. They do so by helping to keep the federal funds rate close to the target rate set by the Federal Open Market Committee. They perform this function in two ways: First, they provide a predictable demand for the total reserves that the Federal Reserve needs to supply through open market operations in order to achieve a given federal funds rate target. Second, because required reserve balances must be maintained only on an average basis over a two-week period, depositories have some scope to adjust the daily balances they hold in a manner that helps stabilize the federal funds rate. For instance, if the funds rate were higher than usual on a particular day, depositories could choose to hold lower reserve balances, and their reduced demand would help to damp the upward pressure on the funds rate. Later in the two-week period, they could make up the shortfall in their average holdings of reserve balances. Depositories hold balances in their accounts at Federal Reserve Banks for reasons other than satisfying their two-week average requirements. Some balances are needed as a precaution against the chance that payment orders late in the day might leave a depository with an overdraft on its account, and the Federal Reserve strongly discourages overdrafts. On days when payment flows are particularly heavy and uncertain, or when the distribution of reserves is substantially displaced from normal, depositories tend to hold balances for precautionary purposes well above required levels. Unlike the two-week average demands, these daily precautionary demands cannot help smooth the funds rate from one day to the next. They are also difficult to predict, making it harder for the Federal Reserve to determine the appropriate daily quantity of reserves to supply to the market. In the absence of reserve requirements, or if reserve requirements were very low, the daily demand for balances at Reserve Banks would be dominated by these precautionary demands, and as a result, the federal funds rate could often diverge markedly from its intended level. An example of the volatility that can arise in the federal funds market because of a low level of required reserve balances occurred in early 1991. The Federal Reserve had reduced certain reserve requirements in late 1990 as a means of easing funding costs to banks during the credit crunch period. The cut in requirements reduced required balances at Reserve Banks for many depositories to below the balances needed for precautionary purposes, and the federal funds rate consequently became very volatile. On a typical day in that period, the funds rate strayed over a range of about 8 percentage points and missed the target for the average of daily rates by 1/2 percentage point. After a couple of months, stability returned to the federal funds market because depositories made improvements in their reserve management and because strong growth in deposits again boosted the level of required reserve balances above precautionary demands for many institutions. Since that time, depositories have become much more adept at managing their reserve positions, and their need for precautionary balances on a typical day has declined considerably. In fact, they are now managing to operate with lower aggregate required balances at Reserve Banks than they had in early 1991, and the federal funds rate is nevertheless much more stable. A number of measures taken by the Federal Reserve have helped to foster stability, including improvements in the timeliness of account information provided to depositories, more frequent open market operations geared to daily payment needs, and improved procedures for estimating reserve demand. Another measure now being considered by the Federal Reserve Board is a shift to lagged reserve requirements, which would also contribute to some reduction in uncertainty about reserve demand. The additional improvements in reserve management in recent years have been needed because required reserve balances have dropped substantially--from about $28 billion in late 1993 to about $9 billion in late 1997. This decline has not occurred because of further cuts in required reserve ratios by the Federal Reserve, but because of the new retail sweep programs implemented by depositories. These programs use computerized systems to sweep consumer transaction deposits, which are subject to reserve requirements, into personal savings accounts, which are not. The spread of such retail sweep programs has not yet fully run its course, and considerable uncertainty shrouds its eventual outcome. We expect that the effects of future declines in required reserve balances on the volatility of the federal funds rate will not necessarily proceed gradually; the rather modest effects on volatility seen so far may not preclude a more outsized reaction as reserve balances fall even lower. Heightened volatility in the federal funds rate is of concern for a number of reasons. To be sure, the transmission of volatility in the funds rate to volatility in longer-term rates is likely to be muted because of the averaging out of upticks and downticks in the overnight rate. However, even in the absence of much transmission to longer-term rates, increased volatility in the federal funds rate would affect other overnight interest rates, raising funding risks for most large banks, securities dealers, and other money market participants. Suppliers of funds to the overnight markets, including many small banks and thrifts, would face greater uncertainty about the returns they would earn. Market participants concerned about unexpected losses would incur additional costs in managing their funding to limit the heightened risks. Countries that have eliminated reserve requirements do not generally experience a great deal of volatility in overnight interest rates because they are able to use alternative procedures for the implementation of monetary policy. One type of procedure, for instance, establishes a ceiling and a floor to contain movements of the overnight interest rate. The ceiling is set by a penalty interest rate on loans provided freely by the central bank through what is called a Lombard facility. The floor is established in effect by the payment of interest on excess reserves because no bank would lend to a private party at an interest rate below the rate it could earn on a risk-free deposit at the central bank. For the Federal Reserve to be able to set a similar interest rate floor, it would need authority to pay interest on excess reserves. As regards a ceiling on the funds rate, a change in the Federal Reserve's approach to the discount window would be necessary, as we have no penalty interest rate and instead subject borrowing applications to an administrative review. Alternative means of establishing a ceiling could be considered. If interest were allowed to be paid on both demand deposits and required reserve balances, adjustments in the procedures for implementing monetary policy might not be needed. Such interest payments would likely boost the level of transaction deposits substantially, as some business and household sweep programs were unwound, and as banks became more able to compete for the liquid funds of businesses. The increased transaction deposits could ensure that required reserve balances would remain above the level of daily precautionary needs for many institutions, thus helping to stabilize the federal funds rate, while also improving economic efficiency as previously noted. The magnitude of the prospective responses to these measures is uncertain, however. Some corporations may not find the interest paid on demand deposits high enough to induce them to shift out of other liquid instruments. Also, some banks may retain consumer sweep programs in order to seek higher investment returns than the Federal Reserve would pay on reserve balances. If interest were allowed on required reserve balances, the Federal Reserve would likely pay a rate close to the rate available on an overnight repurchase agreement. Higher yields are of course available on investments of greater risk and longer maturities. Because of the uncertainties involved, the Federal Reserve needs to be able to pay interest on excess reserves as well as on required reserve balances, and at differential rates to be set by the Federal Reserve. The ability to pay interest on excess reserves would provide an additional tool that could be used for monetary policy implementation, but one that might not need to be used, if interest on required reserve balances and demand deposits resulted in a sufficient boost to the level of those balances. Even if not used immediately, it is important that the Federal Reserve have the full range of tools available to other central banks, given the inventiveness of our financial markets and the need for the Federal Reserve to be prepared for potential developments that may not be immediately visible. The payment of interest on reserve balances would tend to reduce the revenues received by the Treasury from the Federal Reserve, while the payment of interest on demand deposits would increase those revenues. Treasury revenues would be directly reduced by the payment of interest on existing reserve balances. However, there would be some offset to this direct revenue loss. The level of reserve balances would rise because of the interest payments, and the Federal Reserve would therefore be able to increase its holdings of government securities. The Federal Reserve on average would earn a higher yield on those securities than the rate it would pay on required reserve balances. On net, Treasury revenues are still likely to fall with the payment of interest on required reserve balances, but the recent declines in such balances have reduced that revenue loss to an historic low, roughly $100 million anually starting next year, according to a recent estimate by the Congressional Budget Office. Similarly, interest payments on demand deposits would increase the level of demand deposits, as well as the reserve balances held against them on which the Federal Reserve would also earn a positive interest rate spread. The size of this further offset to the Treasury's revenue loss on required reserve balances is subject to considerable uncertainty. In the long run, the benefits of the proposed legislation will likely be distributed rather widely among bank customers. The biggest winners should be small businesses that currently earn no interest on their checking accounts. They will gain from the interest earned and from being able to relax procedures used to hold to a minimum the size of their checking account deposits. Larger firms will benefit as well, in part by saving on some sweep fees. For banks, interest on demand deposits will increase costs, at least in the short run. Larger banks and securities firms may also lose some of the fees they currently earn on sweeps of business demand deposits. The higher costs to banks will be partially offset by interest on reserve balances, and over time, these measures should help the banking sector attract liquid funds in competition with nonbank institutions and direct market investments by businesses. Small banks in particular should be able to bid for business demand deposits on a more level playing field vis-a-vis both nonbank competition and large bank sweep programs. Moreover, large and small banks will be strengthened by fairer prices on the services they offer and by the elimination of unnecessary costs associated with sweeps and other procedures currently used to try to minimize the level of reserves. In the early 1980s, the Congress decided to deregulate interest rates on all household deposits and to allow money market deposit accounts for businesses. It is now time to extend the benefits of deposit interest rate deregulation to the ordinary checking accounts of businesses. Eliminating price distortions on demand deposits and on required and excess reserve balances would spare the economy wasteful expenditure, increase the efficiency of our financial markets, and facilitate the conduct of monetary policy.
Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan The current Asian crisis Before the Subcommittee on Foreign Operations of the Committee on Appropriations, U.S. Senate March 3, 1998 The global financial system has been evolving rapidly in recent years. New technology has radically reduced the costs of borrowing and lending across traditional national borders, facilitating the development of new instruments and drawing in new players. Information is transmitted instantaneously around the world, and huge shifts in the supply and demand for funds naturally follow, resulting in a massive increase in capital flows. This burgeoning global system has been demonstrated to be a highly efficient structure that has significantly facilitated cross-border trade in goods and services and, accordingly, has made a substantial contribution to standards of living worldwide. Its efficiency exposes and punishes underlying economic imprudence swiftly and decisively. Regrettably, it also appears to have facilitated the transmission of financial disturbances far more effectively than ever before. Three years ago, the Mexican crisis was the first such episode associated with our new high-tech international financial system. The current Asian crisis is the second. We do not as yet fully understand the new system's dynamics. We are learning fast, and need to update and modify our institutions and practices to reduce the risks inherent in the new regime. Meanwhile, we have to confront the current crisis with the institutions and techniques we have. Many argue that the current crisis should be allowed to run its course without support from the International Monetary Fund or the bilateral financial backing of other nations. They assert that allowing this crisis to play out, while doubtless having additional negative effects on growth in Asia, and engendering greater spill-overs onto the rest of the world, is not likely to have a large or lasting impact on the United States and the world economy. They may well be correct in their judgment. There is, however, a small but not negligible probability that the upset in East Asia could have unexpectedly large negative effects on Japan, Latin America, and eastern and central Europe that, in turn, could have repercussions elsewhere, including the United States. Thus, while the probability of such an outcome may be small, its consequences, in my judgment, should not be left solely to chance. We have observed that global financial markets, as currently organized, do not always achieve an appropriate equilibrium, or at least require time to stabilize. Opponents of IMF support for member countries facing international financial difficulties also argue that such substantial financial backing, by cushioning the losses of imprudent investors, could encourage excessive risk-taking. There doubtless is some truth in that, though arguably it has been the expectation of governments' support of their financial systems that has been the more obvious culprit, at least in the Asian case. In any event, any expectations of broad bailouts have turned out to have been disappointed. Many if not most investors in Asian economies have to date suffered substantial losses. Asian equity losses, excluding Japanese companies, since June 1997, worldwide, are estimated to have exceeded $700 billion, at the end of January, of which more than $30 billion had been lost by U.S. investors. Substantial further losses have been recorded in bonds and real estate. Moreover, the policy conditionality, associated principally with IMF lending, which dictates economic and financial discipline and structural change, helps to mitigate some of the inappropriate risk-taking. Such conditionality is also critical to the success of the overall stabilization effort. At the root of the problems is poor public policy that has resulted in misguided investments and very weak financial sectors. Convincing a sovereign nation to alter destructive policies that impair its own performance and threaten contagion to its neighbors is best handled by an international financial institution, such as the IMF. What we have in place today to respond to crises should be supported even as we work to improve those mechanisms and institutions. Some observers have also expressed concern about whether we can be confident that IMF programs for countries, in particular the countries of East Asia, are likely to alter their economies significantly and permanently. My sense is that one consequence of this Asian crisis is an increasing awareness in the region that market capitalism, as practiced in the West, especially in the United States, is the superior model; that is, it provides greater promise of producing rising standards of living and continuous growth. Although East Asian economies have exhibited considerable adherence to many aspects of free-market capitalism, there has, nonetheless, been a pronounced tendency toward government-directed investment, using the banking system to finance that investment. Given a record of real growth rates of close to 10 percent per annum over an extended period of time, it is not surprising that it has been difficult to convince anyone that the economic system practiced in East Asia could not continue to produce positive results indefinitely. Following the breakdown, an increasing awareness, bordering in some cases on shock, that their economic model was incomplete, or worse, has arguably emerged in the region. As a consequence, many of the leaders of these countries and their economic advisors are endeavoring to move their economies much more rapidly toward the type of economic system that we have in the United States. The IMF, whatever one might say about its policy advice in the past, is trying to play a critical role in this process, providing advice and incentives that promote sound money and long-term stability. The IMF's current approach in Asia is fully supportive of the views of those in the West who understand the importance of greater reliance on market forces, reduced government controls, scaling back of government-directed investment, and embracing greater transparency--the publication of all the data that are relevant to the activities of the central bank, the government, financial institutions, and private companies. It is a reasonable question to ask how long this conversion to embracing market capitalism in all its details will last in countries once temporary IMF support is no longer necessary. We are, after all, dealing with sovereign nations with long traditions, not always consonant with market capitalism. There can be no guarantees, but my sense is that there is a growing understanding and appreciation of the benefits of market capitalism as we practice it--that what is being prescribed in IMF programs fosters their own interests. The just-inaugurated president of Korea, from what I can judge, is unquestionably aware of the faults of the Korean system that contributed to his country's crisis; he appears to be very strenuously endeavoring to move his economy and society in the direction of freer markets and a more flexible economy. In these efforts, he and other leaders in the region with similar views, have the support of many younger people, a large proportion educated in the West, that see the advantages of market capitalism and who will soon assume the mantle of leadership. Accordingly, I fully back the Administration's request to augment the financial resources of the IMF by approving as quickly as possible U.S. participation in the New Arrangements to Borrow and an increase in the U.S. quota in the IMF. Hopefully, neither will turn out to be needed, and no funds will be drawn. But it is better to have it available if that turns out not to be the case and quick response to a pending crisis is essential.
Remarks by Governor Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. Before America's Community Bankers, Washington, D.C. March 4, 1998 The Asian Crisis: Lessons To Be Learned And Relearned Thank you very much for inviting me to address your session this morning. As you know, we live in a rapidly changing economic environment, both domestically and internationally. I would like to take some time today to discuss the unfolding crisis in Asia and the lessons both those in Asia and we in the United States can learn from that crisis regarding the structure, performance, and regulation of financial institutions. Asian Crisis: Sources and Solutions Before I elaborate on the implications for the United States of the current crisis in Asia, let me describe briefly some of the factors that underlie the problems facing those economies and the efforts under way to solve them. Growth in the emerging economies of Asia has, of course, been very strong in recent years. During the 1990s, GDP growth in this region regularly exceeded 5 percent annually, and often was closer to 10 percent. Such strong growth, and the widespread expectations that growth would continue, led to an enormous amount of investment. Not only did the residents of those countries save a large part of their income and invest much of that in their own economies, but foreign investors as well found prospects in Asia to be appealing. In consequence, record amounts of foreign capital flowed into the Asian emerging economies. To a considerable extent, sound macroeconomic policies--that is, monetary and fiscal policies--were responsible for and supportive of growth. Inflation rates in the Asian emerging market economies were well below levels commonly observed elsewhere in the developing world. This good performance in large part reflects the restrained fiscal policies followed by governments in the region--budget deficits have been small, and some countries have run surpluses. However, notwithstanding responsible macroeconomic policies, strong increases in private spending, much of it financed by bank credit, led to sharp increases in imports and a widening of trade deficits. Moreover, much of the increased investment spending was concentrated either in areas with highly volatile returns, such as stocks and real estate, or in areas where substantial capacity already existed. Finally, exchange rates were in some cases allowed to get out of line with fundamental forces in the economy. To some extent, this was a result of pegging exchange rates to the U.S. dollar, or to a basket of currencies in which the dollar had a large weight, at a time when the value of the dollar was rising against other currencies, notably against the yen. Pegging exchange rates to the U.S. dollar also had the unfortunate effect of allowing people to become complacent about the possibility that exchange rates might depreciate in the future. This led domestic residents to seek to lower their interest costs by borrowing abroad, often without hedging. One result was a worrisome buildup of foreign debt that became a further cause of concern, once prospects in the region began to be reassessed. As a consequence of these developments, the emerging Asian economies became increasingly vulnerable to a reversal of investor sentiment. When this occurred in Thailand, forcing the authorities to "float" their currency last year, investors reassessed the prospects for the other economies in East Asia. The value of currencies and stocks plunged throughout the region, capital flows to these countries reversed, and continued financial turmoil is causing a sharp contraction in economic activity. One of the most important elements in this context has been the weakness of the banking sector in most of these countries. The managers of banks had not developed appropriate procedures for evaluating and extending loans. This was due, in part, to the fact that they were subject to direction by the authorities and, in part, therefore, because they expected the government to support their borrowers. But importantly this lack of procedures was because they had not developed the tools of credit risk analysis, and the system of bank supervision was not equipped to impose proper risk management practices. Thus, when economic conditions worsened abruptly, the quality of the banks' assets deteriorated. Some borrowers could not service their loans. As the banks' financial condition eroded, their creditors in turn looked at them more carefully and their access to funding began to dry up. The problems caused by poor lending practices and inadequate supervision have been compounded by two other features of the financial systems in these countries. First, standards for the transparency and disclosure of private financial information were extremely lax. Once problems arose, it was difficult for creditors to distinguish good risks from bad, and this caused them to withdraw credit from all borrowers indiscriminately. Second, creditors to banks no doubt relied to some extent on a public safety net to back up their claims. This was true not only of small depositors, but also of foreign bank creditors. As it turned out, the presumption of official support was at least to some extent misplaced, because the government did not clearly have the resources to provide that support. As I indicated, the weakness of the banking system was caused in part by the deteriorating financial condition of borrowers. Compounding this problem, because the banking system is such an integral part of the functioning of the economy, weakness in the banking sector reinforced the deterioration elsewhere in the economy. What might have been a mild economic correction became much more severe. Let us now turn to the solution that has emerged. In the face of this crisis, the international financial community has provided some support. Central to the process of international support is the International Monetary Fund. As I indicated, fiscal and monetary policies do not lie at the heart of the Asian crises, and conditions relating to those policies correspondingly are not at the heart of IMF conditionality. Instead, the IMF, in cooperation with the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank, is emphasizing the need to restructure the economy, and especially the banking system, in the troubled Asian economies. Consistent with the central role of the IMF and the other international organizations, some individual countries, including the United States, have offered some bilateral support. In this context, concerns have been raised that creditors are being "bailed out," and that this diminishes investors' incentives to gauge risk carefully in the future. However, creditors and other investors have absorbed some of the real economic losses associated with the crises. Obviously, in the face of the abrupt changes in exchange rates and losses on local stock markets, those who have invested in Asian equities or who have exposures in Asian currencies have suffered substantial losses to date. Similarly, international banks have suffered losses on their loans to Asian borrowers, as well as on credit exposures arising from derivative transactions. Interbank exposures represent a special problem. Because of the importance of the banking system and the need for banks to be able to support a recovery of economic activity, authorities in most countries are unwilling to let the banking system fail, while obviously some banks do go out of business. As a result, international banks with interbank exposures to Asian banks have benefited from the official support provided to Asian governments. However, in the case of Korea, for example, international banks have agreed to exchange what they had thought were liquid claims for medium-term obligations, albeit with an explicit government guarantee. Implications for the United States Economy I will return to the problems of Asian banking systems in a moment. Let me digress on the implications of this crisis for our economic performance. The present economic expansion will turn seven years old in March, making it the third longest expansion in the postwar period. While "old" by historical standards, the expansion clearly has not lost any pizzaz. Real GDP grew by almost 4 percent last year, on top of an impressive 3-1/4 percent gain in 1996. The strength in economic activity energized the labor market, and the unemployment rate fell to 4-3/4 percent--the lowest level in a quarter of a century. And, if that were not good enough news, price inflation slowed to below 2 percent last year, despite higher rates of resource utilization. These obviously are very positive developments. I will not pretend today that I can fully explain this favorable constellation of events. It has been a very pleasant surprise to both forecasters and policymakers alike. What is clear, however, is that the current economic environment has been fostered by the prudent conduct of monetary and fiscal policy, and it has been propagated by important underlying trends in the private sector. One such trend is the tremendous growth in business investment over the past seven years. This investment boom has been important in stimulating the rate of growth in labor productivity in our economy. Economic history teaches us fairly convincingly that growth in the amount of capital per worker is an important determinant of such efficiency gains and ultimately in increases in our nation's standard of living. The statistical evidence here is encouraging: output per hour worked rose at around 2 percent in 1997 after an advance of 1-3/4 percent in the year before. Although such growth in productivity is still below the pace recorded in the 1960s, the acceleration in recent years provides some grounds to be optimistic about longer-term trends. The favorable state of the macroeconomy should stand us in good stead as we work our way through 1998. The available evidence suggests that the year began with considerable momentum. The labor market remained strong in January, and the stock market is rising again. Such strength will be important, as the economy attempts to absorb the shocks from Asia. As all of you know, many forecasters have lowered their sights for 1998 because of these shocks. I too expect to see some drag on economic activity in the United States, but determining the magnitude of this effect and its timing are likely to be very tricky. Where should we look for concrete evidence that the events in Asia are affecting economic activity in this country? The first place I would expect to see some effect is in the prices of primary commodities. Such commodities are traded on world markets and tend to be very sensitive to shifts in the supply-demand balance. The recent weakness in most major indexes of spot commodity prices is certainly due in part to the financial constraints on the affected Asian countries, which are translating into lower levels of demand for these commodities. In the short run, the U.S. economy will benefit from the reduced cost of raw materials. Over time, the increased imports at lower prices from Asia, as well as the more generalized reduction in commodity prices as their economies slow, will aid in containing price pressures in developed economies, but it will put pressure on U.S. businesses that make products that must compete with cheaper imports. A second place I would expect to see some rather immediate effect is in orders from abroad. The last two purchasing managers reports have provided preliminary evidence of some weakening in this area. There also are anecdotal reports of capital goods producers who already have experienced some cancellation of bookings or who anticipate a slowdown in orders as the year progresses. The weaker growth abroad, coupled with the reduced price competitiveness of U.S. goods, certainly will take a toll on U.S. exports to that region. In addition to the potential direct effects on trade-sensitive industries, there are broader macroeconomic risks from the Asian crises as well. Reduced earnings from abroad, coupled with some erosion of domestic profit margins stemming from the increased price competition, could adversely affect business spending. Some firms reportedly have lowered their sales expectations for 1998 a notch because of the Asian developments, which could reduce the demand for capacity expansion and trim the desired level of their inventory holdings. Ironically, there may also be a few stimulative effects. The recent lowering of long-term interest rates is due, in part, to the "flight to quality" and has been a factor in the strength of interest-sensitive sectors, such as housing. In short, the effects of the Asian crisis on the U.S. economy are likely to be very complex. The evolution of the crisis is uncertain at this point, but policymakers at the Federal Reserve will be monitoring developments in this sphere quite closely. Lessons Regarding the Financial Sector and Regulation Such monitoring will include how the problems facing banks in Asia ultimately are resolved. Only if the banking systems in Asian economies are restored to health can those economies recover. It is in the interest not just of Asia but also of the United States that they do so. The aspect that I suspect will be most interesting to this audience is the process now underway to restructure those systems, a process that in many respects parallels the resolution of the savings and loan problems in the United States in the 1980s. The problem, in a nutshell, is what to do with a system in a country in which many, if not most, of the banks and other financial institutions are insolvent, or would be if the prospects for repayment of their loans were properly taken into account. Should the banks be closed, or should the government inject enough capital to allow the banks to remain open? Should they be taken over by the government, with their nonperforming loans sold off so that the remaining entity could eventually be sold to private investors as a viable firm? What should be done with the nonperforming loans? Should they be acquired by an official body, like the RTC, and liquidated or held for some period of time? If it makes you feel any better, the difficulties associated with our S&L crisis have at least provided some insights that are being drawn upon to resolve some of the problems in Asia. While the management of our S&L crisis has provided useful lessons for Asia, have Asia's problems provided lessons that we can apply here? I think we really have not learned anything new, but the experience has reinforced some core principles that we have learned from our own history of financial crises. Recent Asian developments first remind us why we supervise and regulate depository institutions. Not only do we want to minimize the pain and disruption to relative innocents--such as most depositors--but we also supervise and regulate because systemic failure of depository institutions can and does have broad macroeconomic effects. Indeed, it is hard to imagine an economic crisis that was not made significantly worse--if not initiated--by systemic failure of the banking system, broadly defined. And, in a world of globalization, crises can easily and rapidly be transmitted across borders. I might note that these linkages among supervision, macroeconomic stability, and financial and nonfinancial shocks are the reason that I believe the Federal Reserve, the nation's central bank, must stay in the supervisory business. Second, Asian developments reinforce once again the critical importance of disinterested credit decisions. We in the United States require fair lending for all borrowers and communities, but thankfully do not have to worry about the government requiring that we finance specific borrowers. But there are similar concerns--the lack of impartiality--with credit extensions to affiliates, parents, and subsidiaries, concerns reinforced by the reduced funding costs and general moral hazard risks associated with the safety net. Unbiased credit judgments are more difficult to achieve when institutions lend to themselves or their affiliates, and the existence of a safety net allows them to take risks they might not otherwise take. The U.S. policy to reduce moral hazard has been to apply limits on bank and thrift loans to affiliates and, in the case of thrifts, to ban such credits outright if the affiliates would be prohibited to banks under the Bank Holding Company Act. These issues are a factor for many who are concerned about expanding activities in subsidiaries of banks rather than in subsidiaries of holding companies. Concerns about expanding the safety net and maintaining disinterested credit decisions are critical to my position that we go slow on (not oppose in all manner and for all time) the combining of banking and commerce. A parenthetic word about banking and commerce--not bank structure--may be in order because this is an issue important to you. I understand it is becoming increasingly difficult to draw a bright line between financial and real business activity, between banking and commerce. But large numbers of these combinations once made are, in reality, irreversible. I worry that we, all of us, do not yet understand either exactly how widespread integration between banking and commerce will work or if we can guard against the worst abuses. Hence, my go- slow perspective. It seems to me personally a good idea to absorb financial sector reform, and be sure we can manage that, before we go further. And the management of financial sector reform is a substantial job for all of us--both you and the supervisors who have to learn the risk implications of linkages among depositories, securities firms and insurance companies. A third crucial lesson that recent banking problems in Asia reinforce is the need for better risk management by banks and better, more market-driven, supervision of banks. The need for better risk management by banks and thrifts is obvious. As technology, regulation, and I hope one of these days, legislation, widen activities--widen the menu of risks--institutions have to learn how to use better the techniques of risk management. Better supervision does not mean more intrusive oversight of transactions, but more intensive review of systems to assure that risk management is more aligned with best practices. I should underline that the increasing complexity of financial instruments and the increasing rapidity of movements in financial markets make intrusive supervision less meaningful, if not less possible. We at the Fed have therefore been looking at ways to simulate, if not harness, market forces to help us do our job. I believe that our objective should be to make managers and institutions behave as if there were no safety net, to more fully let market forces show through. Prompt corrective action and model-based capital requirements for trading accounts are two examples already adopted. Fourth, the current crisis in Asia teaches that supervisors must act quickly. Forbearance and delay more often than not make the problem worse, not better. Indeed, the need for the authorities and financial institutions to face reality when problems occur--especially big problems--cannot be emphasized too much. In Asia, failure to face reality, and the associated delays, may well have turned problems into disasters and then disasters into crises. To be sure, the Asian authorities have no monopoly on such behavior. United States regulators, legislators, and Administrations in the 1980s and early 90s were guilty of the same sin. Finally, and most important, the Asian crisis underscores the need to limit intrusions, both regulatory and political, that distort markets. I have already referred to the lack of transparency, which in effect limited the information exchange required for well-functioning markets. Intrusions from regulation should not complicate these private problems. While some regulations are necessary to avoid moral hazard and protect what is ultimately taxpayers' dollars, not all regulations meet that test. Some regulations that were thought to have met that standard years ago may not meet it today. You and I share the twin goals of both minimizing regulatory burden and distortion and also creating the most level playing field we can among competing financial institutions. There are a couple of recent examples of Federal Reserve's support for streamlining regulation. The Federal Reserve has already amended Regulation Y to simplify and hasten the appplication process. More recently, the Federal Reserve has expressed its support for removing the ban on interest bearing corporate checking accounts. I supported that position because it fosters economic efficiency, eliminates price distortions in the market for deposits, and eliminates a federally mandated incentive for banks to invest in new systems to provide indirectly a consumer benefit that the regulation limits. Conclusion There are more principles that I could mention. Central bankers always see problems and principles in any set of facts. But time is short, and I wish to leave time for some discussion. Suffice it to say, in this country we have learned our lessons the old fashioned way--by the experience of our own crises. They have been different from those of Asia, and we do not face their problems. But history clearly indicates that we are not immune to crises either. Asia reminds us of some of the fundamentals of good financial service and good financial service regulation that should never be forgotten. Thank you.
Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan Coming budgetary challenges Before the Committee on the Budget, U.S. House of Representatives March 4, 1998 Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee, just last week I presented the Federal Reserve's semiannual report on economic conditions and the conduct of monetary policy. This morning, I will briefly review some aspects of that outlook before I turn to a more detailed discussion of coming budgetary challenges. The exemplary performance of the U.S. economy in 1997 will be hard to match. Last year's combination of robust expansion of activity, healthy creation of new jobs, and a decline in inflation generated widespread benefits for our citizens. Many of those benefits have the promise to be long-lived: Our nation has been experiencing a higher growth rate of productivity--output per hour worked--in recent years, which is the ultimate source of rising standards of living. There can be no doubt that domestic demand retained some of its considerable momentum going into this year. Production and employment have been on a strong uptrend in recent months. Confident households, enjoying gains in income and wealth and benefitting from the reductions in intermediate- and longer-term interest rates to date, should continue to increase their spending. Firms should find financing available on relatively attractive terms to fund profitable opportunities to enhance efficiency by investing in new capital equipment. By itself, this strength in spending would seem to presage intensifying pressures in labor markets and on prices. Yet, the outlook for total spending on goods and services produced in the United States is less assured of late because of storm clouds massing over the Western Pacific and heading our way. With the crisis curtailing the financing available in foreign currencies, many Asian economies have had no choice but to cut back their imports sharply from the United States and elsewhere, a situation made worse by disruptions to their financial systems and economies more generally. American exports should be held down further by the appreciation of the dollar, which will make the prices of competing goods produced abroad more attractive, just as foreign-produced goods will be relatively more attractive to buyers here at home. As a result, we can expect a worsening net export position to exert a discernible drag on total output in the United States and the dollar prices of our non-oil imports to extend their recent declines. These lower import prices are apparently already making domestic producers hesitant to raise their own prices for fear of losing market share, further contributing to the restraint on overall prices. The key question going forward is whether the restraint building from the turmoil in Asia will be sufficient to check inflationary tendencies that might otherwise result from continued strength of domestic spending and tightening labor markets. The depth of the adjustment abroad will depend on the extent of weakness in the financial sectors of Asian economies and the speed with which structural inefficiencies in the financial and nonfinancial sectors of those economies are corrected. If, as we suspect, the restraint coming from Asia is sufficient to bring the demand for American labor back into line with the growth of the working-age population desirous of working, labor markets will remain unusually tight, but any intensification of inflation should be delayed, very gradual, and readily reversible. However, we cannot rule out two other, more worrisome possibilities. On the one hand, should the momentum to domestic spending not be offset significantly by Asian or other developments, the U.S. economy would be on a track along which spending could press too strongly against available resources to be consistent with contained inflation. On the other, we also need to be alert to the possibility that the forces from Asia might damp activity and prices by more than is desirable by exerting a particularly forceful drag on the volume of net exports and the prices of imports. The robust economy has facilitated the efforts of the Congress and the Administration to restore balance in the unified federal budget. The deficit dropped to its lowest level in more than two decades in fiscal 1997, and both the Administration and the Congressional Budget Office now expect the budget to remain essentially in balance over the next few years before moving to moderate surpluses by the middle of the next decade. I should caution, though, that while receipt growth remained robust through January, the prospects for fiscal 1998 as a whole remain uncertain until we have a tally of the final payments that will be included in the April's tax returns. As I have indicated to the Congress on numerous occasions, putting the unified budget into significant surplus would be the surest and most direct way of increasing national saving. In turn, higher national saving, by promoting lower real long-term interest rates, helps spur spending to outfit American firms and their workers with the modern equipment they need to compete successfully on world markets. We have seen a partial down payment of the benefits of better budget balance already: It seems reasonable to assume that the decline in longer-term Treasury yields last year owed, in part, to reduced competition--current and prospective--from the federal government for scarce private saving. But much hard work remains to be done to ensure that these projected surpluses actually materialize and that the appropriate budgetary strategy is in place to deal with the effects on federal entitlement spending of the looming shift in the nation's retirement demographics. The baseline projections from OMB and CBO provide a good starting point for assessing the budget outlook over the medium term: They are based on sensible economic and technical assumptions and thus offer a reasonable indication of how the budget is likely to evolve if economic conditions remain favorable and current budgetary policies remain in place. However, the experience of the past few years amply demonstrates that such forecasts are subject to considerable error. For evidence on that score, we need only look back to last winter. Even with fiscal 1997 already well under way, both CBO and OMB were overestimating that year's deficit by about $100 billion. In retrospect, much of the error in last winter's deficit estimates fell on the inflow side, largely reflecting a surge in tax receipts that far exceeded estimates. This "tax surprise", which helped lift the receipts share of GDP to an historical high, was not a new phenomenon. In the early 1990s, growth of receipts consistently fell short of expectations based on the trends in aggregate income and the tax laws then in place. Even after the fact, our knowledge about the sources of such surprises has not always been definitive. As a result, we must remain cautious about extrapolating recent favorable tax inflows into the future. We cannot rule out the possibility that the next few years will see a more rapid dissipation of the strength in receipts than either OMB and CBO have assumed, implying renewed deficits. Indeed, all else equal, had the 1997 surprise fallen on the other side--downward instead of upward--we would be confronted by non-trivial budget deficits at least through the beginning of the coming decade. Moreover, the baseline projections assume that discretionary spending will be held to the statutory caps, which allow almost no growth in nominal outlays through fiscal 2002. Given the declining support for further reductions in defense spending, keeping overall discretionary spending within the caps is likely to require sizable, as yet unspecified, real declines in nondefense programs from current levels. Not surprisingly, many observers are skeptical that the caps will hold, and battles over appropriations in coming years may well expose deep divisions that could make the realization of the budget projections less likely. In addition, although last year's legislation cut medicare spending substantially, experience has highlighted the difficulty of controlling this program, raising the possibility that the savings will not be so great as anticipated--especially if resistance develops among beneficiaries or providers. These uncertainties underscore the need for caution as you move ahead on your work on the 1999 budget. There is no guarantee that projected surpluses over the next few years will actually materialize. However, we can be more certain that, absent action, the budgetary position will erode after the next decade as the baby boom generation moves into retirement, putting massive strains on the social security and medicare programs. Without question, the task of stemming that erosion will become increasingly difficult the longer it is postponed. Indeed, especially in light of these inexorable demographic trends, I have always emphasized that we should be aiming for budgetary surpluses and using the proceeds to retire outstanding federal debt. In that regard, one measure of how much progress has been made in dealing with the nation's fiscal affairs is that serious discussion of such paydowns has begun to surface. Working down the stock of the federal debt would put further downward pressure on long-term interest rates, which would enhance private capital investment, labor productivity, and economic growth, preparing us better to confront the looming changes in retirement demographics. Over the decades, our budgetary processes have been biased toward deficit spending. Indeed, those processes are strewn with initiatives that were viewed as having only a small projected budgetary cost at inception, but which produced a sizable drain on the Treasury's coffers over time. As you are well aware, programs can be easy to initiate or expand, but extraordinarily difficult to trim or shut down once a constituency develops that has a stake in maintaining them. Thus far, the President and the Congress have been quite successful, contrary to expectations, in placing, and especially holding, caps on discretionary spending. More recently, they have started to confront the budget implications of the surge in retirements that will occur early in the next century. But the good news of late on the budget has unleashed an outpouring of proposals that, if adopted, do not bode well for the maintenance of fiscal discipline. Although many of the individual budget proposals may have merit, they must be considered only in the context of a responsible budget strategy for the longer run. In closing, I want to commend Chairman Kasich and the members of the committee for your insistence on fiscal responsibility and persistent efforts to bring the budget under control. The shrinking budget deficit and the prospect of surplus stand as testimony to your endeavors. But we must remember that projections of surpluses are based on an extrapolation of steady economic growth and subdued inflation in coming years. Achieving such a performance in these uncertain times, with the U.S. economy now subject to a fine balance of powerful forces of expansion and restraint, will provide policymakers with a considerable challenge. And, on your part, not succumbing to the temptation to commit prematurely future surpluses that exist only on paper, while, in addition, addressing the adverse effects of ongoing demographic changes to the budget over the longer run, will not be easy. However, if we meet these challenges, the increase in national saving and investment will almost surely pay off handsomely in the form of a more rapidly expanding standard of living for all Americans.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced revisions in its cash access policy on how cash shipments and deposits will be handled in an interstate branching environment. The policy is effective May 4, 1998. The revised policy provides flexibility to depository institutions to obtain cash services from any Reserve Bank office. The original policy adopted in 1996 mandates greater consistency in Reserve Bank cash service levels than currently exists by providing a base level of free currency access to all depository institutions, but with restrictions on the frequency and number of offices served. Offices of depository institutions that meet minimum volume thresholds will be able to obtain more frequent access. Fees will be charged for additional access beyond the base service level. The Board's notice is attached. FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM [Docket No. R-0922] Federal Reserve Uniform Cash Access Policy AGENCY : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. ACTION : Policy statement. SUMMARY : The Board has revised its cash access policy to clarify the base level of free currency access to all depository institutions in an interstate branching environment. Each depository institution will be able to designate up to ten endpoints to receive free currency access from each Reserve Bank office. The revised policy provides flexibility to depository institutions to make the most cost-effective arrangements for obtaining cash services from Reserve Bank offices. The Board has also delegated authority to the director of the Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems to interpret the cash access policy. EFFECTIVE DATE : May 4, 1998. FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT : Jon J. Cameron, Manager (202/452-2220) or Kathleen M. Connor, Senior Financial Services Analyst (202/452-3917), Cash Section, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems; for the hearing impaired only: Telecommunications Device for the Deaf, Dianne Jenkins (202/452-3544). SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION : I. Background In April 1996, the Board approved a new cash access policy that becomes effective on May 4, 1998 (61 FR 19062, April 30, 1996). The policy provides greater consistency in Reserve Bank cash service levels than currently exists. The policy provides for a base level of free currency access to all depository institutions, but restricts the number of offices served and the frequency of access. Depository institution offices that meet minimum volume thresholds will be able to obtain more frequent free access. Fees will be charged for additional access beyond the free service level. The policy applies only to currency deposits and orders, and does not include coin deposits and orders. Since approval of the policy, issues have arisen regarding implementation in an interstate branching environment. The issues relate to the definition of endpoints eligible for free access. The April 1996 policy allowed each depository institution with a banking presence in a Federal Reserve office territory to designate up to ten offices to receive free cash access (deposit and order) from the local Reserve Bank office (i.e., the Reserve Bank office in whose territory the institution's office is located). Depository institutions asked Reserve Bank offices whether they could receive cash services from non-local Reserve Bank offices. It may be more economical for some depository institutions to use a non-local Reserve Bank office. For example, some depository institutions serve as correspondent banks for respondent banks in other Federal Reserve territories. There also are depository institutions that are geographically closer to non-local Reserve Bank offices. In addition, depository institutions asked if an automated teller machine (ATM) network or subset of a network could be designated as an office to receive free cash access. In order to address these issues, the Board has revised the April 1996 policy. II. Discussion The Board has revised its cash access policy within the following framework: (1) the policy continues to provide consistency in the cash service levels provided by Reserve Bank offices to depository institutions; (2) the base level of free cash services continues to be consistent with a wholesale role for the Reserve Banks, which implies that a large depository institution is responsible for servicing its own branch network; and (3) the policy provides flexibility to depository institutions to make the most cost-effective arrangements for obtaining cash services from Reserve Bank offices. Under the revised policy, each depository institution can designate up to ten endpoints to receive free cash access service from each Reserve Bank office. A depository institution may not designate an endpoint to receive free cash access from more than one Reserve Bank office. A designated endpoint may be a branch, head office, a money room and/or an armored carrier used by the depository institution to provide cash. Individual ATM locations are not eligible for designation as endpoints. If a depository institution uses an armored carrier to service ATMs, the armored carrier may be designated as an endpoint. Beyond the ten endpoints, Reserve Bank offices will continue to provide free cash access to large endpoints whose volumes exceed a specified threshold. The revised policy provides flexibility to depository institutions to make the most cost-effective arrangements for obtaining cash services from Reserve Bank offices. For some depository institutions, it may be more economical to use a non-local Reserve Bank office. The Board continues to believe that implementation of the policy will not materially affect the Reserve Banks' costs of providing cash services. Aggregate cash receipts and disbursements are expected to remain unchanged. The Board has delegated authority to the director of the Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems to interpret the cash access policy, and has permitted the director to further delegate this authority to the Reserve Banks' Financial Services Policy Committee. Other aspects of the policy remain unchanged. III. Effective Date The revised cash access policy becomes effective on May 4, 1998. IV. Competitive Impact Analysis The Board assesses the competitive impact of changes that may have a substantial effect on payment system participants. In particular, the Board assesses whether a proposed change would have a direct and material adverse effect on the ability of other service providers to compete effectively with the Federal Reserve Banks in providing similar services and whether such effects are due to legal differences or due to a dominant market position deriving from such legal differences. It is highly unlikely that the revised policy will result in any significant shift to Federal Reserve cash services away from private-sector providers. Private-sector providers offer an array of value-added cash services that the Federal Reserve Bank offices do not provide. The revised policy also clarifies that armored carriers may be designated as endpoints. The Board's revised policy, therefore, does not adversely affect the ability of depository institutions or service providers to compete with the Federal Reserve Banks to provide cash services. V. Federal Reserve Cash Service Access Policy The Board has adopted the following Federal Reserve cash access policy: Number of endpoints eligible for free cash access. Each depository institution can designate up to ten endpoints to receive free cash access (deposit and order) service from each Reserve Bank office. A depository institution may not designate an endpoint to receive free cash access from more than one Reserve Bank office. A designated endpoint may be a branch, head office, a money room and/or an armored carrier used by the depository institution to provide cash services. Individual ATM locations are not eligible for designation as endpoints. If a depository institution uses an armored carrier to service ATMs, the armored carrier may be designated as an endpoint. Beyond the ten endpoints, Reserve Bank offices will provide free cash access to endpoints whose volumes exceed a specified threshold. Each Reserve Bank office will set a "high bundle threshold," within the range of fifty to one hundred bundles, to accommodate the needs of the geographic area being serviced within that Federal Reserve office territory. If a depository institution receives free access for more than ten endpoints, each endpoint must meet the high bundle threshold. Frequency of access. Normal free access for each designated endpoint of the depository institution will be one deposit and one order per week. Access more frequent than once per week will be available free of charge to each designated endpoint whose volume exceeds a twenty-bundle aggregate threshold and that satisfies the local Reserve Bank office's denomination bundle standard. Priced access. Reserve Bank offices may choose to accommodate additional access where the demand exists subject to the constraints of the physical facilities at each Reserve Bank office. Reserve Banks must price access to cash services beyond the free service described above, if offered. Delegation of authority. The director of the Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, under delegated authority, may (1) approve changes in the base number of free endpoints and the volume thresholds; (2) waive the policy for a limited period if warranted by special circumstances, such as a natural disaster or the introduction of new currency; and (3) interpret the cash access policy. The director may further delegate this authority to interpret the policy to the Federal Reserve Banks' Financial Services Policy Committee. By order of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March 5, 1998. (signed) William W. Wiles William W. Wiles Secretary of the Board
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today issued its 1998 Trading and Capital-Markets Activities Manual for examiners and banking organizations. The new manual represents a substantive revision and expansion of the Trading Activities Manual issued in March 1994. The new manual compiles the latest Federal Reserve supervisory guidance on trading operations and related capital-markets banking activities. It details both sound management practices and key examination and review considerations for these operations and activities. The manual provides in-depth discussions of a wide range of risk management issues encountered in trading and dealer operations including revised and expanded presentations on market risk, counterparty credit risk, legal risk, financial reporting, accounting and ethics. Chapters on capital adequacy and settlement risk and a comprehensive subject index have also been added. A new section of the manual present existing guidance on other capital-markets related activities including whole-bank interest rate risk management, investment and end-user activities, and secondary market credit activities and products such as securitization and credit derivatives. The manual also includes profiles of 35 specific financial instruments commonly encountered in trading and capital-markets related activities. Each profile contains a basic description of the instrument and discussions on topics such as the risks encountered, pricing conventions, accounting treatment, risk-based capital considerations and bank-eligibility requirements. Copies of the manual may be obtained for $50 from: Publications Services Division of Support Services Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Washington, D.C. 20551 Updates and supplements will be issued as needed in the spring and fall of each year. The price will be $20 annually. The manual was produced by staff members at the Board of Governors and at the Federal Reserve Banks of New York, Chicago, Minneapolis and San Francisco.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today requested comment on the benefits and drawbacks associated with its 1994 same-day settlement rule. The Board also is requesting comment on the implications of potential further rule changes to reduce legal disparities between the Federal Reserve Banks and private-sector banks in the presentment and settlement of checks. Comments are requested by July 17, 1998 . The Board's same-day settlement rule enhanced the legal rights of private-sector banks to obtain same day settlement for checks presented to a paying bank by 8:00 a.m. local time at specified locations. The Board is evaluating marketplace experience under this rule and is considering further modifications to the rule pursuant to its responsibility under the Expedited Funds Availability Act. The Board is also considering whether modifications to its Regulation J, which governs check collection by the Federal Reserve Banks, to reduce or eliminate legal disparities would enhance the efficiency of the interbank check collection market, the check collection process, and the payments system more broadly. The Board believes that a reduction in the legal disparities between the Federal Reserve Banks and private-sector banks generally should promote competition in the provision of check collection services. This competition should, in turn, promote efficiencies and spur innovation. The Board will also consider whether potential further rule changes would increase costs to paying banks and their check-writing customers, and the extent to which these costs represent increases in the overall cost of the check system or a shift in costs from other check system participants. The Board's notice is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application and notice of FirstMerit Corporation, Akron, Ohio, to merge with CoBancorp, Inc., Elyria, Ohio, and thereby acquire PremierBank & Trust, Elyria, Ohio, and Jefferson Savings Bank, West Jefferson, Ohio. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. FirstMerit Corporation Akron, Ohio Order Approving the Merger of Bank Holding Companies FirstMerit Corporation, Akron, Ohio ("FirstMerit"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 3 of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1842) to merge with CoBancorp, Inc., Elyria, Ohio ("CoBancorp"), and thereby acquire CoBancorp's subsidiary bank, PremierBank & Trust, Elyria, Ohio ("PremierBank"). FirstMerit also has requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1843(c)(8)) and section 225.24 of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.24) to acquire Jefferson Savings Bank, West Jefferson, Ohio ("Savings Bank"), and thereby engage in savings association activities. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (63 Federal Register 2980 (1998)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the proposal and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in sections 3 and 4 of the BHC Act. FirstMerit is the tenth largest depository institution in Ohio, controlling $4.3 billion in deposits, representing approximately 2.9 percent of total deposits in insured depository institutions in the state ("state deposits"). CoBancorp is the 28th largest depository institution in Ohio, controlling $571.7 million in deposits, representing less than 1 percent of state deposits. On consummation of the proposal, FirstMerit would become the seventh largest depository institution in Ohio, controlling $4.8 billion in deposits, representing approximately 3.3 percent of state deposits. Competitive Considerations The BHC Act prohibits the Board from approving an application under section 3 of the BHC Act if the proposal would result in a monopoly, or if the proposal would substantially lessen competition in any relevant banking market and the Board has not found that the anticompetitive effects of the proposal are clearly outweighed in the public interest by the probable effect of the proposal in meeting the convenience and needs of the community to be served. FirstMerit and CoBancorp compete directly in the Ohio banking markets of Cleveland and Sandusky. Consummation of the proposal would be consistent with the Department of Justice Merger Guidelines and Board precedent in both banking markets. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposal would not have a significantly adverse effect on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in the Cleveland and Sandusky banking markets or any other relevant banking market. Financial, Managerial, and Other Supervisory Factors In addition, the BHC Act requires the Board, in acting on an application, to consider the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the companies and banks involved in a proposal and certain other supervisory factors. The Board has carefully considered the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of FirstMerit, CoBancorp, and their respective subsidiary banks, in light of all the facts of record, including supervisory reports of examination assessing the financial and managerial resources of the organizations and financial information provided by FirstMerit. The Board notes that the bank holding companies and their subsidiary banks are well capitalized and are expected to remain so after consummation of the proposal. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of FirstMerit, CoBancorp, and their subsidiary banks are consistent with approval, as are the other supervisory factors the Board must consider under section 3 of the BHC Act. Convenience and Needs Considerations The Board also has carefully considered the effect of the proposal on the convenience and needs of the communities to be served in light of all the facts of record, including a comment by the Legal Aid Society of Lorain County, Inc. ("Commenter") contending that FirstMerit has made inadequate efforts to help meet the housing-related credit needs of low- and moderate-income ("LMI") individuals in Lorain County, Ohio, and that FirstMerit's proposed branch closings in Lorain County would adversely affect LMI and minority neighborhoods. As noted, PremierBank and Savings Bank would be merged with and into FirstMerit Bank in connection with the proposal. In this light, the Board has given substantial consideration to the existing record of FirstMerit Bank, as reflected in its CRA performance evaluations and the policies and programs of FirstMerit Bank that help meet the credit needs of all its service communities, including LMI neighborhoods. CRA Performance Examinations The Board has long held that consideration of the convenience and needs factor includes a review of the records of the relevant depository institutions under the Community Reinvestment Act (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 2901 et seq .) ("CRA"). As provided in the CRA, the Board evaluates the convenience and needs factor in light of examinations of the CRA performance records of the relevant institutions by their primary federal supervisors. An institution's most recent CRA performance evaluation is a particularly important consideration in the applications process because it represents a detailed, on-site evaluation of the institution's overall record of performance under the CRA by its primary federal supervisor. The predecessor banks to FirstMerit Bank received "outstanding" CRA performance ratings from the OCC at their most recent examinations. FirstMerit's remaining banks received "satisfactory" ratings from the OCC at their most recent examinations for CRA performance. In addition, PremierBank and Savings Bank received "outstanding" and "satisfactory" ratings, respectively, from their primary federal supervisors at their most recent examinations for CRA performance. Examiners found no evidence of prohibited discrimination or other illegal credit practices at the subsidiary depository institutions of FirstMerit or CoBancorp in these examinations. Lending Record of FirstMerit Bank FirstMerit Bank offers several programs to assist in meeting the housing-related credit needs of LMI and minority borrowers, including two affordable home mortgage products (the BEST I and BEST III programs) designed specifically for LMI borrowers and residences in LMI census tracts. Both programs feature flexible underwriting guidelines, closing cost assistance, and down payments as low as 5 percent. FirstMerit also has invested $1 million in the Ohio Equity Fund for Housing, which financially supports the construction, rehabilitation and preservation of affordable housing throughout Ohio, including a family housing project in Lorain County. In 1997, the bank committed $221,000 in financing for a group home for low-income individuals. In addition, FirstMerit Bank intends to participate with the City of Lorain in programs designed to provide home purchase and home improvement loans to LMI individuals. FirstMerit Bank also engages in small business lending. In 1996, the bank originated 291 small business loans in Lorain County, totalling $28.5 million. Approximately 22 percent of the total dollar amount of these small business loans were made to businesses in LMI census tracts. FirstMerit Bank also participates in federal and state government-sponsored small business loan programs, including programs offered by the Small Business Administration, and the Ohio Link Deposit and Ohio Mini-Loan programs. The bank currently has outstanding 48 loans, totalling $4.4 million, under these government-sponsored loan programs in Lorain County. FirstMerit Bank also has provided financing to the Women's Development Center and the Elyria Downtown Development Fund. FirstMerit has formed a Community Development Corporation ("CDC") that has made approximately $4 million in loans and investments in LMI communities over the last two years. The CDC also has participated in numerous community outreach programs and has provided interest-free financing to the Community Housing Corporation in Elyria, Ohio. Branch Closings FirstMerit has indicated that 20 branches would be closed or consolidated as a result of the proposal. Two of the branches to be closed or consolidated are in LMI census tracts and are operated by PremierBank. One of the LMI branches is across the street from a FirstMerit branch that would continue to operate. The other LMI branch would be merged with a FirstMerit branch that is within approximately 1.5 miles of the PremierBank branch to be closed. FirstMerit contends that this branch has significantly fewer transactions and a significantly smaller deposit base than the average for transactions and deposits at all other FirstMerit branches in Lorain County. FirstMerit notes, moreover, that the customers of the PremierBank branch to be closed would be able to obtain information on their accounts and apply for loans by telephone. The Board also notes that the branch closing policies of FirstMerit and PremierBank require consideration of community concerns before deciding to close a branch. In addition to these factors, the Board has considered that federal banking law provides a specific mechanism for addressing branch closings. Federal law requires an insured depository institution to provide notice to the public and to the appropriate regulatory agency at least 30 days prior to closing a branch. The law does not authorize federal regulators to prevent the closing of any branch. Conclusion on Convenience and Needs Considerations The Board has carefully considered all the facts of record, including the public comment received, responses to the comment, and the CRA performance records of the subsidiary banks of FirstMerit and CoBancorp, including relevant reports of examination. Based on a review of the entire record, and for the reasons discussed in this order, the Board has concluded that convenience and needs considerations, including the CRA performance records of the subsidiary banks of FirstMerit and CoBancorp, are consistent with approval. Nonbanking Activities FirstMerit also has filed notice under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act to acquire Savings Bank and thereby engage in savings association activities. The Board previously has determined by regulation that the operation of a savings association by a bank holding company is closely related to banking for purposes of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act, and FirstMerit has committed to conduct this activity in accordance with Regulation Y and relevant Board interpretations and orders. In making this determination, the Board requires that savings associations acquired by bank holding companies conform their direct and indirect activities to those permissible for bank holding companies under section 4 of the BHC Act. In order to approve the proposal, the Board also must determine that the performance of the proposed activity is a proper incident to banking, that is, that the proposed transaction, "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public . . . that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices." As part of the Board's evaluation of these factors, the Board considers the financial and managerial resources of the notificant and its subsidiaries, including any company to be acquired, and the effect the transaction would have on such resources. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that financial and managerial considerations are consistent with approval of the notice under section 4 of the BHC Act for the reasons discussed above. The Board also has carefully considered the competitive effects of the proposed acquisition of Savings Bank and, as discussed above, has concluded that consummation of the proposal would not have a significantly adverse effect on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in any relevant banking market. The Board expects, moreover, that the acquisition of CoBancorp by FirstMerit would provide added convenience to CoBancorp's customers and to FirstMerit's customers. Consummation of the proposal also is likely to result in increased operating efficiencies for the combined organization. Additionally, there are public benefits to be derived from permitting capital markets to operate so that bank holding companies may make potentially profitable investment in nonbanking companies when, as in this case, those investments are consistent with the relevant considerations under the BHC Act, and from permitting banking organizations to allocate their resources in the manner they believe is most efficient. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that consummation of the proposal can reasonably be expected to produce public benefits that would outweigh any likely adverse effects under the proper incident to banking standard of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Conclusion Based on the foregoing and all the other facts of record, the Board has determined that this transaction should be, and hereby is, approved subject to all the terms and conditions in this order. The Board's approval is specifically conditioned on compliance by FirstMerit with all the commitments made in connection with the proposal. The Board's determination on the nonbanking activities also is subject to all the terms and conditions set forth in Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.25(c) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.7 and 225.25(c)), and to the Board's authority to require such modification or termination of the activities of a bank holding company or any of its subsidiaries as the Board finds necessary to ensure compliance with, and to prevent evasion of, the provisions of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders issued thereunder. The commitments and conditions relied on by the Board in reaching this decision are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The acquisition of CoBancorp's PremierBank shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day following the effective date of this order, and the proposal shall not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good .cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective March 11, 1998. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today its approval of the application of Regions Financial Corporation, Birmingham, Alabama, to merge with First State Corporation, Albany, Georgia ("FSC"), and thereby acquire FSC's subsidiary banks: First Bank & Trust Company, Albany, Georgia, and First Bank & Trust Company, Cordele, Georgia. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Regions Financial Corporation Birmingham, Alabama Order Approving Merger of Bank Holding Companies and Acquisition of Banks Regions Financial Corporation ("Regions"), Birmingham, Alabama, a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 3 of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1842) to merge with First State Corporation, Albany, Georgia ("FSC"), and thereby acquire FSC's subsidiary banks: First Bank & Trust Company, Albany, Georgia ("FB&T-Albany"), and First Bank & Trust Company, Cordele, Georgia ("FB&T-Cordele"). Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (63 Federal Register 5805 (1998)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the application and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in the BHC Act. Regions, with total consolidated assets of approximately $24 billion, operates banks in Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, South Carolina, and Tennessee. Regions is the largest commercial banking organization in Alabama, controlling deposits of approximately $8.8 billion, representing approximately 19.4 percent of total deposits in commercial banking organizations in the state ("state deposits"). It is the sixth largest commercial banking organization in Georgia, controlling deposits of approximately $3.8 billion, representing approximately 5.3 percent of Georgia state deposits. FSC is the 17th largest commercial banking organization in Georgia, controlling deposits of $373.7 million, representing less than 1 percent of Georgia state deposits. On consummation of the proposal, Regions would remain the sixth largest commercial banking organization in Georgia. Interstate Analysis Section 3(d) of the BHC Act, as amended by Section 101 of the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act of 1994 ("Riegle-Neal Act"), allows the Board to approve an application by a bank holding company to acquire control of a bank located in a state other than the home state of such bank holding company, if certain conditions are met. For purposes of the BHC Act, the home state of Regions is Alabama, and FSC controls banks in Georgia. All of the conditions for an interstate acquisition enumerated in section 3(d) are met in this case. In view of all the facts of record, the Board is permitted to approve the proposal under section 3(d) of the BHC Act. Competitive, Financial and Managerial Considerations Regions and FSC do not compete in any banking market. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposal would not have a significantly adverse effect on competition in any relevant banking market. The Board also has considered the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of Regions, FSC, and their respective subsidiary banks in light of all the facts of record, including supervisory reports of examination assessing the financial and managerial resources of the organizations and financial information provided by Regions. The Board notes that Regions is in satisfactory financial condition and would remain so after consummation of the proposal. Reports of examination assessing the managerial resources of Regions and its subsidiaries indicate that this factor is consistent with approval. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that considerations related to the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of Regions, FSC, and their respective subsidiary banks are consistent with approval under the BHC Act, as are other supervisory factors the Board must consider under the BHC Act. Convenience and Needs Considerations In acting on a proposal under section 3 of the BHC Act, the Board is required to consider the effect of the proposal on the convenience and needs of the community to be served. The Board has long held that consideration of the convenience and needs factor includes a review of the records of the relevant depository institutions under the Community Reinvestment Act (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 2901 et seq .) ("CRA"). CRA Performance Examinations As provided in the CRA, the Board has evaluated the convenience and needs factor in light of examinations of the CRA performance records of the relevant institutions by their primary federal supervisors. An institution's most recent CRA performance evaluation is a particularly important consideration in the application process, because it represents a detailed, on-site evaluation of the institution's overall record of performance under the CRA by its primary federal supervisor. The Board has reviewed the records of performance of the subsidiary banks of Regions and FSC in light of all the facts of record. Regions's lead bank, which accounts for approximately 65 percent of the company's consolidated assets, received an "outstanding" rating from its primary federal supervisor, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ("FDIC"), at its most recent evaluation for CRA performance, as of September 1996. Regions's other banks each received a "satisfactory" or better rating from their primary federal supervisor at their most recent evaluation for CRA performance. In addition, FB&T-Albany and FB&T-Cordele received "outstanding" CRA performance ratings from the FDIC as of July 1996 ("July 1996 Examination") and January 1996, respectively. Comments on Performance Record of FB&T-Albany The Board did not receive comments on the CRA performance records of Regions's banks. The Board received comments generally contending that FB&T-Albany was inadequately serving the credit needs of low- to moderate-income ("LMI") census tracts and the credit needs of small businesses owned by African Americans. Commenter also indicated that FB&T-Albany did not have a branch in an Albany census tract with a predominately minority population. In the July 1996 Examination, examiners concluded that FB&T-Albany effectively assisted in meeting the credit needs of its communities by originating residential, small business and small farm loans, and that the bank's loans were reasonably dispersed throughout its delineated communities, including LMI neighborhoods. Examiners particularly commended the bank's efforts in assisting the credit needs of small businesses. As of July 1996, FB&T-Albany had $63 million outstanding in small business loans, including eight loans under programs sponsored by the Small Business Administration that totalled approximately $1.1 million. The bank also allocated $1 million for a loan program administered by the Albany Dougherty Inner City Authority for the purpose of providing loans at below-market rates to improve inner city businesses. Examiners found no evidence of practices under the bank's loan policies and procedures that discouraged applications for the types of credit set forth in the CRA statement and no evidence of discriminatory or other illegal credit practices. FB&T-Albany's branches also were found to be readily accessible to all areas of its delineated communities. Examiners favorably noted that the bank had six full-service branches in Albany and that four of the branches were in or near LMI areas. Conclusion on Convenience and Needs The Board has carefully considered the entire record in its review of the convenience and needs factor under the BHC Act. Based on all the facts of record, including Commenter's submission and the relevant reports of examination, the Board concludes that considerations relating to convenience and needs, including the CRA performance records of the relevant institutions, are consistent with approval. Conclusion Based on the foregoing and all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the application should be, and hereby is, approved. The Board's approval of the proposal is specifically conditioned on compliance by Regions with all the commitments made in connection with this application. For purposes of this action, the commitments and conditions relied on in reaching this decision are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The proposal shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day following the effective date of this order, or later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective March 11, 1998. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes All banking data are as of September 30, 1997. Pub. L. No. 103-328, 108 Stat. 2338 (1994). A bank holding company's home state is that state in which the operation of the bank holding company's banking subsidiaries were principally conducted on July 1, 1966, or the date on which the company became a bank holding company, whichever is later. 12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1841(o)(4)(C). See 12 U.S.C. ï¿½ï¿½ 1842(d)(1)(A) and (B) and 1842(d)(2)(A) and (B). Regions is adequately capitalized and adequately managed, as defined by the Riegle-Neal Act. FSC's banks have been in existence and continuously operated for the minimum period required under Georgia law. See Ga. Code Ann. ï¿½ 7-1-628.3 (1997) (5 years). On consummation of the proposal, Regions would control less than 10 percent of the total amount of deposits of insured depository institutions in the United States and less than 30 percent of the total amount of deposits of insured depository institutions in Georgia. All other requirements of section 3(d) of the BHC Act also would be met on consummation of the proposal. The Statement of the Federal Financial Supervisory Agencies Regarding the Community Reinvestment Act provides that a CRA examination is an important and often controlling factor in the consideration of an institution's CRA record and that reports of these examinations will be given great weight in the applications process. See 54 Federal Register 13,742 and 13,745 (1989). An individual ("Commenter") submitted comments on behalf of Business Research and Development & Associates and the Albany-Dougherty National Association for the Advancement of Colored People. Although examiners noted technical violations of the Fair Housing Act, they concluded that the violations did not indicate any discriminatory practices and that bank was in compliance with the substantive provisions of anti-discrimination laws and regulations. Bank has initiated steps to correct the violations. Commenter also alleges that FB&T-Albany does not have a sufficient number of African Americans on its board of directors and in management. The BHC Act does not authorize the Board to adjudicate disputes that arise in areas of employment discrimination. Under the regulations of the Department of Labor, FSC and FB&T-Albany are required to file reports with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission ("EEOC") covering all employees, and the EEOC has jurisdiction for determining whether companies are in compliance with equal employment opportunity statutes. See 41 C.F.R. 60-1.7(a), 60-1.40. Commenter has requested that the Board hold a public hearing or meeting on the application. Section 3(b) of the BHC Act does not require the Board to hold a public hearing on an application unless the appropriate supervisory authority for the bank to be acquired makes a timely written recommendation of denial. The Board has not received such a recommendation from the FDIC or any state supervisory authority. Under its rules, the Board also may, in its discretion, hold a public hearing or meeting on an application to acquire a bank if necessary or appropriate to clarify factual issues related to the application and to provide an opportunity for testimony, if appropriate. 12 C.F.R. 225.16(e). The Board has carefully considered Commenter's request in light of all the facts of record. In the Board's view, Commenter has had ample opportunity to submit his views, and has submitted written comments that have been carefully considered by the Board in acting on the application. Commenter's request fails to demonstrate why his written presentation does not adequately present his evidence, allegations, or views. Commenter also fails to indicate why a public meeting or hearing is necessary for the proper presentation or consideration of his views. For these reasons, and based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that a public hearing or meeting is not required or warranted in this case. Accordingly, the request for a hearing or meeting on the proposal is hereby denied. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, and Governors Phillips, Meyer, Ferguson, and Gramlich. Absent and not voting: Vice Chair Rivlin and Governor Kelley.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice of Dresdner Bank AG, Frankfurt, Germany, to engage de novo through its nonbanking subsidiaries, Oechsle International Advisors, L.P., Boston, Massachusetts, and RCM Capital Management, L.L.C., San Francisco, California, in acting as commodity pool operators for private limited partnerships organized as commodity pools investing in assets in which a bank holding company is permitted to invest. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Dresdner Bank AG Frankfurt, Germany Oechsle International Advisors, L.P. Boston, Massachusetts RCM Capital Management, L.L.C. San Francisco, California Order Approving Notice to Engage in Nonbanking Activities Dresdner Bank AG, Frankfurt, Germany ("Dresdner"), a foreign bank subject to the provisions of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1843(c)(8)) and section 225.24 of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.24) to engage de novo through its nonbanking subsidiaries, Oechsle International Advisors, L.P., Boston, Massachusetts, and RCM Capital Management, L.L.C., San Francisco, California (together, "Companies"), in acting as commodity pool operators ("CPOs") for private limited partnerships organized as commodity pools investing in assets in which a bank holding company is permitted to invest ("Partnerships"). Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (63 Federal Register 229 (1998)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the proposal and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Dresdner, with consolidated assets of approximately $358.8 billion, is the second largest banking organization in Germany. In the United States, Dresdner operates branches in New York, New York, and Chicago, Illinois, and an agency in Los Angeles, California. Dresdner also controls several subsidiaries that engage in various nonbanking activities in the United States. Dresdner proposes that Companies provide administrative services and serve as investment advisor and sole general partner to Partnerships. Companies would privately place Partnership interests with "accredited investors," as that term is defined in the rules of the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC"). In connection with providing investment advice to Partnerships, Companies would be registered as commodity trading advisors with the Commodity Futures Trading Commission ("CFTC") and the National Futures Association ("NFA"). Because Partnerships would hold positions in commodity futures contracts and would be controlled by Companies, Companies also must register as CPOs with the CFTC and the NFA. Companies would be subject to the record keeping, reporting, fiduciary standards, and other requirements of the Commodity Exchange Act (7 U.S.C. ï¿½ 2 et seq .), the CFTC, and the NFA. The Board previously has determined by order that acting as a CPO for and controlling a private limited partnership that invests solely in investments that a bank holding company is permitted to make directly are activities that are closely related to banking and therefore permissible for bank holding companies. Dresdner has stated that all the investments of Partnerships would be permissible for a bank holding company to make directly. In order to approve this proposal, the Board must determine that the proposed transaction "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public . . . that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices." Previously, the Board has relied on a number of commitments that were offered by bank holding companies to address potential adverse effects that could arise from acting as general partner to private investment partnerships. The Board has reviewed these commitments in the context of this notice. Several of the commitments relied on by the Board in the past were offered to mitigate potential adverse financial effects associated with the proposed activities by limiting the exposure of the bank holding company to financial risks associated with the partnerships' activities and by requiring the maintenance of corporate separateness between the partnership and the bank holding company and its affiliates. To address these concerns, the Board has determined that in the event that a bank holding company reports its investment in a partnership on other than a consolidated basis, the bank holding company is required to include, when calculating its consolidated regulatory capital ratios, an amount of the assets in the denominator that is equal to all liabilities reported by the partnership. The Board also has determined that bank holding companies may not directly or indirectly guarantee the obligations of a subsidiary acting as general partner to the partnerships or enter into any guarantee, indemnity, or loss-sharing agreement or any similar arrangement intended to protect an investor in any partnership from any type of loss associated with an interest in the partnership. The Board notes, furthermore, that transactions between Dresdner's subsidiary banks and Partnerships would continue to be governed by sections 23A and 23B of the Federal Reserve Act. In addition, to ensure compliance with the Glass-Steagall Act, the Board will continue to rely on the restriction prohibiting partnerships controlled by bank holding companies from offering interests more than four times a year. In this case, the Board also has reviewed Dresdner's risk management systems and has concluded that they are adequate to address the financial risks associated with the proposed activities. The Board expects Dresdner to apply prudent risk and financial management policies to the proposed activities and maintain the legal separateness of the general partner from its bank holding company affiliates. Examinations of Dresdner would continue to check the adequacy of its systems for monitoring and assessing the financial risks associated with this activity. As part of its evaluation of the public interest factors, the Board considers the financial condition and managerial resources of the notificant and its subsidiaries and the effect the proposed transaction would have on such resources. The Board also has reviewed other aspects of the financial condition and resources of Dresdner, including the effect of this proposal on the financial condition and resources of Dresdner. The Board notes that Dresdner's capital ratios meet applicable risk-based capital standards under the Basle Accord and are equivalent to the capital levels that would be required of a U.S. banking organization. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that financial and managerial considerations are consistent with approval. The Board expects that the conduct by Dresdner of the proposed activities de novo would enhance market competition and provide greater convenience to Dresdner's customers. The Board also expects that the proposed transaction would benefit the public by increasing the number of commodity pools available to investors. For the reasons discussed above, and in reliance on all the facts of record, including the commitments made by Dresdner and subject to the conditions in this order, the Board concludes that the conduct of the proposed activities by Dresdner is not likely to result in significantly adverse effects that would outweigh the public benefits of the proposal. Accordingly, the Board has determined that performance of the proposed activities by Dresdner is a proper incident to banking for purposes of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Conclusion Based on the foregoing and all the facts of record, including the commitments discussed in this order and all other commitments and representations made by Dresdner in connection with this notice, and subject to the terms and conditions set forth in this order, the Board has determined that the notice should be, and hereby is, approved. The Board's determination is subject to all the terms and conditions set forth in Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.25(c) (12 C.F.R. 225.7 and 225.25(c)), and to the Board's authority to require modification or termination of the activities of a bank holding company or any of its subsidiaries as the Board finds necessary to assure compliance with and to prevent evasion of the provisions of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders issued thereunder. The Board's decision specifically is conditioned on Dresdner's compliance with the commitments and representations made in connection with this notice, including the commitments and conditions discussed in this order. The commitments and conditions shall be deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decisions and may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. This transaction shall not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective March 11, 1998. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Appendix Commitments provided by Dresdner in connection with acting as general partner of private limited partnerships. Dresdner, directly or indirectly, will not guarantee the obligations of Partnerships or a subsidiary acting as general partner or commodity pool operator of Partnerships, and, directly or indirectly, will not enter into any guarantee, indemnity, or loss-sharing agreement or any similar arrangement intended to protect an investor in any Partnership from any type of loss associated with an interest in the Partnership. In the event that Dresdner reports its investment in Partnerships on other than a consolidated basis, Dresdner will include, when calculating its consolidated regulatory capital ratios, an amount of assets in the denominator equal to all liabilities reported by the Partnership(s). The amount of this adjustment will be risk-weighted at 100 percent for purposes of calculating the risk-based capital ratios. Partnerships shall not offer interests more than four times per year unless the Board determines that more frequent issuances are consistent with the Glass-Steagall Act. Footnotes Asset and ranking data are as of December 31, 1996, and use exchange rates then in effect. Dresdner Bank Lateinamerika AG, Hamburg, Germany, a wholly owned subsidiary of Dresdner, also operates an agency in Miami, Florida. Dresdner previously has received approval to engage in private placement, investment advisory, and other transnational activities. See Letter dated June 23, 1997, from Jay Bernstein, Bank Supervision Officer, to Hartmut Grossman; Dresdner Bank AG , 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 850 (1996). Dresdner also has received approval to provide administrative services to closed-end investment companies. See Dresdner Bank AG , 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 676 (1996). SEC Regulation D, 17 C.F.R. 230.501. Partnerships would not be registered as investment companies under the Investment Company Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. ï¿½ 80a-1 et seq .). See The Bessemer Group, Inc ., 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 569 (1996) (" Bessemer "); Meridian Bancorp, Inc ., 80 Federal Reserve Bulletin 736 (1994). See 12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1843(c)(8). See Bessemer. A number of the commitments offered by bank holding companies in past cases are addressed by applicable statutes and regulations, such as the limitations on inter-affiliate transactions set out in sections 23A and 23B of the Federal Reserve Act and the standards governing control or the definition of the activities under the BHC Act and Regulation Y. These commitments are unnecessary because they restate certain statutory and regulatory obligations and confirm Board interpretations that, by force of law, govern the activities of Dresdner and Partnerships. Many other commitments previously relied on by the Board in similar cases were restrictions that governed private placement activities. In connection with its recent revision to Regulation Y, the Board removed those restrictions from all bank holding companies conducting private placement activities. The commitments relied on by the Board in this case are listed in the Appendix. See 12 C.F.R. 225.26; see also The Fuji Bank, Limited , 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 94 (1989); Bayerische Vereinsbank AG , 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 155 (1987). Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan and Governors Phillips, Meyer, Ferguson, and Gramlich. Absent and not voting: Vice Chair Rivlin and Governor Kelley.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today requested public comment on a proposal to permit the electronic delivery of disclosures for four of its consumer protection regulations. Comment is requested by May 15. The regulations affected are Regulation B, Equal Credit Opportunity; Regulation M, Consumer Leasing; Regulation Z, Truth in Lending; and Regulation DD, Truth in Savings. These proposals to permit electronic disclosures correspond in approach to an interim rule that the Board also published today, amending Regulation E, Electronic Fund Transfers. The Board also requested comment on proposed technical amendments to Regulations M and DD. A copy of each of the four proposals is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today published an interim rule to its Regulation E, Electronic Fund Transfers, that permits depository institutions to deliver disclosures electronically if the consumer agrees. The interim rule is similar to a proposed rule that the Board published in May, 1996, except that institutions need not provide paper copies of disclosures delivered electronically. Electronic disclosures remain subject to applicable timing, format, and other requirements of the regulation. The Board is also publishing a proposed amendment to Regulation E that would reduce the time period for investigating errors that involve debit cards used in point-of-sale and foreign transactions. Comment is requested by May 15. The Board's notices are attached.
For immediate release
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of a Prompt Corrective Action Directive against the OmniBank, River Rouge, Michigan. A copy of the directive is attached.
Remarks by Governor Susan M. Phillips Before the Conference on Coping with Financial Crisis in Developing and Transition Countries: Regulatory and Supervisory Challenges in a New Era of Global Finance, Forum on Debt and Development,De Nederlandsche Bank, Amsterdam March 17, 1998
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today its approval of the application of Peoples Heritage Financial Group, Inc., Portland, Maine, to merge with CFX Corporation, Keene, New Hampshire ("CFX"), and thereby acquire CFX's subsidiary banks: CFX Bank, Keene, New Hampshire; Orange Savings Bank, Orange, Massachusetts; and Safety Fund National Bank, Fitchburg, Massachusetts. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Peoples Heritage Financial Group, Inc. Portland, Maine Order Approving Merger of Bank Holding Companies Peoples Heritage Financial Group, Inc., Portland, Maine ("Peoples"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 3 of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1842) to merge with CFX Corporation, Keene, New Hampshire ("CFX"), and to acquire CFX's subsidiary banks: CFX Bank, Keene, New Hampshire ("CFX Bank"); Orange Savings Bank, Orange, Massachusetts ("Orange Savings Bank"); and Safety Fund National Bank, Fitchburg, Massachusetts ("Safety Bank"). Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (63 Federal Register 2980 (1998)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the proposal and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 3 of the BHC Act. Peoples operates depository institutions in Maine, New Hampshire, and Massachusetts, and CFX operates banks in New Hampshire and Massachusetts. Peoples is the third largest depository institution in New Hampshire, controlling $1.6 billion in deposits, representing approximately 12.3 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in the state ("state deposits"), and the 20th largest depository institution in Massachusetts, controlling $630.7 million in deposits, representing less than 1 percent of state deposits. CFX is the fourth largest depository institution in New Hampshire, controlling $1.6 billion in deposits, representing approximately 11.8 percent of state deposits, and the 47th largest depository institution in Massachusetts, controlling $348.4 million in deposits, representing less than 1 percent of state deposits. On consummation of the proposal, and accounting for the proposed divestitures, Peoples would become the largest depository institution in New Hampshire and the 11th largest depository institution in Massachusetts. Interstate Analysis Section 3(d) of the BHC Act, as amended by Section 101 of the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act of 1994 ("Riegle-Neal Act"), allows the Board to approve an application by a bank holding company to acquire control of a bank located in a state other than the home state of such bank holding company, if certain conditions are met. For purposes of the BHC Act, the home state of Peoples is Maine, and CFX controls banks in New Hampshire and Massachusetts. All of the conditions for an interstate acquisition enumerated in section 3(d) are met in this case. In view of all the facts of record, the Board is permitted to approve the proposal under section 3(d) of the BHC Act. Competitive Considerations The BHC Act prohibits the Board from approving a proposal if it would result in a monopoly or if the effect of the proposal may be substantially to lessen competition in any relevant market, unless the Board finds that the anticompetitive effects of the proposed transaction are clearly outweighed in the public interest by the probable effect of the transaction in meeting the convenience and needs of the community to be served. Peoples and CFX compete in the following banking markets: the Hillsborough, Manchester, and Concord banking markets, all in New Hampshire; the Boston, Massachusetts, banking market; and the Portsmouth/Dover/Rochester banking market. Consummation of the proposal would be consistent with the Department of Justice Merger Guidelines ("DOJ Guidelines") and prior Board precedent in the Boston and Portsmouth/Dover/Rochester banking markets. In order to mitigate the potential anticompetitive effects of the proposal in the Hillsborough, Manchester, and Concord banking markets, Peoples has committed to divest certain branches in those markets. In the Hillsborough banking market, Peoples would divest CFX's only branch to an out-of-market competitor, and the concentration in this market, as measured by the HHI, would remain unchanged. In the Manchester banking market, Peoples proposes to divest two CFX branches with total deposits of $51.3 million to an out-of-market competitor. Accounting for the proposed divestiture, consummation of the proposal would be consistent with the DOJ Guidelines and Board precedent in this market. In the Concord banking market, Peoples proposes to divest two branches controlling $104 million in deposits to an out-of-market competitor. Accounting for the proposed divestiture, Peoples would become the largest depository institution in the Concord market, controlling $380.7 million in deposits, representing 34.3 percent of market deposits. The HHI would increase 210 points to 1841. Fourteen competitors would remain in the market after consummation, including three competitors other than Peoples that would each control more than 10 percent of market deposits and four additional competitors that would each control more than 5 percent of market deposits. Three de novo entries into the Concord banking market since 1992 also indicate that the market has characteristics that make it attractive for entry. The Board believes that the proposed divestitures and the considerations discussed above mitigate the potentially adverse effects of the proposal. The Department of Justice also has reviewed the proposal and advised the Board that, in light of the proposed divestitures, consummation of the proposal would not likely have a significantly adverse competitive effect in the Hillsborough, Manchester, or Concord banking markets, or in any other relevant banking market. For the reasons discussed in this order, and based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposal is not likely to result in any significantly adverse effects on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in the Hillsborough, Manchester, and Concord banking markets, or any other relevant banking market. Accordingly, the Board believes that competitive factors are consistent with approval of this proposal. Other Considerations The BHC Act requires the Board, in acting on an application, to consider the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the companies and banks involved, the convenience and needs of the communities to be served, and certain supervisory factors. The Board has reviewed these factors in light of the record, including supervisory reports of examination assessing the financial and managerial resources of the organizations and financial information provided by Peoples. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of Peoples, CFX, and their respective subsidiary banks are consistent with approval, as are the other supervisory factors the Board must consider under section 3 of the BHC Act. Convenience and Needs Considerations The Board has carefully reviewed the effect of the proposal on the convenience and needs of the communities to be served in light of all the facts of record, including comments on the effects the proposal would have on the communities to be served by the combined organization. The Board has received a number of comments in favor of the proposal. Commenters supporting the proposal commended Peoples's participation in community and economic development efforts in northern central Massachusetts. In particular, commenters noted that, since 1991, Family Bank has played an active role in supporting and financing many community development projects that help meet the credit needs of low- and moderate-income ("LMI") individuals in the community of Haverhill, Massachusetts. Several other commenters expressed concern that the proposal would have an adverse effect on an economically depressed area served by Orange Savings Bank in Massachusetts that is known as North Quabbin. Some of the commenters contended that the lending activities of Orange Savings Bank were inadequate to serve the credit needs of North Quabbin, particularly the credit needs of local small businesses. In reviewing the convenience and needs of the communities to be served, the Board notes that Peoples provides a full range of financial services through its depository institutions. Peoples has indicated that it intends to enhance and expand the banking services available to all of its CFX's customers through increased commercial and residential housing lending activities, and access to a larger network of banking offices with extended banking hours, a full-service commercial real estate department, and expanded municipal financial services. Peoples also intends to provide $3 million through its Community Mortgage Outreach Program for mortgage loans to LMI and minority families in North Quabbin and $1 million to establish a loan pool to be administered by an advisory board composed of North Quabbin community representatives. The Board has long held that consideration of the convenience and needs factor includes a review of the records of the relevant depository institutions under the Community Reinvestment Act (12 U.S.C. § 2901 et seq. ) ("CRA"). As provided in the CRA, the Board has evaluated this factor in light of examinations by the primary federal supervisors of the CRA performance records of the relevant institutions. As noted, Peoples intends to merge CFX's banks into its depository institutions after consummation of the proposal. In this light, the Board has given substantial consideration to the existing record of Peoples as reflected in the CRA examinations of its subsidiaries, and the current programs and policies of Peoples that help meet the credit needs of all its service communities, including LMI neighborhoods. CRA Performance Examinations The Board has reviewed the examinations by the primary federal supervisor of the CRA performance records of the relevant institutions. An institution's most recent CRA performance evaluation is a particularly important consideration in the applications process because it represents a detailed on-site evaluation of the institution's overall record of performance under the CRA by its primary federal supervisor. Peoples's lead bank, Peoples Heritage Savings Bank, Portland, Maine, received an "outstanding" rating from its primary federal supervisor, the FDIC, at its most recent CRA examination, as of April 1996. Family Bank, which would serve North Quabbin after consummation of the proposal, also received an "outstanding" rating at its most recent CRA examination from the OTS, as of July 1997. All of CFX's banks were rated "satisfactory" or better at their most recent CRA performance evaluations by their primary federal supervisors. CRA Performance Record of Family Bank Examiners found that Family Bank's record of residential and commercial lending reflected a strong responsiveness to the credit needs of its communities. In addition to originating residential mortgages throughout its service communities, Family Bank offers the Community Mortgage Outreach Program specifically to assist LMI and minority borrowers in obtaining mortgage loans. The program features flexible underwriting criteria and Family Bank has made more than $6 million in loans since the program was established in 1994. In addition, Family Bank assists in meeting the small business credit needs of its communities. Examiners noted that 23.8 percent of the volume of small business loans made by the savings bank during the period covered by the examination were originated in LMI census tracts. Family Bank originated $84.4 million in small business loans during this period which represented 61 percent of the total dollar amount of its outstanding commercial loans. The savings bank has been designated as a "Preferred Lender" by the Small Business Administration and has participated as a member of several loan pools designed to assist small businesses, including the minority micro-loan pool of Lawrence and the Cambodian-American League of Lowell, both in Massachusetts. Family Bank also has indicated that it intends to assign two experienced commercial lending officers with primary responsibility for North Quabbin, consistent with its approach of permitting lending decisions to be made locally. Examiners also found that Family Bank actively supports community development activities. The bank made $5.2 million in loans to organizations involved in affordable housing, economic and community development, and neighborhood stabilization activities during the period covered by the examination. Conclusion on Convenience and Needs The Board has carefully considered all the facts of record, including the comments received, responses to those comments, and the CRA performance records of the insured depository institutions of Peoples and CFX, including relevant reports of examination and other supervisory information. Based on a review of the entire record and for the reasons discussed above, the Board concludes that convenience and needs considerations, including the CRA records of performance of the institutions, are consistent with approval of the proposal. Conclusion Based on all the facts of record, and for the reasons discussed above, the Board has determined that the application should be, and hereby is, approved. The Board's decision is specifically conditioned on compliance with all the commitments made in the application, including the proposed divestiture commitments discussed in this order. The commitments relied on in reaching this decision shall be deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision, and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The acquisition of CFX may not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day after the effective date of this order, and the proposal may not be consummated later that three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective March 18, 1998. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes Peoples would merge CFX Bank with and into its bank in New Hampshire, Bank of New Hampshire, Manchester, New Hampshire ("Manchester Bank"), and Orange Savings Bank and Safety Bank with and into its savings bank in Massachusetts, Family Bank, FSB, Haverhill, Massachusetts ("Family Bank"). Peoples's subsidiaries have requested approval for the proposed mergers from the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ("FDIC") and the Office of Thrift Supervision ("OTS") under section 18(c) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1828(c)) (the "Bank Merger Act"), and the appropriate state bank regulators. In this context, depository institutions include commercial banks, savings banks, and savings associations. All state deposit data are as of June 30, 1997. Pub. L. No. 103-328, 108 Stat. 2338 (1994). A bank holding company's home state is that state in which the operation of the bank holding company's banking subsidiaries are principally conducted on July 1, 1966, or the date on which the company became a bank holding company, whichever is later. 12 U.S.C. § 1841(o)(4)(C). See 12 U.S.C. §§ 1842(d)(1)(A) and (B) and 1842(d)(2)(A) and (B). Peoples is adequately capitalized and adequately managed, as defined by the Riegle-Neal Act, and CFX's banks have been in existence and operated for the minimum periods of time necessary to satisfy age requirements established by applicable state law. See N.H. Rev. Stat. Ann. ch. 384 (1997) (5 years); Mass. Ann. Laws ch. 167A § 2 (Law. Co-op. 1997) (3 years). Massachusetts imposes a 28 percent limitation on the amount of deposits in insured depository institutions that a banking organization may control through acquisition and New Hampshire imposes a 20 percent limitation, but permits state action to waive this maximum, up to 30 percent. On consummation of the proposal, accounting for all proposed divestitures, Peoples would control less than 10 percent of the total amount of deposits of insured depository institutions in the United States. Peoples also would not exceed applicable state law deposit limitations as calculated under state law, and state banking authorities in New Hampshire and Massachusetts have advised the Board that the proposal is consistent with state law. All other requirements of section 3(d) of the BHC Act also would be met on consummation of the proposal. 12 U.S.C. § 1842(c)(1)(B). Market share data used to analyze the competitive effects of the proposal are as of June 30, 1997. These data are based on calculations in which the deposits of thrift institutions are included at 50 percent. The Board has previously indicated that thrift institutions have become, or have the potential to become, significant competitors of commercial banks. See Midwest Financial Group, 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 386 (1989); National City Corporation, 70 Federal Reserve Bulletin 743 (1984). Thus, the Board has regularly included thrift deposits in the calculation of market share on a 50-percent weighted basis. See, e.g., First Hawaiian, Inc., 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 52 (1991). The Hillsborough banking market is defined as the Hillsborough County towns of Deering, Hillsborough, and Windsor, and the town of Washington in Sullivan County, all in New Hampshire. The Manchester banking market is defined as the Manchester RMA and the towns of Chester, Deerfield, New Boston, Raymond, Raymond and Weare, all in New Hampshire. The Concord banking market consists of the Concord RMA and the towns of Andover, Barnstead, Bradford, Canterbury, Dunbarton, Henniker, Hill, Salisbury, Warner, Webster and Loudon, and the city of Franklin, all in New Hampshire. The Boston banking market is defined as the Boston MSA. The Portsmouth/Dover/Rochester banking market is defined as the Portsmouth/Dover/Rochester RMA and the towns of Brookfield, Epping, Fremont, Hampton Falls, Kensington, Middleton, New Durham, Northwood, Nottingham, Strafford, and Wakefield in New Hampshire, and the town of Lebanon, Maine. Under the revised DOJ Guidelines, 49 Federal Register 26,823 (June 29, 1984), a market in which the post-merger Herfindahl-Hirschman Index ("HHI") exceeds 1800 is considered highly concentrated. The Department of Justice has informed the Board that a bank merger or acquisition generally will not be challenged (in the absence of other factors indicating anticompetitive effects) unless the post-merger HHI is at least 1800 and the merger increases the HHI by more than 200 points. The Department of Justice has stated that the higher than normal HHI thresholds for screening bank mergers for anticompetitive effects implicitly recognize the competitive effect of limited-purpose lenders and other non-depository financial entities. On consummation of the proposal, Peoples would remain the eighth largest depository institution in the Boston banking market and control $1.35 billion in deposits, representing approximately 1.6 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in the market ("market deposits"). The HHI would increase by 1 point to 1447. Peoples would become the largest depository institution in the Portsmouth/Dover/Rochester banking market and control $835.6 million in deposits, representing 32.6 percent of market deposits. The HHI would increase by 265 points to 1680. With respect to each market in which Peoples would divest branches, Peoples has committed to execute sales agreements with an out-of-market competitor prior to consummation of the acquisition of CFX, and to complete the divestitures within 180 days of consummation of the acquisition. Peoples also has committed that, in the event it is unsuccessful in completing any divestiture within 180 days of consummation of the proposal, it will transfer the unsold branch(es) to an independent trustee acceptable to the Board. The trustee will be instructed to sell the branches promptly to competitively suitable purchasers. BankAmerica Corporation, 78 Federal Reserve Bulletin 338 (1992). The HHI in the Manchester banking market would increase by 194 points to 3081, and Peoples would remain the third largest depository institution in the banking market, controlling deposits of $492.3 million, representing 22.4 percent of market deposits. Nine competitors would remain in the banking market after consummation of the proposal, including three competitors, other than Peoples, that would each control more than 10 percent of market deposits. One commenter expressed concern that grants to the commenter's community organization from Orange Savings Bank would not be continued after consummation of the proposal. Such agreements are matters governed by private negotiations between the parties and are not required by the CRA. Accordingly, the Board's review of the proposal has focused on the programs and policies that Peoples has in place to serve the credit needs of its communities. The Statement of the Federal Financial Supervisory Agencies Regarding the Community Reinvestment Act provides that a CRA examination is an important and often controlling factor in the consideration of an institution's CRA record and that reports of these examinations will be given great weight in the applications process. 54 Federal Register 13,742 and 13,745 (1989). The bank has retained an "outstanding" CRA performance rating since 1978 when federal supervisors began examining insured depository institutions for CRA performance. Manchester Bank's most recent CRA performance rating as of January 1995 was "satisfactory." Peoples acquired Manchester Bank in April 1996, and established a goal of improving its rating to "outstanding" in 1998. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Meyer and Gramlich. Absent and not voting: Governors Kelley, Phillips, and Ferguson.
Remarks by Governor Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. Before the Ohio Bankers Day conference, Columbus, Ohio March 19, 1998 The Changing Banking Environment and Emerging Questions for Public Policy In this period of rapid change in the banking system, it is important to maintain and strengthen communication between bankers and the bank supervisory agencies. Today's program contributes to that objective, and I thank you for inviting me to participate. I will begin by commenting on several changes and trends in the banking industry: consolidation, new products and tools, and new delivery channels. Then, I will suggest some implications and questions for public policy that I see following from those trends. Consolidation of Banking The most obvious trend in banking today is consolidation. In the last two decades, nearly all the traditional barriers to geographic expansion have come tumbling down. States took the lead with legislation liberalizing intrastate branching and permitting interstate bank holding companies. The federal government followed with the Riegle-Neal Act in 1994, which allows interstate branch banking. Banks are taking advantage of these new opportunities, and the net result has been an unprecedented wave of geographic expansion. Why are banks consolidating in number and expanding in size and geography? There is no single factor explaining the current merger wave, which actually dates back to 1981. Clearly, many banks are recognizing natural markets that cross political boundaries. For example, the Washington, D.C. area is one banking market that had been artificially divided between the District of Columbia and the States of Maryland and Virginia. Now, it is much easier for financial institutions to establish offices throughout the region in a format that fits their business plans. Clearly, there is some convenience gain to consumers, especially those who work and live in different political jurisdictions. A second explanation is the market for corporate control. To some extent, the market is sorting banks into those viewed as survivors and those viewed as acquisition targets. In large measure, this division is based on the market's assessment of management and the past performance of the bank. Some managers can best maximize shareholder value by finding a buyer that is willing to pay a high multiple for future earnings. Other managers can do better for their shareholders by expansion, including through the acquisition of banks in new markets. Third, technological change has always played a role in the merger movement. Data warehouses, call centers, home banking services, upgrades to legacy systems all require expensive information technology investments that can be justified by a larger customer base. Now, we hear anecdotal evidence that some banks are candidates for acquisition because they have not been willing or able to update their technology, or have not been able to adjust to the year 2000 computer problem. Fourth, consolidation may yield scale economies in some specific banking activities, and some mergers have led to more efficient banks. However, the long-term survival and profitability of small banks suggest there are few overall scale economies in banking. An efficiently run small bank can provide standard banking services and be as profitable as a large bank. The scale economies may arise in services that are more commonly provided by large banks. Whatever the motives, the transition to a nationwide banking structure is resulting in many mergers and acquisitions. About 400 healthy-bank mergers now occur each year. The number of banking organizations has decreased from approximately 12,300 in 1980 to approximately 7,100 now. At the national level, the percentage of domestic deposits held by the 100 largest organizations increased from 47 percent in 1980 to nearly 69 percent in 1997. Turning from banking to the larger financial services industry, some nonbank firms have expanded to become full service financial institutions. While banks have had to fight for many years to provide investment and insurance products, nonbank firms have been able to enter multiple segments of the financial services industry. I am a strong supporter of the need to modernize our banking laws and regulations and recognize that cross-industry consolidation is inevitable. However, I do not believe that the financial conglomerate will be the only, or even the dominant, means to distribute financial services. In the end, for some the challenge of cross marketing and cross selling financial products will prove to be quite difficult. Just as I believe that there are customer segments for which small banks will be the preferred choice, I also believe that there will be product segments for which focused providers will be viable competitors. New Products and Tools The second trend of the past several years is the introduction of many new banking products and tools, and a more intense use of some products and tools that have existed for quite awhile. I can only touch on a selected few. First, there have been products and tools that have changed the nature of lending. Interest rate swaps, credit scoring systems, and the securitization of loans have all changed some dimension of lending and allowed banks to more nearly obtain their desired degree of interest rate and credit risk. New methodologies for the control of risk are another important advance in banking. Risk that was measured mainly by the judgment of a loan officer can, to an increasing degree, now be quantified and risk criteria standardized across loan officers. While most traditional risk analysis was framed in terms of credit risk, it is becoming possible to evaluate the whole asset portfolio in terms of credit risk, interest rate risk, foreign exchange risk, or liquidity risk. With the tools now available, the individual bank can, to a degree almost unimaginable only a few years ago, decide on the amounts of the various types of risk that it is willing to assume and build a portfolio that provides its desired risk exposure. New retail payment products round out the list. However, they have not yet overcome the public's attachment to the familiar payment tools. Debit cards are gaining popularity, but most people still prefer to have the canceled check as a receipt for the transaction and gain the float. Stored value cards seem to have great potential as a means of payment, but most of the experiments conducted thus far appear to have had limited success. Channels for the Provision of Banking Services Finally, the ongoing experimentation with new channels for the delivery of banking services is very exciting. But, at this point, the eventual outcome of the experimentation is highly uncertain. Supermarket branches are receiving much attention these days. Clearly, there are savings in terms of bricks and mortar, and many customers like the expanded hours. While this new approach to the provision of banking services seems to hold great promise, there have been anecdotal reports that the profitability of supermarket branches has generally been disappointingly low. Distribution channels based on computer and communications technology have also received a great deal of industry attention. ATMs are the most well-established of those technically-driven distribution channels. Many banks also have their own home page on the world wide web; a few banks offer proprietary home banking services via telephone or personal computers; and a few offer services through companies that own the basic personal computer financial management systems. For some customers comfortable with the technology, these computer-based systems will likely become the preferred mode of banking. Directions for Public Policy Let me now turn to some of the longer-term public policy implications of these experiments and changes in structure, products, and channels. I would like to discuss three elements of public policy that might be influenced by these forces at work in the banking industry. These areas are: competition policy, using the market to control risk taking, and appropriate policies to foster new products and services. Competition Policy Let me start with a few words on banking competition. As I mentioned, consolidation is a trend in banking. The Bank Merger Act and the Bank Holding Company Act require that the Board approve only those mergers that are not expected to adversely affect competition. In assessing the competitive impact of a proposed merger, the Board examines many factors. Particularly important are the change in concentration and the post-acquisition level of concentration in each local market in which the banks operate. Through its published orders on applications, the Board has, for many years, attempted to provide the industry with a reasonably clear indication of its competitive standards for approval. In particular, when the basic screening guidelines of the Department of Justice are exceeded, mitigating factors must be present; the more a proposal exceeds the screening guidelines, the greater the need that the mitigating factors be significant. Policymakers recognize that measures of concentration are proxies for the likely impact on pricing and service quality that will result from a merger. These impacts currently are difficult to observe directly. Nonetheless, we should remain alert to any evidence that new technologies and delivery channels are making the current approach to market definition obsolete. Based on survey evidence, that time is not yet at hand, but we should recognize that it may come at some point. Market Control of Risk Taking Turning from competition to safety and soundness, the ongoing changes in the banking industry raise numerous issues. Key safety and soundness concerns include the accuracy of the Basle Accord's risk-based capital standards as a measure of risk and, more broadly, the appropriate role for market discipline on insured depository institutions. While I obviously cannot discuss these in adequate detail, I would like to give you a feel for the nature of my concerns. A core function of central banks is to protect the stability of the banking and financial systems. But the days when bank examiners could exercise that function by focusing almost solely on a bank's books and use simple formulaic rules are long past, if they ever existed. As I mentioned, we are in an era when financial transactions are increasingly complex and risk management systems of banks more sophisticated. Given this complexity, how should capital standards vary across banks? While the Basle Accord was originally intended to apply only to large, internationally active banks, the Accord's designers worked hard to craft it so that it could be applied in much the same manner to virtually all banks. But events have called into question the wisdom of this approach. Supervisors are increasingly looking for opportunities to use banks' internal measures of risk for ensuring adequate control. Thus, for example, U. S. bank supervisors have recently moved to require only large, internationally active, American banks to meet the Accord's capital requirements for market risk using their own "internal models" with appropriate monitoring and safeguards imposed by the supervisors. Moreover, efforts are underway to see if we can advance further in this direction with respect to credit risk in the banking book. On a closely related front, the Federal Reserve has been exploring incentive-compatible capital standards for market risk in the trading account. One approach, the "pre-commitment" approach, requires an institution to formally identify and disclose a level of potential loss beyond which it would be subject to severe supervisory penalties. This approach recognizes differences among institutions in the nature of their trading activities while providing strong incentives to ensure prudent risk management, more efficient allocation of capital and the maintenance of minimum prudential standards. There are both benefits and problems with such approaches. However, with refinement, some form of individually-designed capital requirements may well be a reasonable evolution from the internal models approach for establishing capital adequacy of a trading business. Therefore, the time is here for regulators, domestic and international, to seriously review the viability of these intriguing alternatives. More generally, when designing supervisory policy, I believe that we should always remember that markets can, and normally do, provide powerful incentives to control risk. Perhaps there is more that we can do to allow market incentives to be an ally in public policy. I wonder whether, eventually, we might wish to shrink the coverage of the deposit insurance safety net further. It might be reasonable to ask if some of today's range of banking products and services should be removed from the list of financial activities meriting such support. Perhaps a touchstone of future regulatory reform might be either a narrowing of the banks covered by full deposit insurance or a reduction of insurance coverage. The clear goal should be to reduce the moral hazard in--and hence the regulation imposed upon--our banking system. Another approach that I believe deserves some future debate is requiring banks to issue a minimum amount of subordinated debt to unrelated parties. An active market in such debt would give banks and their investors an incentive to bring more transparency to the banking endeavor and could be quite useful for more market-based supervision. These are only ideas now, ideas that seem to many to be impractical. The doubters may be right, but we should not stop debating how to use market incentives, rather than supervision, to control risk. Policies Toward New Products and Services Finally, we need to speed the development of modern, efficient, and safe retail payment products and services. Although the Federal Reserve has a role as provider of interbank clearing and settlement services to banks and thrifts, and will continue to play that role, the market will ultimately decide which electronic payment products and services will best meet the needs of households and small businesses. However, I believe that the Federal Reserve should look for ways to encourage the private sector in fostering experimentation with, and expanding usage of, newer retail payment systems. Our role might include identifying and reducing regulatory burdens that unreasonably inhibit experimentation. Regulation may reduce uncertainty and product development costs for some, but it may also discourage investment in new products or technologies by others. This is particularly true if the product is relatively new, and demand for it is relatively uncertain, as is currently the case with stored-value cards. Thus, in my view, the government should avoid regulatory actions that may inhibit the evolution of emerging payment products and services or prevent the effective operation of competitive market forces. It is much too early to regulate these new products. Conclusion Well, I hope that I have provided a few ideas for you to think about. Let me conclude with a short recap of my major points. The financial system is rapidly consolidating, and new products, services, and channels are being developed. The vast changes occurring in our financial system also raise new questions for our public policy debates. Do we measure the competitive impact of mergers correctly? What is the best way to set capital standards? How can we use market forces to control risk taking? How do we foster new financial products and services? I do not have answers to each of these questions. However, I do know that, to be successful, supervisors will surely need to adapt in new and innovative ways. The task before us is not easy. Balancing sometimes conflicting goals remains a challenging task for both banks and their supervisors, but I believe we have no choice but to adapt to our rapidly evolving financial landscape. Thank you.
Remarks by Vice Chair Alice M. Rivlin Before the 1998 Student Conference of the Georgetown University Public Policy Institute, Washington, D.C. March 19, 1998 Next Steps for D.C. I am in a fortunate position today for two reasons. First, as keynoter, I get to lay out the challenge to which my distinguished colleagues are asked to respond. Second, since I don't work for the City and they do, I can speak freely as an individual citizen and long-time D.C. resident about my hopes for the District, while they, in their positions on the firing line, have to be more guarded about what they can commit to deliver. So, I intend to exploit my advantage to the hilt by addressing three topics briefly. What can we aspire to? What can citizens hope their city will be like in 5-10 years? Where are we now with respect to these aspirations? Are we better or worse off than we were 3-4 years ago? What are the next steps that must be taken right away if we are to make progress toward the City we want to see? And, who should take these steps -- these officials and their colleagues, other governments, or D.C. citizens themselves? First, what can we hope for and aspire to? By "we," I mean not just D.C. residents, but residents of surrounding counties who care about the vital core of their metropolitan area and citizens of the rest of the country who want to be proud of their Nation's capital. If we are aspiring, we should reach high, but we should also be realistic. We might want to be a "shining city on a hill," but what we are is the central city of a major metropolitan area. That's not a genus that provides a great many shining examples at the moment. All central cities, especially older ones in the East and Middle West, have a disproportionate share of current problems: concentration of poverty; big gaps between rich and poor; middle class flight to the suburbs; older, decaying neighborhoods; crime and drugs; high costs, declining tax bases, race and class tension. D.C. has all the problems of other central cities, plus the requirement to produce both state and city services, plus drastic artificial restrictions on its powers to raise revenue, plus a recent history of colonial misrule followed by limited experience with representative democracy. But along with our special disadvantages, we also have some major assets. We are the capital of the world's most prosperous and powerful nation. We are one of the world's most beautiful cities. We are the center of a vibrant metropolitan area with a concentration of technology companies that rivals Silicon Valley. One sometimes hears local pundits bemoaning the fact that Washington has no major manufacturing industries. We don't make steel or cars or textiles or ball-bearings or refrigerators. But that's precisely our advantage. Our industries are the growth engines of the future: the knowledge industries, hospitality and tourism, medical care, professional and managerial services. If we exploit our advantages and work hard at it, we can realistically aspire to revitalize the City. Aspirations I believe our aspirations should have four dimensions. First, services -- a municipal government and a school system that deliver high quality services. They don't have to be Cadillac services, but they have to work. That means kids coming out of school who can read and write and reason and can handle the technology of modern jobs. That means businesses and professionals being able to get permits and licenses expeditiously. It means responsive emergency services, medical care, foster care, drug treatment and a host of other services that citizens need. It means well trained, polite municipal employees with a sense of pride in their work. Second, democracy -- a city run by locally elected officials responsive to an electorate that votes and demands performance. Strong professional managers are essential to the quality of city services, but they have to be accountable to elected officials who, in turn are accountable to the voters. I don't believe this city or any city can thrive without an engaged empowered electorate. The current vesting of power in an unelected control board can be justified only as a temporary response to crisis and a transition to democratic process. Third, regional focus -- strong partnerships (both public and private) between central city and metropolitan area. The growth and development of the suburban ring is largely dependent on its being a ring around the seat of the national government. It's not in the suburban interest if the core decays. I don't believe metropolitan government is realistic, especially across state lines, but partnerships and cooperation are. Fourth, cooperation with the Federal government -- working relationship in which Federal agencies act as responsible corporate citizens of the District. While we needn't kid ourselves that the relationship between the District and the Federal government can ever be free of tension (not a lot of love is lost between most cities and their states, after all) we should aspire to mutual respect and cooperation. The Federal government has an interest in a strong, independent, well functioning city, and D.C. needs to be able to draw on the resources and expertise of its largest employer. Are We Making Progress or Retrogressing? The last few years in D.C. have been devoted to crisis management and damage control. In November 1994, when the last mayoral election took place, the city was in fiscal free fall, not able to pay its bills, hurtling towards bankruptcy. The crisis had been a long time coming. In 1989, Mayor Barry, as his previous term was approaching its final year, realized that expenses were mounting and the revenues generated by the building boom of the 1980s were tapering off. He appointed a commission to examine the District's fiscal future and make recommendations. I had the honor to chair that Commission, which reported after the election of 1990, not to the Mayor who had appointed us, but to his successor, Sharon Pratt Kelly. We predicted, accurately, that if action were not taken, spending would outrun revenues and deficits would mount. Hard choices were needed to avoid fiscal disaster. We recommended cutting the size of the D.C. government workforce; investing in training, equipment and infrastructure; shifting D.C.'s pension liability to the Federal government (which created the problem), sharing the burden of paying for metropolitan services (such as transportation) with the suburbs, and raising more revenue, either by taxing non-resident income or increasing the Federal payment. We got a lot of attention, but not much action. It was an opportunity missed. Over the next four years, the District's fiscal problems worsened and were compounded by national recession and cut-backs in the Federal government itself. By the time Mayor Barry was reinaugurated in January 1995, the District was in imminent danger of bankruptcy. Drastic action had to be taken quickly. The Clinton Administration worked closely with Congress and City officials to put the Control Board in place. It got a fast start, reestablished D.C. credit, got the overdue bills paid, restored a measure of confidence. Tony Williams came on board as the City's CFO and began to build the City's fiscal infrastructure and get the budget under control. Now, with a lot of hard work and a little help from an improving economy, the deficit has been tamed and the City is back in the black. But fiscal damage control was just the first step. Everybody recognized that D.C., even if it had the most effective city government in the country--which it didn't--couldn't pull itself together without more resources. It had state-like functions without state-like revenues. Asking for broader taxing power or greater cash contributions from national taxpayers did not seem politically realistic. Hence, the thinking in the Administration, Congress and the city, coalesced around a plan to do two things: (1) to relieve D.C. of some of the burdens it was ill-equipped to carry, such as prisons, Medicaid, and the past pension liability; and (2) to invest in D.C.'s infrastructure and future development. I believed then, and still do, that this plan made sense for D.C. But its success depended heavily on (1) Mayor and Council working closely with the Control Board to modernize and streamline the city government and, (2) on Congress not trying to be a 535-member City Council. The Control Board was never intended to become the city government. I was President Clinton's point person on the creation and appointment of the Board, and I remember how clear we all were at the time that we were not putting in place a new city government. The Mayor and the Council were to manage the city and get it back on the track to fiscal health. The Control Board--five highly qualified, dedicated, part-time, unpaid people with a small staff--were to be the watch dogs. They were to monitor the city government's actions, oversee the budget and ensure that it moved quickly toward balance. They were to work with the Major and the Council to help them restore fiscal viability to D.C. It didn't work out that way. Communication between elected officials and the Control Board broke down (blame lies on both sides, but it doesn't matter now). Congress leapt into the breech, turned much of the responsibility for running City services over to the Control Board and made up a lot of the rules itself. The Control Board, in turn, finding itself with far more managerial responsibility than it expected, reached out to pull in experienced managers from around the country -- most notably putting General Julius Becton in charge of the schools and bringing Camille Barnett, a city administrator with a strong track record, to help reform and revitalize a city's major agencies. Next Steps So here we are, in the spring of 1998, three years after the bottom of the fiscal crisis, facing the prospect of appointments to the Control Board for another three years and a new round of municipal elections. On the plus side, the fiscal picture is a lot brighter, not just temporarily, but into the future. The D.C. government workforce is smaller, many unnecessary expenditures (along with a lot of necessary ones, I'm afraid) have been curtailed, the Federal government is taking over Lorton and the pension liability, and paying a higher share of Medicaid. New management teams are in place and working hard to deliver better services with less money. Those are the pluses or potential pluses. But the costs have been high. Local elected officials have lost power; the Congress is micro managing as if it would rather be a city council than a national legislature; the local population, feeling disenfranchised and disempowered, angry at deteriorating services, unconvinced that the proverbial corner has been turned, is still voting with its feet to get out of the city. Despite all of which, I'm hopeful. The next few months are crucial if we are to move towards our aspirations for the City and not fall back into destructive bickering, recriminations and name-calling. For success, everyone involved has to be clear that there are two tasks before us: improving city services returning power to elected officials. These tasks have to be done together, in parallel. We won't get one without the other. The City, the Control Board and the Congress, all have to recognize that we are in a transition period (transition to a better run city and transition back to home rule) and that they have to work together or they guarantee failure. A newly appointed Control Board if it is to have the confidence (or even the tolerance) of City officials and the electorate has to make crystal clear from day one that it is here to work itself out of a job as quickly as possible. The President should make that clear when he announces the appointments (or reappointments) and the Board itself should say it frequently and far more emphatically than the present Board has done. The new Board should work far more closely and visibly with elected officials than the Board has and reach out for input from citizens and their representatives. At the same time, elected officials and candidates for elected office have to recognize that unless the D.C. government visibly embraces substantial managerial and operational reform, they will never get real power back. They might get elected by resisting change and portraying D.C. as a helpless victim of a malevolent forces, but they would be elected to powerless offices. That is not the road to restoration of self-government in D.C. Finally, the citizens of the District -- including the corporate and non-profit citizens and citizen groups as well as individuals -- have to make clear every way they can that they want both more effective, better managed government and a return of power to elected government. We have to challenge both candidates for elective office and the Control Board to discuss very specifically how they plan to improve city services and how they intend to manage the transfer of power, in an orderly way, to elected officials and the people who put them there. Footnotes This keynote speech was presented at a conference sponsored by the Georgetown University Public Policy Institute. Alice Rivlin also participated on a panel which included Marion Barry, Jr., Mayor of the District of Columbia; Linda Cropp, Chair of the District of Columbia City Council; Camille Barnett, Chief Management Officer of the District of Columbia; and Anthony Williams, Chief Financial Officer of the District of Columbia.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the termination of the following enforcement actions: The Bank of Versailles, Versailles, Missouri Cease and Desist Order dated December 6, 1994 Terminated February 26, 1998 The Security State Bank of Pecos, Pecos, Texas Cease and Desist Order dated October 17, 1995 Terminated February 23, 1998 Millennium Bank, San Francisco, California Written Agreement dated June 8, 1992 Terminated February 11, 1998
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice of Banco Bilbao Vizcaya, S.A., Bilbao, Spain, to engage through its wholly owned subsidiary, BBV LatInvest Securities Inc., New York, New York, in a variety of nonbanking activities, including underwriting and dealing, to a limited extent, in all types of debt and equity securities. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Banco Bilbao Vizcaya, S.A. Bilbao, Spain Order Approving Notice to Engage in Certain Nonbanking Activities Banco Bilbao Vizcaya, S.A., Bilbao, Spain ("BBV"), a foreign bank subject to the provisions of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8)) and section 225.24 of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.24) to engage in the following nonbanking activities through its wholly owned subsidiary, BBV LatInvest Securities Inc., New York, New York ("Company"): Underwriting and dealing in, to a limited extent, all types of debt and equity securities, other than ownership interests in open-end investment companies; Extending credit and servicing loans, in accordance with section 225.28(b)(1) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(1)); Providing financial and investment advisory services, in accordance with section 225.28(b)(6) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(6)); Providing securities brokerage services, in accordance with section 225.28(b)(7)(i) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(7)(i)); Buying and selling all types of securities on the order of customers as a "riskless principal," in accordance with section 225.28(b)(7)(ii) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(7)(ii); Acting as agent in the private placement of all types of securities, in accordance with section 225.28(b)(7)(iii) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(7)(iii)); Providing other transactional services, in accordance with section 225.28(b)(7)(v) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(7)(v)); and Underwriting and dealing in obligations of the United States and Canada, general obligations of U.S. states, Canadian provinces, and their political subdivisions, and other obligations in which state member banks may underwrite and deal under 12 U.S.C. §§ 335 and 24(7) ("bank-eligible securities"), in accordance with section 225.28(b)(8)(i) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(8)(i)). Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (62 Federal Register 7231 (1997)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the notice and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. BBV, with total consolidated assets of approximately $129.6 billion, is the second largest banking organization in Spain. In the United States, BBV operates a branch and a representative office in New York, New York; two agencies in Miami, Florida; and a branch and an insured nonmember bank in San Juan, Puerto Rico. Company is registered as a broker-dealer with the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. § 78a et seq. ) and is a member of the National Association of Securities Dealers, Inc. ("NASD"). Accordingly, Company is subject to the recordkeeping and reporting obligations, fiduciary standards, and other requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the SEC, and the NASD. Underwriting and Dealing in Bank-Ineligible Securities The Board has determined that -- subject to the framework of prudential limitations established in previous decisions to address the potential for conflicts of interests, unsound banking practices, or other adverse effects -- underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities is so closely related to banking as to be a proper incident thereto within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. The Board also has determined that underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities is consistent with section 20 of the Glass-Steagall Act (12 U.S.C. § 377), provided that the company engaged in the activity derives no more than 25 percent of its gross revenues from underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities over a two-year period. BBV has committed that Company will conduct its underwriting and dealing activities using the methods and procedures and subject to the prudential limitations established by the Board in the Section 20 Orders. BBV also has committed that Company will conduct its bank-ineligible securities underwriting and dealing activities subject to the Board's revenue restriction. As a condition of this order, BBV is required to conduct its bank-ineligible securities activities subject to the revenue restrictions and Operating Standards established for section 20 subsidiaries ("Operating Standards"). Activities Approved by Regulation As noted above, BBV proposes that Company engage in providing credit and servicing loans; financial and investment advisory activities; securities brokerage, riskless principal, private placement, and other transactional activities; and bank-eligible securities underwriting and dealing activities. The Board has determined by regulation that each of these activities is closely related to banking for purposes of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. BBV has committed that Company will conduct these activities in accordance with the limitations set forth in Regulation Y and the Board's orders and interpretations relating to each of the activities. Proper Incident to Banking Standard In order to approve this notice, the Board also must consider whether performance of the proposed activities is a proper incident to banking, that is, whether the activities proposed "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public . . . that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices." As part of its evaluation of these factors, the Board considers the financial condition and managerial resources of the notificant and its subsidiaries and the effect the transaction would have on such resources. The Board notes that BBV's capital ratios satisfy applicable risk-based standards under the Basle Accord and are considered equivalent to the capital levels that would be required of a U.S. banking organization. The Board also has reviewed the capitalization of BBV and Company in accordance with the standards set forth in the Section 20 Orders and finds the capitalization of each to be consistent with approval of the proposal. The Board has reviewed these factors in light of all the facts of record, including BBV's projection of the volume of Company's underwriting and dealing activities in bank-ineligible securities. On the basis of its supervisory experience with BBV, the results of a recent infrastructure review of Company, the commitments provided in this case, and the proposed management of Company, the Board has determined that BBV and Company have established policies and procedures to ensure compliance with this order and the Section 20 Orders, including computer, audit, and accounting systems, internal risk management controls, and the necessary operational and managerial infrastructure. The Board also has reviewed other aspects of the managerial resources of the entities involved in the proposal, including the expected effect of the proposal on such resources. On the basis of the foregoing and all the facts of record, the Board concludes that financial and managerial considerations are consistent with approval of the notice. The Board expects, moreover, that consummation of the proposal would provide added convenience to BBV's customers and increase the level of competition among existing providers of these services. As noted above, BBV has committed that Company will conduct its bank-ineligible securities underwriting and dealing activities in accordance with the prudential framework established by the Board's Section 20 Orders, including the Operating Standards. Under the framework and conditions established in this order and the Section 20 Orders, the Board concludes that Company's proposed limited conduct of bank-ineligible securities underwriting and dealing activities is not likely to result in significantly adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices that would outweigh the public benefits of the proposal. Similarly, the Board finds no evidence that Company's private placement, riskless principal, and other activities -- conducted under the framework and conditions established in this order and Regulation Y -- would likely result in any significantly adverse effects that would outweigh the public benefits of the proposal. Accordingly, the Board has determined that performance of the proposed activities by BBV can reasonably be expected to produce public benefits that outweigh possible adverse effects under the proper incident to banking standard of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Conclusion Based on all the facts of record, and subject to the commitments made by BBV, as well as the terms and conditions set forth in this order and in the Board's orders and regulations noted above, including the Operating Standards, the Board has determined that the notice should be, and hereby is, approved. Underwriting and dealing in any manner other than as approved in this order and the Section 20 Orders, as modified by the Modification Orders, is not authorized. The Board's determination also is subject to all the terms and conditions set forth in Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.25(c) (12 C.F.R. 225.7 and 225.25(c)), and to the Board's authority to require modification or termination of the activities of a bank holding company or any of its subsidiaries as the Board finds necessary to assure compliance with, and to prevent evasion of, the provisions of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders issued thereunder. In approving the proposal, the Board has relied on all the facts of record and all the representations and commitments made by BBV. These commitments and conditions shall be deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decisions, and may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. This transaction shall not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good .cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective March 23, 1998. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes BBV previously received approval under section 4(c)(9) of the BHC Act to acquire Company and to engage temporarily in various nonbanking activities through Company. See Letter dated October 15, 1995, from Jennifer J. Johnson, Deputy Secretary of the Board, to Eileen P. Matthews, Esq. Asset data are as of September 30, 1997, and are based on exchange rates then applicable. Ranking data are as of June 30, 1997. See Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, et al., 76 Federal Reserve Bulletin 158 (1990); J.P. Morgan & Co. Inc., et. al., 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 192 (1989), aff'd sub nom. Securities Industry Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 900 F.2d 360 (D.C. Cir. 1990); Citicorp, 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 473 (1987), aff'd sub nom. Securities Industry Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 839 F.2d 47 (2d Cir.), cert. denied, 486 U.S. 1059 (1988), as modified by Review of Restrictions on Director, Officer and Employee Interlocks, Cross-Marketing Activities, and the Purchase and Sale of Financial Assets Between a Section 20 Subsidiary and an Affiliated Bank or Thrift, 61 Federal Register 57,679 (1996), and Amendments to Restrictions in the Board's Section 20 Orders, 62 Federal Register 45,295 (1997) (collectively, "Section 20 Orders"). Compliance with the revenue limitation shall be calculated in accordance with the method stated in the Section 20 Orders, as modified by the Order Approving Modifications to the Section 20 Orders, 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 751 (1989); 10 Percent Revenue Limit on Bank-Ineligible Activities of Subsidiaries of Bank Holding Companies Engage in Underwriting and Dealing in Securities, 61 Federal Register 48,953 (1996); and Revenue Limit on Bank-Ineligible Activities of Subsidiaries of Bank Holding Companies Engaged in Underwriting and Dealing in Securities, 61 Federal Register 68,750 (1996) (collectively, "Modification Orders"). Company may provide services that are necessary incidents to the proposed underwriting and dealing activities. Unless Company receives specific approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act to conduct the activities independently, any revenues from the incidental activities must be treated as ineligible revenues subject to the Board's revenue limitation. See 12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(1), (b)(6), (b)(7)(i), (b)(7)(ii), (b)(7)(iii), (b)(7)(v), and (b)(8)(i). 12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8). See 12 C.F.R. 225.24; see also The Fuji Bank, Limited, 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 94 (1989); Bayerische Vereinsbank AG, 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 155 (1987). Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Phillips, Meyer, and Ferguson. Absent and not voting: Governor Gramlich.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice filed by Commerce Bancorp, Inc., Cherry Hill, New Jersey, to acquire A.H. Williams & Co., Inc., Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, and thereby engage in a variety of securities-related activities, including engaging to a limited extent in underwriting and dealing in certain bank-ineligible securities. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Commerce Bancorp, Inc. Cherry Hill, New Jersey Order Approving Notice to Engage in Nonbanking Activities Commerce Bancorp, Inc. ("Commerce"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8)) and section 225.24 of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.24) to acquire A.H. Williams & Co., Inc., Philadelphia, Pennsylvania ("Company"), and thereby engage de novo in the following activities: Underwriting and dealing in, to a limited extent, certain municipal revenue bonds (including certain unrated municipal revenue bonds and private ownership industrial development bonds issued for traditional government services), 1-4 family mortgage-related securities, consumer receivable-related securities, and commercial paper (collectively, "bank-ineligible securities"); Providing services that are usual in connection with making, acquiring, brokering, or servicing loans or other extensions of credit, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(1) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(1)); Leasing personal or real property or acting as agent, broker, or adviser in leasing such property, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(3) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(3)); Providing financial and investment advisory services, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(6) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(6)); Providing securities brokerage, private placement, and riskless principal services, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(7) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(7)); Underwriting and dealing in government obligations and money market instruments in which state member banks may underwrite and deal under 12 U.S.C. §§ 335 and 24(7) ("bank-eligible securities") and engaging in investing and trading activities as a principal, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(8)(i) and (ii) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(8)(i) and (ii)); and Providing management consulting and employee benefits counseling services, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(9) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(9)). Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (63 Federal Register 4267 (1998)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the notice and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Commerce, with total consolidated assets of approximately $4 billion, operates subsidiary banks in New Jersey and Pennsylvania. Company is and, following consummation of the proposal, will continue to be registered as a broker-dealer with the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. § 78a et seq. ) ("1934 Act"), and is a member of the National Association of Securities Dealers, Inc. ("NASD"). Accordingly, Company is and will remain subject to the recordkeeping and reporting obligations, fiduciary standards, and other requirements of the 1934 Act, the SEC, and the NASD. Underwriting and Dealing Activities The Board has determined -- subject to the framework of prudential limitations to address the potential for conflicts of interests, unsound banking practices, or other adverse effects -- that underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities are so closely related to banking as to be a proper incident thereto within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. The Board also has determined that conduct of these activities is consistent with section 20 of the Glass-Steagall Act (12 U.S.C. § 377), provided that the company engaged in underwriting and dealing activities derives no more than 25 percent of its gross revenues from underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities over a two-year period. Commerce has committed that Company will conduct its bank-ineligible securities underwriting and dealing activities subject to the Board's 25-percent revenue limit. As a condition of this order, Commerce also would be required to conduct its bank-ineligible securities activities subject to the Operating Standards for section 20 subsidiaries. Other Activities Approved by Regulation The Board previously has determined by regulation that activities related to extending credit; leasing personal or real property; financial and investment advisory activities; securities brokerage, riskless principal, and private placement services; underwriting and dealing in bank-eligible securities; investment and trading as a principal; and management consulting are closely related to banking within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Commerce has committed that it will conduct each of these activities in accordance with the BHC Act, Regulation Y, and the relevant Board interpretations and orders. Proper Incident to Banking Standard In order to approve the proposal, the Board also must determine that the proposed activities are a proper incident to banking, that is, that the proposed transaction "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public . . . that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices." As part of its evaluation of these factors, the Board considers the financial condition and managerial resources of the notificant and its subsidiaries and the effect the transaction would have on such resources. The Board has carefully examined the financial resources, management expertise, and risk management policies of Commerce and its subsidiaries. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that financial and managerial considerations are consistent with approval. The Board has carefully considered the competitive effects of the proposal. To the extent that Commerce and Company offer different types of products and services, the proposal would result in no loss of competition. In those markets in which Commerce's and Company's products and services overlap, such as municipal finance underwriting, there are numerous existing and potential competitors. Consummation of the proposal, therefore, would have a de minimis effect on competition in the market for these services, and the Board has concluded that the proposal would not result in any significantly adverse competitive effects in any relevant market. The Board expects that the proposal would provide added convenience and efficiency to customers of Commerce and Company by expanding the range of products and services available to states and municipalities in the region Company would serve. As noted above, Commerce has committed that Company will conduct its bank-ineligible securities underwriting and dealing activities in accordance with the prudential framework described above. Under the framework and conditions described in this order, the Board concludes that the acquisition of Company by Commerce and the conduct by Commerce of the proposed limited bank-ineligible securities underwriting and dealing activities is not likely to result in significantly adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices that would outweigh the public benefits of the proposal. Similarly, the Board finds no evidence that Company's riskless principal, private placement, and other nonbanking activities -- conducted under the framework and conditions established in this order and Regulation Y -- would likely result in any significantly adverse effects that would outweigh the public benefits of the proposal. Accordingly, the Board has determined that performance of the proposed activities by Commerce is a proper incident to banking for purposes of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Conclusion On the basis of all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the notice should be, and hereby is, approved, subject to all the terms and conditions described in this order. The Board's approval of the proposal extends only to activities conducted within the limitations of this order, including the Board's reservation of authority to establish additional limitations to ensure that Commerce's activities are consistent with safety and soundness, avoidance of conflicts of interests, and other relevant considerations under the BHC Act. Underwriting and dealing in any manner other than as approved in this order is not within the scope of the Board's approval and is not authorized for Commerce. The Board's determination is subject to all the terms and conditions set forth in Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.25(c) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.7 and 225.25(c)), and to the Board's authority to require such modification or termination of the activities of a bank holding company or any of its subsidiaries as the Board finds necessary to ensure compliance with, and to prevent evasion of, the provisions of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders issued thereunder. The Board's decision is specifically conditioned on compliance with all the commitments made in connection with this notice, including the commitments discussed in this order, and the conditions set forth in this order and the above-noted Board regulations and orders. These commitments and conditions are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decisions, and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The proposal shall not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective March 23, 1998. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes After consummation of the proposal, Commerce would change the name of Company to Commerce Capital Markets, Inc. Asset data are as of December 31, 1997. See Citicorp, et al. , 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 473 (1987), aff'd sub nom. Securities Industry Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 839 F.2d 47 (2d Cir. 1988), cert. denied, 486 U.S. 1059 (1988); as modified by Review of Restrictions on Director, Officer and Employee Interlocks, Cross-Marketing Activities, and the Purchase and Sale of Financial Assets between a Section 20 Subsidiary and an Affiliated Bank or Thrift, 61 Federal Register 57,679 (1996), and Amendments to Restrictions in the Board's Section 20 Orders, 62 Federal Register 45,295 (1997) (collectively, "Section 20 Orders"). Compliance with the revenue limitation shall be calculated in accordance with the method stated in the Section 20 Orders, as modified by the Order Approving Modifications to the Section 20 Orders, 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 751 (1989), and 10 Percent Revenue Limit on Bank-Ineligible Activities of Subsidiaries of Bank Holding Companies Engaged in Underwriting and Dealing in Securities, 61 Federal Register 48,953 (1996), and Revenue Limit on Bank-Ineligible Activities of Subsidiaries of Bank Holding Companies Engaged in Underwriting and Dealing in Securities, 61 Federal Register 68,750 (1996) (collectively, "Modification Orders"). Company may provide services that are necessary incidents to the proposed underwriting and dealing activities. Unless Commerce receives specific approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act to conduct the activities independently, Company must treat any revenues from the incidental activities as ineligible revenues subject to the Board's revenue limitation. 12 C.F.R. 225.200. Company proposes to complete the underwriting of five issues of securities that are not within the scope of activities for which Commerce is seeking approval. Company agreed to perform these five underwritings prior to agreeing to be acquired under the proposal, and the underwriting of all these securities is expected to be completed within 120 days after consummation of the proposal. Company may complete these underwritings and must treat all revenue derived from any of these underwritings that are completed after consummation of the proposal as bank-ineligible revenue subject to the Board's revenue limitations. See 12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(1), (3), (6), (7), (8)(i) and (ii), and (9). See 12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8). See 12 C.F.R. 225.26. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Phillips, Meyer, and Ferguson. Absent and not voting: Governor Gramlich.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced a clarification of the operating standards relating to customer disclosures of section 20 subsidiaries of bank holding companies. The clarification is effective March 27, 1998 . The Board is modifying the customer disclosure operating standard to make clear that a section 20 subsidiary operating off bank premises may satisfy the standard by providing a one-time disclosure in writing when an investment account is opened. The clarification requires section 20 subsidiaries to provide to each of its retail customers, in writing, at the time an investment account is opened, the same minimum disclosures, and to obtain the same customer acknowledgment, as described in the Interagency Statement on Retail Sales of Nondeposit Investment Products. This clarification will relieve section 20 subsidiaries operating off the premises of depository institutions, from providing oral disclosures to retail customers on a continuing basis. The Board's notice is attached. |
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of an Order of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty against the Habib Bank AG Zurich, Switzerland and Habib Banks Branch in Los Angeles, California. The order was issued jointly with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. Habib Bank and the Branch, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the order in connection with allegations that they did not file complete and accurate F.R. Y-7 reports with the Federal Reserve and a complete and accurate application for federal deposit insurance with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. Habib Bank and the Branch paid a $15,000 penalty to the Federal Reserve and Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. A copy of the order is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board has voted to move from a system of contemporaneous reserve requirements to one where reserves are maintained on a lagged basis. The change will go into effect with the reserve maintenance period beginning July 30, 1998. The switch will make it easier for depositories to calculate their required reserve balances for the current maintenance period and will increase the accuracy of information on aggregate required reserve balances, which is needed by the Open Market Trading Desk to carry out its operations. Under the lagged system, the reserve maintenance period for weekly reporting institutions will begin 30 days after the beginning of the two-week reserve computation period. Under the current system, the reserve maintenance period begins only two days after the beginning of the computation period. The Board's notice is attached. |
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board, along with the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of Thrift Supervision today issued a final rule to expand the examination frequency cycle for certain financial institutions. The rule is effective April 2, 1998. Implementation of this final rule expands the eligibility for the 18-month examination cycle for "1" and "2" rated, well-managed banks from the current asset size limit of $100 million to a new limit of $250 million. The ruling implements section 306 of the Riegle Community Development and Regulatory Improvement Act of 1994, and section 2221 of the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act of 1996. The interagency notice is attached. |
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced an extension of time to receive public comments on its advance notice of proposed rulemaking concerning its margin regulations, Regulations T, U and X. The comment period is being extended from April 1, l998, to May 1, 1998. The Board's notice is attached. FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM 12 CFR Parts 220, 221 and 224 [Regulations T, U and X; Docket No. R-0995 ] Securities Credit Transactions AGENCY : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. ACTION : Advance notice of proposed rulemaking and request for comment; extension of comment period. SUMMARY : The Board is extending the comment period for responding to the Board's advance notice of proposed rulemaking concerning its margin regulations, Regulations T, U and X. The Secretary of the Board, acting pursuant to delegated authority, has extended the comment period from April 1, 1998, to May 1, 1998, to give the public additional time to provide comments. DATES : Comments should be received by May 1, 1998. ADDRESSES : Comments should refer to Docket No. R-0995 and may be mailed to William W. Wiles, Secretary, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 20th Street and Constitution Avenue, N.W., Washington, DC 20551. Comments also may be delivered to Room B-2222 of the Eccles Building between 8:45 a.m. and 5:15 p.m. weekdays, or to the guard station in the Eccles Building courtyard on 20th Street, N.W. between Constitution Avenue and C Street, N.W. at any time. Comments received will be available for inspection in Room MP-500 of the Martin Building between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. weekdays, except as provided in 12 CFR 261.12 of the Board's Rules Regarding Availability of Information. FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT : Oliver Ireland, Associate General Counsel (202) 452-3625; Scott Holz, Senior Attorney (202) 452-2966; or Jean Anderson, Staff Attorney (202) 452-3707, Legal Division; for the hearing impaired only, Telecommunications Device for the Deaf (TDD), Diane Jenkins (202) 452-3544. SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION : On January 16, 1998, the Board requested comment in response to an advance notice of proposed rulemaking concerning its margin regulations, Regulations T, U and X (63 FR 2840). By order of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March 31, 1998. (signed) William W. Wiles William W. Wiles Secretary of the Board
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today published revisions to its Regulation Z (Truth in Lending) official staff commentary which applies and interprets the requirements of the Regulation. The revisions are effective March 31. Compliance is optional until October 1, 1998. The revisions provide guidance for open-end credit plans that increase rates triggered by late payments or by exceeding credit limits and that have deferred payment features. Proposed changes on how creditors may determine whether credit is an open-end plan or a closed-end transaction have been substantially modified in the final revisions. In addition, the update discusses issues such as the treatment of annuity costs in reverse mortgage transactions and transaction fees imposed on checking accounts with overdraft protection. The Board's notice is attached. |