For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today its approval of the application of The Bank of East Asia Ltd., Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, People's Republic of China, to establish a representative office in Flushing, New York. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. The Bank of East Asia, Ltd. Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, People's Republic of China Order Approving Establishment of a Representative Office The Bank of East Asia, Ltd. ("Bank"), Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, People's Republic of China, a foreign bank within the meaning of the International Banking Act ("IBA"), has applied under section 10(a) of the IBA (12 U.S.C. § 3107(a)) to establish a representative office in Flushing, New York. The Foreign Bank Supervision Enhancement Act of 1991, which amended the IBA, provides that a foreign bank must obtain the approval of the Board to establish a representative office in the United States. Notice of the application, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published in a newspaper of general circulation in New York, New York ( The New York Times, October 31, 1997). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the application and all comments received. Bank, with assets of approximately $17.2 billion as of year-end 1997, was established in 1918. Bank has represented that no shareholder owns 10 percent or more of its issued share capital. Bank has approximately 100 branches in Hong Kong and provides a broad range of retail and wholesale banking services. Bank also owns domestic subsidiaries engaged in real estate, investment, insurance, leasing, corporate finance, and other activities. Outside Hong Kong, Bank has nonbanking subsidiaries and offices in several countries, including two branches in New York, New York, and one in Los Angeles, California. The proposed representative office would serve as a marketing office for Bank's New York operations and solicit loans from customers in its proximity. The proposed office would not disburse loan proceeds or accept loan payments, nor would it be used to provide deposit services. In acting on an application to establish a representative office, the IBA and Regulation K provide that the Board shall take into account whether the foreign bank engages directly in the business of banking outside of the United States and has furnished to the Board the information it needs to assess the application adequately. The Board also shall take into account whether the foreign bank and any foreign bank parent is subject to comprehensive supervision or regulation on a consolidated basis by its home country supervisor (12 U.S.C. § 3107(a)(2); 12 CFR 211.24(d)(2)). The Board may take into account additional standards as set forth in the IBA (12 U.S.C. § 3105(d)(3) and (4)) and Regulation K (12 CFR 211.24(c)). With respect to home country supervision of Bank, the Board has considered the following information. The Hong Kong Monetary Authority ("HKMA") is the principal supervisory authority of Bank. The Board previously determined, in connection with applications to establish U.S. offices by three other Hong Kong banks, that these banks were subject to comprehensive consolidated supervision by the HKMA. The Board has determined that Bank is supervised on substantially the same terms and conditions as these other banks. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that the factors relating to the supervision of Bank by its home country supervisors are consistent with approval of the proposed representative office. The Board also has found that, for purposes of the IBA and Regulation K, Bank engages directly in the business of banking outside of the United States through its banking operations in Hong Kong and elsewhere. Bank has provided the Board with the information necessary to assess the application through submissions that address the relevant issues. The Board also has taken into account the additional standards set forth in the IBA (12 U.S.C. § 3105(d)(3) and (4)) and Regulation K (12 CFR 211.24(c)(2)). Bank has received the consent of the HKMA to establish the proposed representative office. The Board also has determined that the financial and managerial factors are consistent with approval of the proposed office. Bank appears to have the experience and capacity to support the proposed office and has established controls and procedures for the proposed office to ensure compliance with applicable U.S. law. Finally, with respect to access to information on Bank's operations, the Board has reviewed applicable provisions of law and has communicated with appropriate government authorities regarding access to information. Bank has committed to make available to the Board such information on the operations of Bank and any of its affiliates that the Board deems necessary to determine and enforce compliance with the IBA, the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956, as amended, and other applicable federal law. To the extent that the provision of such information to the Board may be prohibited or impeded by law or otherwise, Bank has committed to cooperate with the Board in obtaining any necessary consents or waivers that might be required from third parties in connection with the disclosure of certain information. In light of these commitments and other facts of record, and subject to the condition described below, the Board concludes that Bank has provided adequate assurances of access to any necessary information the Board may request. On the basis of all the facts of record, and subject to the commitments made by Bank, as well as the terms and conditions set forth in this order, the Board has determined that Bank's application to establish a representative office should be, and hereby is, approved. Should any restrictions on access to information on the operations or activities of Bank or its affiliates subsequently interfere with the Board's ability to determine the compliance by Bank or its affiliates with applicable federal law, the Board may recommend termination of any of Bank's direct or indirect activities in the United States. Approval of the application is also specifically conditioned on compliance by Bank with the commitments made in connection with the application and with the conditions of this order. The commitments and conditions referred to above are conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its decision, and may be enforced in proceedings under 12 U.S.C. § 1818 against Bank, its offices, and its affiliates. By order of the Board of Governors, effective August 3, 1998. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Footnotes In assessing this standard, the Board considers, among other factors, the extent to which the home country supervisors: (i) ensure that the bank has adequate procedures for monitoring and controlling its activities worldwide; (ii) obtain information on the condition of the bank and its subsidiaries and offices through regular examination reports, audit reports, or otherwise; (iii) obtain information on the dealings with and relationship between the bank and its affiliates, both foreign and domestic; (iv) receive from the bank financial reports that are consolidated on a worldwide basis, or comparable information that permits analysis of the bank's financial condition on a worldwide consolidated basis; and (v) evaluate prudential standards, such as capital adequacy and risk asset exposure, on a worldwide basis. These are indicia of comprehensive consolidated supervision; no single factor is essential and other elements may inform the Board's determination. See Hong Kong and Shanghai Banking Co., 81 Federal Reserve Bulletin 902 (1995); Liu Chong Hing Bank, Ltd., 81 Federal Reserve Bulletin 905 (1995); Dah Sing Bank, Ltd., 80 Federal Reserve Bulletin 182 (1994). On July 1, 1997, Hong Kong became a Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China. The HKMA has confirmed that its supervision of Bank has not been materially affected by the change in sovereignty. The Board's authority to approve the establishment of the proposed representative office parallels the authority of the State of New York to license offices of a foreign bank. In this case, Bank has received permission from the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency to establish and administer the proposed representative office as a unit of Bank's existing insured federal branch in New York, New York. The New York State Banking Department ("NYSBD") has confirmed that, in the circumstances of this case, the establishment of the proposed office as a unit of Bank's existing insured federal branch in New York would not contravene New York State law. Bank has confirmed that, in the event of the closure of Bank's insured New York branch, Bank would be required to obtain a representative office license from the NYSBD to operate the representative office as a stand-alone entity. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Meyer, and Ferguson. Absent and not voting: Governor Gramlich.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice of Cooperatieve Centrale Raiffeisen-Boerenleenbank B.A., Rabobank Nederland, Utrecht, The Netherlands, to acquire Weiss, Peck & Greer, L.L.C., New York, New York, and thereby engage in investment advisory and certain other nonbanking activities. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Cooperatieve Centrale Raiffeisen-Boerenleenbank B.A., Rabobank Nederland Utrecht, The Netherlands Order Approving Notice to Engage in Nonbanking Activities Cooperatieve Centrale Raiffeisen-Boerenleenbank B.A., Rabobank Nederland ("Rabobank"), a foreign bank subject to the provisions of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8)) and section 225.24(a) of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.24(a)) to acquire Weiss, Peck & Greer, L.L.C., New York, New York ("Company"), and thereby engage in the following nonbanking activities: providing financial and investment advisory services in accordance with section 225.28(b)(6) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(6)); providing agency transactional services for customer investments in accordance with section 225.28(b)(7) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(7)); providing certain administrative services for open-end investment companies ("mutual funds"); acting as general partner or managing member for certain private investment funds that invest in assets in which a bank holding company is permitted to invest; and acting as a commodity pool operator for private investment funds organized as commodity pools that invest in assets in which a bank holding company is permitted to invest. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (63 Federal Register 33,374 (1998)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the notice and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Rabobank, with total consolidated assets of approximately $211.4 billion, is the second largest banking organization in The Netherlands and the 40th largest banking organization in the world. In the United States, Rabobank operates a branch in New York, New York; an agency in Dallas, Texas; and representative offices in San Francisco, California; Atlanta, Georgia; and Chicago, Illinois. Rabobank also engages through subsidiaries in a broad range of nonbanking activities in the United States. Company, with total consolidated assets of $2.3 billion, engages in securities brokerage, investment advisory, and other activities. Company is currently and, after consummation of the proposal, will continue to be registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") as an investment adviser under the Investment Advisers Act of 1940 ("1940 Act"), as a broker-dealer under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. § 78a et seq.) ("1934 Act") and a member of the National Association of Securities Dealers, Inc. ("NASD"). Company also is, and will continue to be registered as a futures commission merchant, commodity trading advisor, and commodity pool operator with the Commodity Futures Trading Commission ("CFTC") and the National Futures Association ("NFA"). Accordingly, Company is subject to the recordkeeping and reporting obligations, fiduciary standards, and other requirements of the 1934 Act, the 1940 Act, the SEC, and the NASD, as well as those of the Commodity Exchange Act (7 U.S.C. § 2 et seq.), the CFTC, and the NFA. Mutual Fund Activities The Board previously has determined that providing administrative services to mutual funds is closely related to banking within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Rabobank proposes to provide investment advisory, brokerage, and administrative services through Company that previously have been approved by the Board, and Rabobank has committed that the proposed activities will be conducted in compliance with Regulation Y and subject to the prudential and other limitations established by the Board. Rabobank has committed that distribution activities of mutual funds will be the responsibility of an independent distributor, which will enter into contractual agreements with the mutual funds to serve as "principal underwriter." The independent distributor also would be responsible for supervising sales as the principal underwriter for purposes of the federal securities laws. Rabobank also proposes to have certain director and officer interlocks with the funds. In particular, Rabobank proposes that up to 25 percent of the directors of a mutual fund would be employees, officers, or directors of Rabobank or one of its subsidiaries, including Company. Rabobank proposes that one of these directors may serve as chairman of the board of the fund. In addition, Rabobank seeks to have up to three directors, officers, or employees of Rabobank or its subsidiaries, including Company, serve as senior officers of the fund and have other Rabobank personnel serve as junior-level officers of the fund. The Board previously has authorized a bank holding company and its nonbank subsidiaries to have limited director and officer interlocks with mutual funds that the bank holding company advises and administers. The Board noted that independent directors would constitute at least 40 percent of the board of directors of the fund and would be responsible for the selection and review of the investment adviser, the underwriter, and the other major service contractors of the fund. In this case, Rabobank's personnel would not comprise more than 25 percent of any fund's board of directors. Accordingly, all of the funds to which Rabobank provides advisory and administrative services would have boards of directors in which 75 percent of the directors are unaffiliated with Rabobank. In addition, any director of a fund who also serves as a director, officer, or employee of Rabobank would be an "interested person" under the 1940 Act and, therefore, would be required to abstain from voting on investment advisory and other major contracts of the fund. The director and officer interlocks proposed by Rabobank would not appear to affect the independence of the other directors on the boards of directors for the funds. The independent members of the boards of directors would continue to have authority to review brokerage, advisory, administrative and other major contracts and would retain authority to change the distributor of fund shares. Based on the foregoing, the Board concludes that the proposed director and officer interlocks would not compromise the independence of the boards of the funds or permit Rabobank to control the funds and are consistent with previous Board decisions, the BHC Act, and the Glass-Steagall Act. Other Activities Approved by Regulation or Order The Board previously has determined that providing financial and investment advisory services, providing agency transactional services for customer investments, acting as general partner to private investment limited partnerships that make investments that a bank holding company may make, and acting as a commodity pool operator are all closely related to banking within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Rabobank has committed that it will conduct these activities in accordance with the limitations set forth in Regulation Y and the Board's orders and interpretations relating to each of the activities. Other Considerations In order to approve the proposal, the Board also must determine that the proposed activities are a proper incident to banking, that is, that the proposed transaction "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public . . . that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices." As part of its evaluation of these factors, the Board considers the financial and managerial resources of the notificant, its subsidiaries, and any company to be acquired, and the effect the transaction would have on such resources. Rabobank's capital ratios satisfy applicable risk-based standards under the Basle Accord and are considered equivalent to the capital levels that would be required of a United States banking organization. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that financial and managerial considerations are consistent with approval. The Board also has carefully considered the competitive effects of the proposal. To the extent that Rabobank and Company offer different types of products and services, the proposed acquisition would result in no loss of competition. In those markets where the product offerings of Rabobank and its subsidiaries and Company do overlap, there are numerous existing and potential competitors. As a result, consummation of the proposal would have a de minimis effect on competition for these services, and the Board has concluded that the proposal would not result in a significantly adverse effect on competition in any relevant market. The Board expects that consummation of the proposal can reasonably be expected to provide added convenience to Rabobank's customers by offering them an expanded range of investment products and expertise. The Board previously has determined that the provision of administrative services to mutual funds within the parameters established by the Board is not likely to result in the types of subtle hazards at which the Glass-Steagall Act is aimed or in any other adverse effects. Rabobank also would be required to comply with the Board's interpretive rule on Investment Adviser Activities, which was designed to mitigate potential conflicts of interests and the potential for customer confusion associated with the proposed activities. Based on the foregoing and all the facts of record, the Board concludes that there is no evidence in the record to indicate that consummation of the proposal is likely to result in significantly adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices, that would outweigh the public benefits of the proposal. Accordingly, the Board has determined that the balance of public benefits that it must consider under the proper incident to banking standard of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act is favorable and consistent with approval of the proposal. Conclusion Based on the foregoing and all other facts of record, the Board has determined that the notice should be, and hereby is, approved. This determination is subject to all the terms and conditions discussed in this order, including the Board's reservation of authority to establish additional limitations to ensure that Rabobank's activities are consistent with safety and soundness, conflicts of interests, and other relevant considerations under the BHC Act. The Board's determination also is subject to all the terms and conditions set forth in Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.25(c) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.7 and 225.25(c)), and to require such modification or termination of the activities of a bank holding company or any of its subsidiaries as the Board finds necessary to ensure compliance with, and to prevent evasion of, the provisions of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders issued thereunder. The Board's decision is specifically conditioned on compliance with all the commitments made in connection with the notice and related correspondence, the conditions established in this order, and the Board's regulations and other orders noted above. The commitments and conditions relied on by the Board in reaching this decision are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The proposal shall not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective August 3, 1998. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Appendix List of Administrative Services Maintaining and preserving the records of funds, including financial and corporate records. Computing net asset value, dividends, performance data, and financial information regarding funds. Furnishing statistical and research data to funds. Preparing and filing with the SEC and state securities regulators registration statements, notices, reports, and other materials required to be filed under applicable laws. Preparing reports and other informational materials regarding funds, including proxies and other shareholder communications, and reviewing prospectuses. Providing legal and other regulatory advice to funds. Providing office facilities and clerical support for funds. Developing and implementing procedures for monitoring compliance with regulatory requirements and compliance with funds' investment objectives, policies, and restrictions as established by the boards of directors of the funds. Providing routine accounting services to funds and liaison with outside auditors. Preparing and filing tax returns. Reviewing and arranging for payment of expenses for funds. Providing communication and coordination services with regard to funds' transfer agent, custodian, distributor, and other service organizations that render distribution, recordkeeping, or shareholder communication services. Preparing advertising materials, sales literature, and marketing plans for the funds. Providing information to the distributor's personnel concerning performance and administration of funds. Participating in seminars, meetings, and conferences designed to present information to financial intermediaries concerning operations of the funds. Assisting in the development of additional funds. Providing reports to the board of directors of funds. Providing telephone shareholder services through a toll-free number. Footnotes As a foreign bank operating a branch and an agency in the United States, Rabobank is subject to certain provisions of the BHC Act by operation of section 8(a) of the International Banking Act of 1978 (12 U.S.C. § 3106(a)) ("IBA"). Rabobank would hold its interest in Company through Robeco Groep N.V., a Netherlands corporation. Asset and ranking data are as of December 31, 1997, and are based on foreign exchange conversion rates as of that date. Company currently controls certain limited partnerships that have investments that are not permissible for bank holding companies. Rabobank has committed to conform the investments and relationships of Company to those permissible for bank holding companies within two years of acquiring Company. See, e.g., Societe Generale, 84 Federal Reserve Bulletin ___ (Order dated June 22, 1998) (" SoGen "); Bankers Trust New York Corporation, 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin 780 (1997) (" BTNY "); Commerzbank AG, 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin 679 (1997). See, e.g., SoGen, BTNY. The administrative services that Rabobank would provide to mutual funds through Company and other Rabobank subsidiaries include computing the fund's financial data, maintaining and preserving the records of the fund, providing office facilities and clerical support for the fund, and preparing and filing tax returns for the funds. The services are listed in the . The Board previously has determined that the Glass-Steagall Act does not prohibit a bank holding company from providing advisory and administrative services to a mutual fund. See 12 C.F.R. 225.125. Although Rabobank does not own a member bank, Rabobank is subject to the limitations applicable to domestic banking organizations under the principle of national treatment. See, e.g., Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, et al., 76 Federal Reserve Bulletin 158 (1990). As defined under the 1940 Act, a principal underwriter is any underwriter who, as principal, purchases from a mutual fund any security for distribution, or who as agent for such fund sells or has the right to sell the fund's securities to a dealer and/or to the public. 15 U.S.C. § 80a-2(a)(29). An independent distributor would enter into any sales agreements with brokers or other financial intermediaries to sell shares of mutual funds. The independent distributor also would have legal responsibility under the rules of the NASD for the form and use of all advertising and sales literature and also would be responsible for filing these materials with the NASD or the SEC. In some cases, mutual funds advised and administered by Company would not have a distributor. In these cases, Rabobank has provided commitments to the Board to ensure that Company would not be engaged in distributing these funds. See Lloyds TSB Group plc, 84 Federal Reserve Bulletin 116 (1998) (" Lloyds "). Among these commitments are that these so-called distributorless funds would employ a marketing officer who is independent of Rabobank and Company who would initiate contact with financial intermediaries regarding the sale of fund shares, negotiate broker selling agreements on behalf of the funds, and be responsible for placing, reviewing, and filing with regulators, advertisements on behalf of the funds. No employees, officers, or directors of Rabobank or its subsidiaries, including Company, would serve as directors of distributorless mutual funds advised or administered by Company. See Lloyds. Senior officers include the president, secretary, treasurer, and vice presidents with policy-making functions. Junior officers include assistant secretaries, assistant treasurers, or assistant vice-presidents of the funds. Junior officers are fund employees who have no authority or responsibility to make policy. See, e.g., SoGen, BTNY; Lloyds; BankAmerica Corporation, 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin 913 (1997); The Governor and Company of the Bank of Ireland, 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 1129 (1996). Under the 1940 Act, independent directors may not be affiliated with the mutual fund, investment adviser, or any other major contractor to the fund. The 1940 Act and related regulatory provisions require that independent directors annually review and approve the mutual fund's investment advisory contract and any plan of distribution or related agreement. See 12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(6), (7); Dresdner Bank AG, 84 Federal Reserve Bulletin 361 (1998) (" Dresdner "). See 12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(6), (7); Dresdner. See 12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8). See 12 C.F.R. 225.26(b); see also The Fuji Bank, Limited, 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 94 (1989); Bayerische Vereinsbank AG, 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 155 (1987). Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Meyer, and Ferguson. Absent and not voting: Governor Gramlich.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application by WestStar Bank, Bartlesville, Oklahoma, to acquire the Nowata, Oklahoma, branch of Superior Federal Bank, F.S.B., Fort Smith, Arkansas. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. WestStar Bank Bartlesville, Oklahoma Order Approving the Acquisition of a Savings Association Branch WestStar Bank ("WestStar"), a state member bank, has requested the Board's approval under section 18(c) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act ("FDI Act") (12 U.S.C. § 1828(c)) ("Bank Merger Act") to acquire the assets and assume the liabilities of a branch office of Superior Federal Bank, F.S.B., Fort Smith, Arkansas ("Superior Federal"), located in Nowata, Oklahoma ("Nowata Branch"). Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been given in accordance with the Bank Merger Act and the Board's Rules of Procedure (12 C.F.R. 262.3(b)). As required by the Bank Merger Act, reports on the competitive effects of the merger were requested from the United States Attorney General, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency ("OCC"), and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ("FDIC"). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the application and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in the Bank Merger Act. WestStar is a wholly owned subsidiary of Arvest Bank Group, Bentonville, Arkansas ("Arvest"), which is the ninth largest commercial bank organization in Oklahoma, controlling deposits of approximately $798 million, representing 2.3 percent of total deposits in commercial banking organizations in the state ("state deposits"). The branch of Superior Federal to be acquired controls deposits of approximately $6.2 million, representing less than 1 percent of state deposits. On consummation of the proposal, Arvest would remain the ninth largest commercial banking organization in the state. The Bank Merger Act provides that the Board may not approve an application if the effect of the acquisition is to create a monopoly or substantially to lessen competition in any section of the country unless the Board finds the anticompetitive effects of the proposal are clearly outweighed in the public interest by the probable effect of the proposal in meeting the convenience and needs of the community. WestStar and Superior Federal operate in the Bartlesville, Oklahoma, banking market. WestStar is the largest depository institution in the banking market, controlling deposits of approximately $359 million, representing 50.1 percent of the total deposits in depository institutions in the market ("market deposits"). The Superior Federal branch that WestStar proposes to acquire is the 11th largest depository institution in the market, controlling deposits of approximately $3.1 million, representing less than 1 percent of market deposits. On consummation of the proposal, WestStar would remain the largest depository institution in the Bartlesville banking market, controlling deposits of approximately $365 million, representing 50.8 percent of market deposits. Concentration in the market, as measured by the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index ("HHI"), would increase 60 points to 3066. Several factors materially mitigate the competitive effects of a merger in the market as measured by the HHI. Ten competitors, including WestStar, would remain in the Bartlesville banking market, including the largest commercial banking organization in Oklahoma. In addition, a large credit union operates in the market, of which approximately 39 percent of the total population in the banking market are members. Superior Federal is the smallest competitor in the Bartlesville banking market, and the Nowata Branch is not a full service branch and does not have a loan officer on its staff or offer ATM or drive-through services. Since 1995, deposits in the Nowata Branch have declined by 16 percent, and its market share has declined by more than 20 percent. The Board concludes that all the factors described above mitigate the potentially adverse competitive effects of the proposal. The Department of Justice has reviewed the proposal and advised the Board that consummation of the proposal would not likely have any significantly adverse competitive effects in the Bartlesville banking market or any other relevant banking market. The OCC and the FDIC also have not objected to the proposal. Based on all the facts of record, and for the reasons discussed above, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposal would not have a significantly adverse effect on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in the Bartlesville banking market or any other relevant banking market. The Bank Merger Act also requires the Board to consider the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the existing and proposed institutions and the convenience and needs of the community to be served. The Board has carefully considered these factors in light of all the facts of record. Arvest and WestStar meet, and on consummation of the proposal will continue to meet, all applicable capital standards. The facts of record include supervisory reports of examination that assess the financial and managerial resources of the organizations and financial information provided by WestStar. Based on these and all other facts of record, the Board concludes that financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the institutions involved are consistent with approval, as are other supervisory factors. WestStar plans to consolidate the Nowata Branch into WestStar's existing full service branch in Nowata and close the Nowata Branch. WestStar's branch in Nowata is located within 250 feet of the Nowata Branch and offers many products and services not offered at the Nowata Branch. WestStar's branch in Nowata is staffed full-time by loan officers, and the bank offers commercial checking accounts, corporate cash management services, discount brokerage services, and trust services that Superior Federal does not offer. WestStar also has a satisfactory record of performance under the Community Reinvestment Act in helping to meet the credit needs of all its communities, including low- and moderate-income areas. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that considerations relating to convenience and needs are consistent with approval. Based on the foregoing and all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the proposal should be, and hereby is, approved. The Board's approval of the proposal is specifically conditioned on compliance by WestStar with all the commitments made in connection with the application. For purposes of this action, the commitments and conditions relied on in reaching this decision are conditions imposed in writing by the Board, and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The proposed acquisition shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day following the effective date of this order, or later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective August 3 1998. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Footnotes The proposal involves the acquisition of assets of a Savings Association Insurance Fund member by a Bank Insurance Fund member. Approval of the proposal under the Bank Merger Act satisfies the requirements of section 5(d)(3) of the FDI Act (12 U.S.C. § 1815(d)(3)). The proposal also would comply with the interstate banking requirements of the Bank Holding Company Act if the Nowata Branch was a state bank that the parent holding company of WestStar Bank was applying to acquire directly. State and market data are as of June 30, 1997. 12 U.S.C. § 1828(c)(5). The Bartlesville, Oklahoma, banking market includes Nowata and Washington Counties, Oklahoma; the northeastern quadrant of Osage County, Oklahoma; and the town of Caney, Kansas. In this context, depository institutions include commercial banks, savings banks, and savings associations. Market share data before consummation are based on calculations in which the deposits of thrift institutions are included at 50 percent. The Board previously has indicated that thrift institutions have become, or have the potential to become, significant competitors of commercial banks. See WM Bancorp, 76 Federal Reserve Bulletin 788 (1990); National City Corporation, 70 Federal Reserve Bulletin 743 (1984). Because the deposits of the Nowata Branch would be acquired by a commercial banking organization, the Nowata Branch's deposits are included at 100 percent in the calculation of the pro forma market share. See Norwest Corporation, 78 Federal Reserve Bulletin 452 (1992); First Banks, Inc., 76 Federal Reserve Bulletin 669 (1990). Under the revised Department of Justice Merger Guidelines, 49 Federal Reserve Bulletin 26,823 (June 29, 1984) ("DOJ Guidelines"), a market in which the post-merger HHI is above 1800 is considered to be highly concentrated. The Justice Department has informed the Board that a bank merger or acquisition generally will not be challenged (in the absence of other factors indicating anticompetitive effects) unless the post-merger HHI is at least 1800 and the merger increases the HHI by more than 200 points. The Justice Department has stated that the higher than normal HHI thresholds for screening bank mergers for anticompetitive effects implicitly recognize the competitive effect of limited-purpose lenders and other non-depository financial entities. The nearest full-service branch of Superior Federal where a customer could meet with a loan officer is 50 miles from the Nowata Branch. 12 U.S.C. § 2901 et seq. ("CRA"). WestStar and Superior Federal received satisfactory ratings under the CRA at their most recent performance examinations. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Meyer, and Ferguson. Absent and not voting: Governor Gramlich.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice of Royal Bank of Canada, Montreal, Quebec, Canada, to acquire New Security First Network Bank, Miami, Florida. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Attachment Royal Bank of Canada Montreal, Quebec, Canada Order Approving a Notice to Acquire a Savings Association Royal Bank of Canada ("Royal Bank"), a foreign banking organization that is subject to the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1848(c)(8)) to acquire all the voting shares of New Security First Network Bank, Miami, Florida ("Security First"), and thereby engage in operating a savings association. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (63 Federal Register 29,221 (1998)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the notice and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Royal Bank, with total consolidated assets of approximately $164 billion, is the largest banking organization in Canada and the 56th largest banking organization in the world. In the United States, Royal Bank operates branches in New York, New York; Portland, Oregon; and San Juan, Puerto Rico; agencies in Los Angeles, California; and Miami, Florida; and representative offices in Chicago, Illinois; and Houston, Texas. Royal Bank also engages through subsidiaries in various securities-related, data processing, and foreign exchange activities closely related to banking. Closely Related to Banking Analysis Section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act provides that a bank holding company may, with Board approval, engage in any banking activity that the Board determines to be "so closely related to banking or managing or controlling banks as to be closely related thereto." Old Security First operates a single, full service office in Atlanta, Georgia, and focuses its efforts on providing banking and financial products and services to the public over the Internet. Royal Bank intends to enhance the products and services that Security First offers by providing additional financial and managerial resources to it and to expand Security First's business volume throughout the United States by increasing promotional activities. The Board previously has determined by regulation that the operation of a savings association by a bank holding company is closely related to banking for purposes of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. The Board also previously has determined that providing data processing services related to providing banking and financial services over the Internet is closely related to banking. Proper Incident to Banking Analysis In order to approve the proposal, the Board must determine that the proposed activities are a proper incident to banking, that is, that the proposal "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public, such as greater convenience, increased competition, or gains in efficiency, that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, or unsound banking practices." As part of its review of these factors, when acting on a proposal to acquire a savings association, the Board has traditionally considered the records of performance under the Community Reinvestment Act (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 2901 et seq .) ("CRA") of the institutions involved in the proposal. The Board has reviewed the record of performance of Old Security First in light of all the facts of record, including comments received on the proposal from Inner City Press/Community on the Move ("Commenter"). Commenter argues that Royal Bank's proposal to address CRA is not adequate. The Board has reviewed the examination of the CRA performance record of Old Security First conducted by the Office of Thrift Supervision ("OTS"), the appropriate supervisory authority for Old Security First. An institution's most recent CRA performance evaluation is a particularly important consideration in the applications process because it represents a detailed on-site evaluation of the institution's overall record of performance under the CRA by its primary federal supervisor. Old Security First received an overall rating of "satisfactory" as a result of that evaluation of CRA performance, as of March 1996. Royal Bank has not previously operated an insured depository institution subsidiary in the U.S. that is subject to CRA. As part of its application in this case, however, Royal Bank presented a proposed CRA plan for Security First. The plan includes the appointment of a CRA officer who would report to Royal Bank's board of directors; the employment of a CRA consulting firm to assist Security First in preparing and implementing a CRA plan; and the offering of specific banking products and services directed to its assessment area, including low- and moderate-income areas. Commenter questions whether the criteria adopted in the CRA regulations of the federal financial supervisory agencies for defining the assessment area of an insured depository institution are adequate and whether compliance by Old Security First with the regulations adopted by the institution's appropriate supervisory authority for defining an assessment area is sufficient in light of the Internet banking activities proposed by Old Security First. The CRA requires the federal banking agencies, in reviewing certain applications, to take account of an institution's record of actual performance in helping to meet the credit needs of its community, including low- and moderate-income neighborhoods. That record includes compliance by Old Security First with the rules and requirements of its appropriate supervisory authority and that supervisor's on-site evaluation of the CRA performance record of Old Security First. Old Security First has defined its assessment area in accordance with the requirements contained in regulations of the OTS that govern the CRA obligations and performance of Old Security First. The OTS has examined the CRA performance of Old Security First, including the adequacy of the assessment area definition adopted by Old Security First, and found it satisfactory. Security First, moreover, would continue to be subject to regular evaluations by its primary federal supervisor of its CRA performance record in its entire community, including low- and moderate-income neighborhoods. The proper application of the CRA to the operations of a financial institution such as Security First, that operates primarily over the Internet, is subject to evaluation and review by the institution's appropriate supervisory authority as experience is gained regarding the actual success, geographic reach, and lending patterns of depository institutions conducting these activities. Commenter's concerns regarding the alleged difficulties for a financial institution operating over the Internet to serve low- and moderate-income individuals and communities, however, remain speculative at this time. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that the CRA performance record of the depository institutions involved and the CRA plan submitted by Royal Bank lend weight toward approval of the proposal. In connection with its review of the public interest factors under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act, the Board also has carefully considered the financial and managerial resources of Royal Bank and its subsidiaries and Security First and the effect the transaction would have on such resources in light of all the facts of record. The Board has reviewed, among other things, confidential reports of examination and other supervisory information received from the appropriate supervisory authorities for the organizations. The Board notes that Royal Bank's capital ratios meet applicable risk-based capital standards under the Basle Accord and are equivalent to the capital levels that would be required for a U. S. banking organization. Royal Bank also has significant financial and managerial resources that may be used to support and develop the activities of Security First. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that the financial and managerial resources of the organizations involved in the proposal lend weight toward approval of the proposal. The record indicates that consummation of the proposal would result in benefits to consumers and businesses. The proposal would increase the financial and technological resources available to Security First, thereby enabling it to enhance the financial products and services it offers, which would provide greater convenience to consumers and businesses that desire to conduct banking transactions over the Internet. Additionally, there are public benefits to be derived from permitting capital markets to operate so that bank holding companies may make potentially profitable investments in nonbanking companies when, as in this case, those investments are consistent with the relevant considerations under the BHC Act, and from permitting banking organizations to allocate their resources in the manner they believe is most efficient. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that consummation of the proposal can reasonably be expected to produce public benefits that would outweigh any likely adverse effects under the proper incident to banking standard of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Conclusion Based on the foregoing and all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the notice should be, and hereby is, approved. The Board's approval of the proposal is specifically conditioned on compliance by Royal Bank with the commitments made in connection with the notice. The Board's determination also is subject to all the conditions in Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.25(c) (12 C.F.R. 225.7 and 225.25(c)) and to the Board's authority to require such modification or termination of the activities of a holding company or any of its subsidiaries as the Board finds necessary to assure compliance with, or to prevent evasion of, the provisions and purposes of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders issued thereunder. The commitments and conditions relied on by the Board in reaching this decision shall be deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision, and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The transaction shall not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective August 3, 1998. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Footnotes Royal Bank, through is wholly owned subsidiaries, RBC Holdings (USA) Inc., New York, New York, and RBC Holdings (Delaware) Inc., Wilmington, Delaware, would acquire Security First from Security First Technologies, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia. Security First is a federally chartered savings bank in formation that would acquire certain assets and liabilities of Security First Network Bank, Atlanta, Georgia ("Old Security First"), an insured depository institution that provides electronic banking services primarily over the Internet. See Cardinal Bancshares, Inc. , 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 674 (1996) (" Cardinal "). Asset and ranking data are as of December 31, 1997, and are based on exchange rates then applicable. See The Royal Bank of Canada , 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 272 (1991); Royal Bank of Canada , 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin 135 (1997); Bank of Montreal , 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin 127 (1997). 12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1843(c)(8). 12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(4). See Cardinal. 12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1843(c)(8). See Banc One Corporation , 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin 602 (1997). The Statement of the Federal Financial Supervisory Agencies Regarding the Community Reinvestment Act provides that a CRA examination is an important and often controlling factor in the consideration of an institution's CRA record and that reports of these examinations will be given great weight in the applications process. 54 Federal Register 13,742 and 13,745 (1989). Commenter argues that, in the absence of an established record of performance by Royal Bank under the CRA, the Board should perform an extensive investigation of Royal Bank's proposed CRA plan before taking any action on the proposal. In keeping with the Board's precedent and the BHC Act and CRA, the Board has carefully reviewed and considered the actual CRA performance record of the relevant insured depository institution in this case and has also carefully considered the proposals by Royal Bank to adopt and improve the CRA policies and programs of that insured depository institution. See The Statement of the Federal Financial Supervisory Agencies Regarding the Community Reinvestment Act; see also The Toronto-Dominion Bank , 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 1052 (1996). The proposed CRA plan indicates that the products and services to be offered would include low-cost banking products and services for individuals, credit counseling, and loans to and investments in affordable housing projects. Commenter asserts that the designation by Old Security First of the Atlanta Metropolitan Statistical Area ("MSA") assessment area under the CRA is inappropriate in view of Old Security First's emphasis on soliciting deposits nationwide over the Internet, and that Old Security First's marketing efforts directed to Internet users disproportionately exclude low- and moderate-income individuals. Commenter also asserts that the Miami MSA should be included in Security First's assessment area because Security First's main office would be located there. As part of the proposal, however, Royal Bank intends to relocate the main office to Atlanta approximately 30 days after acquiring Security First and to close the Miami office. See 12 C.F.R. 563e.41(c). In April 1997, the OTS published notice of proposed rulemaking concerning all aspects of electronic banking, including the application of the CRA to those activities. See 62 Federal Register 15,626 (April 2, 1997). Several public comments were received by the OTS concerning the CRA. The proposed rulemaking remains open. Commenter also requests that the Board postpone taking any action on the proposal until the OTS has determined whether to require Royal Bank to submit a specific CRA plan or set of CRA commitments in connection with its review of the proposal and to permit public comment on Royal Bank's CRA plan. The Board is required under its procedures, however, to take action on the proposal within a specified period of time. See 12 C.F.R. 225.24(d). The Board has provided a period for public comment in this case of 34 days, and the Secretary of the Board has extended the time for receiving comments on the proposal from Commenter an additional 22 days. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that no additional delay is warranted in this case. See 12 C.F.R. 225.26. Commenter also alleges that Royal Bank's proposal to establish the main office of Security First in Miami, Florida, and then to relocate the main office to Atlanta, Georgia, is intended to evade Georgia's charter age requirements. See Ga. Code Ann. ï¿½ 7-1-608(a)(2) (Michie 1998). Georgia law permits Royal Bank to acquire Security First's office in Atlanta as a branch of a thrift with a home office in another state, and to relocate its main office to Atlanta. Georgia banking authorities have advised the Board that they have reviewed and do not object to the proposal. Commenter has requested that the Board hold a public meeting or hearing on the proposal to obtain additional factual evidence concerning the adequacy of the CRA plan submitted by Royal Bank for Security First to address the convenience and needs of the community to be served. The Board's Rules of Procedure provide for a hearing on notices under section 4 of the BHC Act to acquire a savings association only if there are disputed issues of material fact that cannot be resolved in some other manner. See 12 C.F.R. 225.25(a)(2). The Board also may, in its discretion, hold a public meeting or hearing if a hearing is necessary to clarify factual issues related to the proposal and to provide an opportunity for testimony, if appropriate. See 12 C.F.R. 225.16(e). After a careful review of all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that Commenter's contentions amount to a dispute concerning the weight that should be accorded to, and the conclusions that the Board should draw from, the facts of record, but do not identify disputed issues of fact that are material to the Board's decision. The Board also notes that interested parties have had an ample opportunity to present their views, and Commenter has submitted substantial written comments that have been considered by the Board. Commenter's request fails to demonstrate why a written presentation would not suffice and to summarize the evidence that would be presented at a meeting or hearing. For these reasons, and based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that a public meeting or hearing is not required or warranted in this case. Accordingly, the request for a public meeting or hearing on the proposal is hereby denied. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Meyer, and Ferguson. Absent and not voting: Governor Gramlich.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board, along with the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of Thrift Supervision today issued a final rule amending capital adequacy standards for banks, bank holding companies, and savings associations to address the regulatory capital treatment of servicing assets on both mortgage assets and financial assets other than mortgages (nonmortgages). The final rule is effective October 1, 1998. Banking organizations may voluntarily apply the provisions of the final rule immediately if desired. The final rule increases the maximum amount of servicing assets along with purchased credit card relationships (PCCRs) that are includable in regulatory capital from 50 percent to 100 percent of Tier 1 capital. Servicing assets include the aggregate amount of mortgage servicing assets (MSAs) and nonmortgage servicing assets (NMSAs). The final rule applies a further sublimit of 25 percent of Tier 1 capital to the aggregate amount of NMSAa and PCCRs and subjects the valuation of MSAs, NMSAs, and PCCRs to a 10 percent discount. The final rule also modifies certain terms used in the banking agencies' capital rules to be more consistent with the terminology found in accounting standards recently prescribed by the Financial Accounting Standards Board for reporting of these assets. The interagency notice is attached. |
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board along with the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of Thrift Supervision are requesting public comment on a proposal to revise their rules regarding management interlocks. Comment is requested by October 13, 1998. The proposal conforms the interlocks rules to recent statutory changes, modernizes and clarifies the rules, and reduces unnecessary regulatory burdens where feasible, consistent with statutory requirements. The interagency notice is attached. |
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today its approval of the application of Norwest Corporation, Minneapolis, Minnesota, to acquire Star Bancshares, Inc., and thereby acquire First State Bank, both of Austin, Texas. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Norwest Corporation Minneapolis, Minnesota Order Approving the Acquisition of a Bank Holding Company Norwest Corporation ("Norwest"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 3 of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. §: 1842) to acquire all of the voting shares of Star Bancshares, Inc, Austin, Texas ("Star"), and thereby acquire Star Bancshares of Nevada, Inc., Carson City, Nevada, and its subsidiary bank, First State Bank, Austin, Texas. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (63 Federal Register 34,651 (1998)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the proposal and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 3 of the BHC Act. Norwest, with total consolidated assets of $98.5 billion, is the eleventh largest commercial banking organization in the United States. Norwest is the fourth largest commercial banking organization in Texas, controlling approximately $6.5 billion in deposits, representing 4 percent of total deposits in commercial banking organizations in the state. Star is the twenty-eighth largest commercial banking organization in Texas, controlling approximately $487.3 million in deposits, representing less than 1 percent of total deposits in commercial banking organizations in the state. On consummation of the proposal, Norwest would remain the fourth largest commercial banking organization in Texas, controlling deposits of approximately $7 billion, representing 4.3 percent of commercial bank deposits in the state. Section 3(d) of the BHC Act, as amended by Section 101 of the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act of 1994 ("Riegle-Neal Act"), allows the Board to approve an application by a bank holding company to acquire a bank located in a state other than the home state of such bank holding company if certain conditions are met. For purposes of the BHC Act, the home state of Norwest is Minnesota, and Norwest proposes to acquire a bank in Texas. The conditions for an interstate acquisition under section 3(d) of the BHC Act are met in this case. The BHC Act prohibits the Board from approving a proposal under section 3 of the BHC Act that if would result in a monopoly that would substantially lessen competition in any relevant market unless the Board finds that the anticompetitive effects of the proposed transaction are clearly outweighed in the public interest by the probable effect of the transaction in meeting the convenience and needs of the community to be served. Norwest and Star compete in fifteen banking markets in Texas. The Board has carefully reviewed the competitive effects of the proposal in those markets in light of all the facts of record, including the projected increase in the concentration of total deposits in depository institutions in the market ("market deposits"), as measured by the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index ("HHI") under the Department of Justice Merger Guidelines ("DOJ Guidelines"), and the number of competitors that would remain in the markets. As described in more detail in the Appendix and below, the increase in the HHI does not exceed the DOJ Guidelines in the banking markets in which Norwest and Star compete. In addition, numerous competitors would remain in those banking markets. In the Kerr County banking market, Norwest is the largest depository institution, controlling deposits of $210.1 million, representing 40.2 percent of market deposits. Star is the sixth largest depository institution in the banking market, controlling deposits of $7.1 million, representing 1.4 percent of market deposits. On consummation of the proposal, Norwest would remain the largest depository institution in the banking market, controlling deposits of $217.2 million, representing 41.6 percent of market deposits. Concentration in the Kerr County banking market, as measured by the HHI, would increase by 110 points to 2896. In evaluating the competitive effects of the proposal in the Kerr County banking market, the Board has considered several factors that tend to mitigate the concentration of banking resources in the market. Five competitors would remain in the market after consummation of the proposal. Four competitors other than Norwest would have market shares of at least 5 percent, including two bank holding companies that would have market shares of 29.3 percent and 13.7 percent, respectively. In addition, the market appears to be attractive for entry. In April 1998, a commercial bank entered the Kerr County banking market de novo and received approximately $13 million in deposits in less than three months. The Board also notes that Star is a recent entrant to the Kerr County banking market with a relatively small market presence of less than 2 percent of market deposits. As in other cases, the Board sought comments from the Department of Justice and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ("FDIC") on the competitive effects of the proposal. The Department of Justice has reviewed the proposal and advised the Board that consummation of the proposal would not likely have any significantly adverse competitive effects in the Kerr County banking market or any other relevant banking market. The FDIC has been consulted and has not objected to consummation of the proposal. Based on all the facts of record, and for the reasons discussed in this order, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposal is not likely to result in any significantly adverse effects on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in the Kerr County banking market or any other relevant banking market. The BHC Act also requires the Board to consider the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the companies and banks involved in the proposal, the convenience and needs of the communities to be served, and certain supervisory factors. The Board has reviewed these factors in light of the record, including supervisory reports of examination assessing the financial and managerial resources of the organizations and financial information provided by Norwest. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that the financial and managerial resources and the future prospects of Norwest, Star, and their respective subsidiary banks are consistent with approval, as are the other supervisory factors the Board must consider under section 3 of the BHC Act. Considerations related to the convenience and needs of the communities to be served also are consistent with approval of the proposal. Conclusion Based on the foregoing, and in light of all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the application should be, and hereby is, approved. The Board's approval is specifically conditioned on compliance by Norwest with all the commitments made in connection with the application. For the purpose of this action, the commitments and conditions relied on by the Board in reaching its decision are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The proposed acquisition of Star shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day following the effective date of this order, or later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective August 12, 1998. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Appendix Austin - Approximated by the Austin Metropolitan Statistical Area ("MSA"). Norwest would control 16.3 percent of the market deposits and would become the second largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase 112 points to 1276. Thirty-six depository institutions would remain in the market after consummation of the proposal. Brazoria - Approximated by Brazoria County, excluding Alvin, Pearland and the surrounding unincorporated area which is included in the Houston Ranally Metropolitan Area ("RMA"). Norwest would control 11.3 percent of the market deposits and would remain the fourth largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase 7 points to 1536. Twelve depository institutions would remain in the market after consummation of the proposal. Corpus Christi - Approximated by the Corpus Christi MSA and the area encompassing Alice and Orange Grove in Jim Wells County; and the community of San Diego in Duval County. Norwest would control 7.7 percent of the market deposits and would become the fifth largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase 3 points to 1105. Twenty-five depository institutions would remain in the market after consummation of the proposal. Dallas - Approximated by Dallas County; the southeastern quadrant of Denton County, including Denton and Lewisville; the southwestern quadrant of Collin County, including McKinney and Plano; Rockwall County; and the communities of Forney and Terrell in Kaufman County; Midlothian, Waxahachie, and Ferris in Ellis County; and Grapevine and Arlington in Tarrant County. Norwest would control less than 1 percent of the market deposits and would become the twenty-first largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase less than 1 point to 1649. One hundred-seven depository institutions would remain in the market after consummation of the proposal. Ft. Worth - Approximated by Tarrant County, excluding Grapevine and Arlington; the northern half of Johnson County, including Cleburne and Burleson; the eastern half of Parker County, including Weatherford and Springtown; the southwestern quadrant of Denton County, including Roanoke and Justin; the communities of Boyd, Newark, and Rhome in Wise County. Norwest would control 12.4 percent of the market deposits and would remain the third largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase 3 points to 860. Fifty depository institutions would remain in the market after consummation of the proposal. Houston - Approximated by the Houston RMA. Norwest would control less than 1 percent of the market deposits and would become the thirty-eighth largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase less than one point to 869. Ninety-eight depository institutions would remain in the market after consummation of the proposal. San Antonio - Approximated by the San Antonio MSA and Kendall County. Norwest would control 6.4 percent of the market deposits and would remain the fifth largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase less than one point to 1099. Thirty-eight depository institutions would remain in the market after consummation of the proposal. Odessa-Midland - Approximated by Midland and Ector Counties. Norwest would control 18.3 percent of the market deposits and would remain the second largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase 11 points to 1474. Ten depository institutions would remain in the market after consummation of the proposal. Brazos County - Approximated by Brazos County. Norwest would control 27.5 percent of the market deposits and would remain the largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase 16 points to 1803. Nine depository institutions would remain in the market after consummation of the proposal. Burnet County - Approximated by Burnet County. Norwest would control 5.7 percent of the market deposits and would become the seventh largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase 15 points to 1441. Ten depository institutions would remain in the market after consummation of the proposal. Lubbock - Approximated by the Lubbock MSA. Norwest would control 21.5 percent of the market deposits and would remain the second largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase 10 points to 1499. Sixteen depository institutions would remain in the market after consummation of the proposal. San Angelo - Approximated by the San Angelo MSA. Norwest would control 23.5 percent of the market deposits and would remain the second largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase 23 points to 1828. Ten depository institutions would remain in the market after consummation of the proposal. Victoria - Approximated by the Victoria MSA. Norwest would control 32.8 percent of the market deposits and would remain the second largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase 34 points to 2630. Eight depository institutions would remain in the market after consummation of the proposal. Hidalgo County - Approximated by Hidalgo County. Norwest would control 4.0 percent of the market deposits and would remain the seventh largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase 1 point to 1481. Twenty depository institutions would remain in the market after consummation of the proposal. Footnotes Asset and state deposit data are as of June 30, 1997, unless otherwise indicated. 12 U.S.C. §: 1842(d). A bank holding company's home state is the state in which the operations of the bank holding company's banking subsidiaries were principally conducted on July 1, 1966, or the date on which the company became a bank holding company, whichever is later. Norwest is adequately capitalized and adequately managed as defined in the Riegle-Neal Act. 12 U.S.C. §: 1842(d)(1)(A). On consummation of the proposal, Norwest would control less than 10 percent of the total amount of deposits of insured depository institutions in the United States. In addition, First State Bank has been in existence for the minimum period of time necessary to satisfy age requirements established by applicable state law. See Tex. Fin. Code Ann. §: 38.003 (West 1998). Norwest also would control less than 20 percent of the total deposits of insured depository institutions in Texas. See Tex. Fin. Code Ann. §: 38.002 (West 1998). The Board has considered Norwest's record of compliance with the applicable state community reinvestment provisions. All other requirements of section 3(d) of the BHC Act also would be met on consummation of the proposal. 12 U.S.C. §: 1842(c). All market data are as of June 30, 1997. In this context, depository institutions include commercial banks, savings banks, and savings associations. Market share data are based on calculations in which the deposits of thrift institutions are included at 50 percent. The Board previously has indicated that thrift institutions have become, or have the potential to become, significant competitors of commercial banks. See Midwest Financial Group, 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 386 (1989); National City Corporation, 70 Federal Reserve Bulletin 743 (1984). Thus, the Board has regularly included thrift deposits in the calculation of market share on a 50-percent weighted basis. See, e.g., First Hawaiian, Inc., 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 52 (1991). Under the revised DOJ Guidelines, 49 Federal Register 26,823 (June 29, 1984), a market in which the post-merger is above 1800 is considered highly concentrated. The Department of Justice has informed the Board that a bank merger or acquisition generally will not be challenged (in the absence of other factors indicating anticompetitive effects) unless the post-merger is at least 1800 and the merger increases the HHI by more than 200 points. The Department of Justice has stated that the higher than normal HHI thresholds for screening bank mergers for anticompetitive effects implicitly recognize the competitive effects of limited-purpose lenders and other non-depository financial entities. The Kerr County banking market is approximated by Kerr County, Texas. Kerr County's population increased by 15.4 percent from 1990 to 1997, compared with an average increase in population of 13.5 percent for the state. The population of Kerr County is projected to increase 12.2 percent from 1997 to 2001, compared with a projected average increase in population of 7.9 percent for the state. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan and Governors Kelley, Meyer, Ferguson, and Gramlich. Absent and not voting: Vice Chair Rivlin.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board, along with the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, today issued the host state loan-to-deposit ratios that the banking agencies will use to determine compliance with section 109 of the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act of 1994 (Interstate Act). Section 109 prohibits any bank from establishing or acquiring a branch or branches outside of its home state under the Interstate Act primarily for the purpose of deposit production and provides a two-step process to test compliance with the statutory requirements. The first step involves a loan-to-deposit ratio screen that compares a bank's statewide loan-to-deposit ratio to the host state loan-to-deposit ratio for a particular state. The second step requires the banking agencies to determine if the bank is reasonably helping to meet the credit needs of the communities served by the bank's interstate branches. A bank that fails both steps is in violation of section 109 and is subject to sanctions by the banking agencies. The are attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the proposal of NationsBank Corporation, Charlotte, North Carolina, to merge with BankAmerica Corporation, San Francisco, California, and thereby acquire all of BankAmerica's bank, nonbank, and foreign subsidiaries. The Board's approval is conditioned on the divestiture of 17 branches in three local banking markets in New Mexico. NationsBank also must report to the Federal Reserve System semi-annually during the two-year period after consummation of the merger all branch closings that occur as a result of this proposal. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application of First American Corporation, Nashville, Tennessee, to acquire The Middle Tennessee Bank, Columbia, Tennessee. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. First American Corporation Nashville, Tennessee Order Approving the Acquisition of a Bank First American Corporation ("First American"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 3 of the BHC Act to acquire The Middle Tennessee Bank, Columbia, Tennessee ("Bank"). Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (63 Federal Register 33,932 (1998)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the proposal and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 3 of the BHC Act. First American is the second largest commercial banking organization in Tennessee, controlling approximately $8.2 billion in deposits, representing 14.2 percent of total deposits in commercial banking organizations in Tennessee ("state deposits"). Bank is the 38th largest commercial banking organization in Tennessee, controlling approximately $196.8 million in deposits, representing less than 1 percent of state deposits. On consummation of the proposal, First American would remain the second largest commercial banking organization in Tennessee, controlling deposits of $8.4 billion, representing 14.5 percent of state deposits. Competitive Considerations Section 3 of the BHC Act prohibits the Board from approving a proposal that would result in a monopoly, or that may substantially lessen competition in any relevant banking market, if the anticompetitive effects of the proposal are not clearly outweighed in the public interest by the probable effect of the proposal in meeting the convenience and needs of the community to be served. First American and Bank compete in the Maury County, Tennessee, banking market, which is an area approximated by Maury County, Tennessee. Consummation of the proposal would exceed the Department of Justice Merger Guidelines ("DOJ Guidelines") in the Maury County banking market. First American is the fifth largest commercial banking organization in the market, controlling $43.5 million in deposits, representing 5.3 percent of total deposits in commercial banking organizations in the market ("market deposits"). Bank is the second largest commercial banking organization in the market, controlling $196.8 million in deposits, representing 23.9 percent of market deposits. On consummation of the proposal, First American would become the second largest commercial banking organization in the market, controlling $240.3 million in deposits, representing 29.2 percent of market deposits. The HHI would increase by 252 points to 2727. Several characteristics of the Maury County banking market mitigate the proposal's potential anticompetitive effects. Six competitors, including First American, would remain in the market after consummation of the proposal. Several of the competitors are large regional institutions, and three of them would each control more than 20 percent of market deposits after consummation of the proposal. The Maury County banking market also is attractive for entry. Data for 1997 show that deposits per banking office and population per banking office in the market are greater than the averages for other non-MSA counties in Tennessee. In addition, population growth, household income, and per capita income in Maury County all substantially exceed the average for rural markets in Tennessee. Since 1992, one bank has entered the Maury County banking market de novo and four bank holding companies have entered the market by acquisition, including two bank holding companies that entered the market by acquiring banks with a significant portion of their deposits in the market. Tennessee, moreover, permits unrestricted intrastate branching. The Department of Justice reviewed the proposal and advised the Board that consummation of the proposal would not likely have any significantly adverse competitive effects in the Maury County banking market or any other relevant banking market. In addition, neither the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, which is the primary federal supervisor for Bank, nor the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, which is the primary federal supervisor for First American National Bank, has objected to the related bank merger. Based on all the facts of record, and for the reasons discussed above, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposal is not likely to result in any significantly adverse effects on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in the Maury County banking market or any other relevant banking market. Other Considerations The BHC Act requires the Board, in acting on an application, to consider the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the companies and banks involved, the convenience and needs of the communities to be served, and certain supervisory factors. The Board has reviewed these factors in light of all the facts of record, including supervisory reports of examination assessing the financial and managerial resources of the organizations. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that the financial and managerial resources and the future prospects of First American, its subsidiary banks, and Bank are consistent with approval, as are the other supervisory factors the Board must consider under section 3 of the BHC Act. In addition, considerations related to the convenience and needs of the communities to be served, including the records of performance of the institutions under the Community Reinvestment Act, are consistent with approval of the proposal. Conclusion Based on the foregoing, and in light of all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the application should be, and hereby is, approved. The Board's approval is specifically conditioned on compliance by First American with all the commitments made in connection with the application. For the purposes of this action, the commitments and conditions relied on by the Board in reaching its decision are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The transaction shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day following the effective date of this order, or later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Reserve Bank of Atlanta, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective August 17, 1998. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Footnotes First American proposes to acquire Bank and merge it with and into First American's subsidiary bank, First American National Bank, Nashville, Tennessee. State deposit data are as of June 30, 1997, and reflect acquisitions through July 6, 1998. First American also controls a bank in Mississippi and a savings association in Virginia. 12 U.S.C. &3167; 1842(c)(1). First American contends that the relevant banking market in this case should be the broader market defined to include Maury County and the greater Nashville, Tennessee, area. Based on an analysis of employment opportunities, commuting data, shopping patterns, loan and deposit data, interviews with local bankers, and other facts of record, the Board concludes that the appropriate market for analyzing the competitive effects of the proposal is the Maury County banking market. See St. Joseph Valley Bank, 68 Federal Reserve Bulletin 673, 674 (1982); see also United States v. Philadelphia Nat'l Bank, 374 U.S. 321, 374 (1963); United States v. Phillipsburg Nat'l Bank, 399 U.S. 350 (1969). Under the revised DOJ Guidelines, 49 Federal Register 26,823 (June 29, 1984), a market in which the post-merger Herfindahl-Hirschman Index ("HHI") exceeds 1800 is considered highly concentrated. The Department of Justice has informed the Board that a bank merger or acquisition generally will not be challenged (in the absence of other factors indicating anticompetitive effects) unless the post-merger HHI is at least 1800 and the merger increases the HHI by more than 200 points. The Department of Justice has stated that the higher than normal HHI thresholds for screening bank mergers for anticompetitive effects implicitly recognize the competitive effect of limited-purpose lenders and other non-depository financial entities. Market share data are as of June 30, 1997, and reflect acquisitions through July 6, 1998. No savings associations operate in the Maury County banking market. Rand McNally Commercial Atlas (1997). See Tenn. Code Ann. &3167; 45-2-614 (1997). Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Meyer, Ferguson, and Gramlich.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice of the BankBoston Corporation, Boston, Massachusetts, to acquire the operating business of the Robertson Stephens Division of BancAmerica Robertson Stephens, San Francisco, California, and thereby engage in underwriting and dealing in, to a limited extent, all types of debt and equity securities and in certain other nonbanking activities. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. BankBoston Corporation Boston, Massachusetts Order Approving Notice to Engage in Nonbanking Activities BankBoston Corporation ("BankBoston"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8)) and section 225.24 of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.24) to acquire the operating business of the Robertson Stephens Division ("Robertson Stephens Division") of BancAmerica Robertson Stephens, San Francisco, California, and thereby engage in the following activities: Underwriting and dealing in, to a limited extent, all types of debt and equity securities, other than ownership interests in open-end investment companies ("bank-ineligible securities"); Extending credit and servicing loans, in accordance with section 225.28(b)(1) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(1)); Arranging commercial real estate equity financing, in accordance with section 225.28(b)(2)(i) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(2)(i)); Providing financial and investment advisory services, in accordance with section 225.28(b)(6) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(6)); Providing securities brokerage, private placement, and riskless principal services, in accordance with section 225.28(b)(7)(i), (ii), and (iii) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(7)(i), (ii), and (iii)); and Underwriting and dealing in government obligations and money market instruments in which state member banks may underwrite and deal under 12 U.S.C. §§ 335 and 24(7) ("bank-eligible securities"), in accordance with section 225.28(b)(8)(i) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(8)(i)). In connection with this acquisition, BankBoston also would acquire BA Robertson Stephens International Limited, London, England ("BARSIL"). BankBoston has requested approval to engage in equity underwriting and dealing through BARSIL in accordance with section 4(c)(13) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(13)) and section 211.5(d)(14) of the Board's Regulation K (12 C.F.R. 211.5(d)(14)). Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (63 Federal Register 35,932 (1998)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the notice and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. BankBoston, with total consolidated assets of approximately $71.4 billion, is the 16th largest banking organization in the United States. BankBoston operates subsidiary banks in Massachusetts, Connecticut, Florida, New Hampshire, and Rhode Island, and engages through its subsidiaries in a broad range of permissible nonbanking activities. BankBoston proposes to merge Robertson Stephens Division with and into BankBoston's wholly owned subsidiary, BancBoston Securities, Inc., Boston, Massachusetts ("BSI"). After consummation of the proposal, BSI would be renamed BancBoston Robertson Stephens, Inc. ("BRS"). BSI currently is, and after consummation of the proposal BRS will be, a broker-dealer registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") and a member of the National Association of Securities Dealers, Inc. ("NASD"). Accordingly, BSI is, and BRS will be, subject to the recordkeeping and reporting obligations, fiduciary standards, and other requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. § 78a et seq. ), the SEC, and the NASD. Underwriting and Dealing Activities The Board has determined, subject to the framework of prudential limitations to address the potential for conflicts of interests, unsound banking practices, or other adverse effects, that underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities is so closely related to banking as to be a proper incident thereto within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. The Board also has determined that underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities is consistent with section 20 of the Glass-Steagall Act (12 U.S.C. § 377), provided that the company engaged in underwriting and dealing activities derives no more than 25 percent of its gross revenues from underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities over a two-year period. BankBoston has committed that BRS will conduct its bank-ineligible securities underwriting and dealing activities using the methods and procedures and subject to the prudential limitations established by the Board in the Section 20 Orders. BankBoston also has committed that BRS will conduct its bank-ineligible securities underwriting and dealing activities subject to the Board's 25-percent revenue limitation. As a condition of this order, BankBoston is required to conduct its bank-ineligible securities activities subject to the revenue restrictions and Operating Standards established for section 20 subsidiaries ("Operating Standards"). Other Activities Approved by Regulation or Order The Board previously has determined by regulation that extending credit and servicing loans; arranging commercial real estate equity financing; providing financial and investment advisory services; providing securities brokerage, private placement, and riskless principal services; and underwriting and dealing in government obligations and money market instruments are closely related to banking within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. BankBoston has committed that BRS will conduct each of these activities in accordance with the BHC Act, Regulation Y, and relevant Board interpretations and orders. Proper Incident to Banking Standard In order to approve the proposal, the Board also must determine that the proposed activities are a proper incident to banking, that is, that the proposed transaction "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public . . . that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices." As part of its evaluation of these factors, the Board considers the financial condition and managerial resources of the notificant and its subsidiaries and the effect the transaction would have on such resources. In considering the financial resources of the notificant, the Board has reviewed the capitalization of BankBoston and BRS in accordance with the standards set forth in the Section 20 Orders. The Board finds the capitalization of each to be consistent with approval of the proposal. The Board's determination is based on all the facts of record, including BankBoston's projections of the volume of BRS's underwriting and dealing activities in bank-ineligible securities. On the basis of its supervisory experience with BankBoston and BSI, the commitments provided in this case, and the proposed management of BRS, the Board also has determined that BankBoston and BRS have established the policies and procedures to ensure compliance with this order and the Section 20 Orders, including computer, audit, and accounting systems, internal risk management controls, and the necessary operational and managerial infrastructure. The Board also has reviewed other aspects of the managerial resources of the entities involved in this proposal, including the expected effect of this proposal on such resources. On the basis of the foregoing and all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that financial and managerial considerations are consistent with approval of the notice. The Board expects that the proposed acquisition would provide added convenience to customers of both BankBoston and Robertson Stephens Division. BankBoston has indicated that the acquisition would expand the range of products and services available to its customers and those of Robertson Stephens Division. BankBoston also has stated that the proposed transaction would result in operational efficiencies that would allow it to become a more effective competitor. The Board also has carefully considered the competitive effects of the proposed acquisition. BankBoston represents that there are few overlaps in the services provided by BSI and Robertson Stephens Division: BSI specializes in brokering, underwriting, and dealing in debt products, while Robertson Stephens Division has focused primarily on underwriting of equity securities. To the extent that BSI and Robertson Stephens Division offer different types of products, the proposed acquisition would result in no loss of competition. In those markets in which the product offerings of BSI and Robertson Stephens Division do overlap, such as investment advisory activities, there are numerous existing and potential competitors. Consummation of the proposal, therefore, would have a de minimis effect on competition in the market for these services, and the Board has concluded that the proposal would not result in any significantly adverse competitive effects in any relevant market. As noted above, BankBoston has committed that, after the proposed acquisition, BRS will conduct its bank-ineligible securities underwriting and dealing activities in accordance with the prudential framework established by the Board's Section 20 Orders. Under the framework and conditions established in this order and the Section 20 Orders, and based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that BRS's proposed underwriting and dealing activities in bank-ineligible securities are not likely to result in significantly adverse effects that would outweigh the public benefits of the proposal. Similarly, the Board finds no evidence that BRS's proposed riskless principal, private placement, and other nonbanking activities, conducted under the framework and conditions established in this order and Regulation Y, would likely result in any significantly adverse effects that would outweigh the public benefits of the proposal. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that consummation of the proposed transaction by BankBoston can reasonably be expected to produce public benefits that would outweigh any potential adverse effects. Accordingly, the Board has determined that performance of the proposed activities by BankBoston is a proper incident to banking for purposes of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. The Board also has determined that BankBoston has established appropriate internal policies and procedures and has adequate capital resources consistent with approval of the proposed equity underwriting and dealing activities, under section 4(c)(13) of the BHC Act. Conclusion On the basis of all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the notice should be, and hereby is, approved, subject to all the terms and conditions in this order and the Section 20 Orders, as modified by the Modification Orders. The Board's approval of the proposal extends only to activities conducted within the limitations of those orders and this order, including the Board's reservation of authority to establish additional limitations to ensure that BRS's activities are consistent with safety and soundness, avoidance of conflicts of interests, and other relevant considerations under the BHC Act. Underwriting and dealing in any manner other than as approved in this order and the Section 20 Orders (as modified by the Modification Orders) is not within the scope of the Board's approval and is not authorized for BRS. The Board's determination is subject to all the terms and conditions set forth in Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.25(c) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.7 and 225.25(c)), and to the Board's authority to require such modification or termination of the activities of a bank holding company or any of its subsidiaries as the Board finds necessary to ensure compliance with, and to prevent evasion of, the provisions of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders issued thereunder. The Board's decision is specifically conditioned on compliance with all the commitments made in connection with this notice, including the commitments discussed in this order, and the conditions set forth in this order and the above-noted Board regulations and orders. These commitments and conditions are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision, and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The proposal shall not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective August 24, 1998. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Footnotes Asset and ranking data are as of March 31, 1998. BSI currently engages in limited underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities, as permitted under section 20 of the Glass-Steagall Act (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 377). See Bank of Boston Corporation, 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin 42 (1996). BSI also is authorized to engage in a variety of other nonbanking activities. See id. See J.P. Morgan & Co. Incorporated, et al., 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 192 (1989), aff'd sub nom. Securities Industries Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 900 F.2d 360 (D.C. Cir. 1990); Citicorp, et al., 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 473 (1987), aff'd sub nom. Securities Industry Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 839 F.2d 47 (2d Cir.), cert. denied, 486 U.S. 1059 (1988); as modified by Review of Restrictions on Director, Officer and Employee Interlocks, Cross-Marketing Activities, and the Purchase and Sale of Financial Assets Between a Section 20 Subsidiary and an Affiliated Bank or Thrift, 61 Federal Register 57,679 (1996), Amendments to Restrictions in the Board's Section 20 Orders, 62 Federal Register 45,295 (1997); and Clarifications to the Board's Section 20 Orders, 63 Federal Register 14,803 (1998) (collectively, "Section 20 Orders"). BankBoston proposes to merge Robertson Stephens Division with and into BRS immediately on consummation of the proposed transaction. Accordingly, BankBoston must calculate BRS's compliance with the revenue limitation in accordance with the method stated in the Section 20 Orders, as modified by the Order Approving Modifications to the Section 20 Orders, 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 751 (1989); 10 Percent Revenue Limit on Bank-Ineligible Activities of Subsidiaries of Bank Holding Companies Engaged in Underwriting and Dealing in Securities, 61 Federal Register 48,953 (1996); and Revenue Limit on Bank-Ineligible Activities of Subsidiaries of Bank Holding Companies Engaged in Underwriting and Dealing in Securities, 61 Federal Register 68,750 (1996) (collectively, "Modification Orders"). 12 C.F.R. 225.200. BRS may provide services that are necessary incidents to the proposed bank-ineligible securities underwriting and dealing activities. Unless BRS receives specific approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act to conduct the activities independently, BRS must treat any revenues from the incidental activities as ineligible revenues subject to the Board's revenue limitation. See 12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(1), (2)(ii), (6), (7)(i), (7)(ii), (7)(iii), and (8)(i). See 12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1843(c)(8). See 12 C.F.R. 225.26. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Ferguson, and Gramlich. Absent and not voting: Governor Meyer.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board along with the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, today issued an interim rule and requested public comment on a proposal to expand the examination frequency cycle for certain U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks. The interim rule is effective August 28, 1998. Comment is requested by October 27, 1998. Implementation of this ruling will make U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks with total assets of $250 million or less eligible for an 18-month examination cycle rather than a 12-month cycle if they meet the qualifying criteria set out in the interim rule. The ruling will implement provisions of section 2214 of the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act of 1996. The interagency notice is attached. |
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board along with the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of Thrift Supervision are amending their respective risk-based capital standards for banks, bank holding companies and thrifts regarding the capital treatment of unrealized holding gains on certain equity securities. These gains are reported as a component of equity capital under U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP), but have not been included in regulatory capital under the banking agencies' capital standards. The final rule is effective October 1, 1998. However, institutions may elect to comply immediately. The final rule permits institutions to include in supplementary (Tier 2) capital up to 45 percent of the pretax net unrealized holding gains on certain available-for-sale (AFS) equity securities. The final rule is intended to make the capital treatment of these unrealized gains consistent with the international standards of the Basle Accord. The interagency notice is attached. |
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan At a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming August 28, 1998 I am pleased once again to open this annual symposium. At the outset, I wish to thank Tom Hoenig and his staff for assembling a highly capable group of experts to inform us and to stimulate discussion on an important issue in the world economy. The study of income inequality--its causes, its consequences, and its potential policy implications--has a long history in economics, although it has not always had a high profile among researchers and policymakers. To borrow a phrase from Professor Atkinson, income distribution in recent years has been "brought in from the cold." In part, that awareness has resulted from the experience of many industrialized economies with widening earnings inequality in the 1980s and 1990s. It has been heightened by interest in the consequences of economic change in developing, newly industrialized, and transition economies. The experience of industrialized countries, including the United States, with growing income inequality has spawned a great deal of research on the functioning of labor markets, on the sources of shifts in the demand for various types of skills, on the supply responses of workers, and on the efficacy of government efforts to intervene in the operation of labor markets. A number of those who have contributed importantly to this work will be participating in this conference. One story that has emerged from that body of research is now familiar: Rising demand for those workers who have the skills to effectively harness new technologies has been outpacing supply, and, thus, the compensation of those workers has been increasing more rapidly than for the lesser skilled segment of the workforce. That this supply-demand gap has been an important source of widening earnings inequality is now widely accepted within the economics profession. However, the considerable diversity of experiences across countries as well as the finding that earnings inequality has also increased within groups of workers with similar measured skills and experience suggest that we may need to look deeper than skill-biased technological change if we are to fully understand widening wage dispersion. In particular, how have private and public institutions influenced inequality over the past two decades? What roles have been played by growing international trade and the evolving ways in which production is organized? Again, the participants in this symposium are well-equipped to speak to these issues, and we should learn much more about the causes of widening inequality during the next two days. In discussing the extent to which large portions of the population are not reaping the benefits of economic growth, I hope that the participants at this conference will not stop with an analysis of trends in earnings--or, for that matter, even trends in income more broadly defined. Ultimately, we are interested in the question of relative standards of living and economic well-being. Thus, we need also to examine trends in the distribution of wealth, which, more fundamentally than earnings or income, represents a measure of the ability of households to consume. And we will even want to consider the distribution of consumption, which likely has the advantage of smoothing through transitory shocks affecting particular individuals or households for just a year or two. Among these more comprehensive measures, data for the United States from the Federal Reserve's Survey of Consumer Finances suggest that inequality in household wealth--that is, in net worth--was somewhat higher in 1989 than at the time of our earlier survey in 1963. Subsequently, the 1992 and 1995 surveys--and here our data are statistically more comparable from survey to survey than they were earlier--showed that wealth inequality remained little changed in terms of the broad measures. Nonetheless, that stability masks considerable churning among the subgroups. One particularly notable change was an apparent rise in the share of wealth held by the wealthiest families at the expense of other wealthy families; most of the change occurred within the top 10 percent of the distribution. Moreover, our research using the survey suggests that conclusions about the distribution of wealth are sensitive--although to a lesser degree than income--to the state of the economy and to institutional arrangements for saving. For instance, among the wealthiest ï¿½ percent of households, business assets, which tend to be quite cyclical, are particularly important. At the other end of the distribution, owned principal residences, the values of which are not as sensitive to business cycle conditions, are a typical household's most important asset. Another interesting finding is that if we expand the definition of wealth to include estimates of Social Security and pension wealth, the distribution among U.S. households becomes much more even. This finding suggests that, in addition to factors influencing private wealth accumulation, the evolution of institutional arrangements for saving that has taken place over the last two decades may have played an important role in affecting changes in the distribution of wealth over time. What about the effect of the recent rise in stock and bond market values? The typical view is that the growth in mutual funds and other financial investment avenues has allowed individuals further down in the wealth distribution to take advantage of the strength in equity markets. Certainly, our figures show that households lower in the income distribution are now more likely to own stocks than a decade ago. However, between the 1992 and 1995 surveys, the spread of stock ownership and the rise in prices did not lead to a rise in the share of stock and mutual fund assets owned by the bottom 90 percent of the wealth distribution. Although their dollar holdings rose rapidly, the increases were not as large as those for households at the top of the wealth distribution. If patterns of equity ownership have not changed much since 1995, the steep rise in stock prices over the past several years would suggest a further increase in the concentration of net worth. This influence could be offset, to some extent, by a continued broadening in the ownership of equities, particularly through tax-deferred savings accounts. Moreover, some additional offset may have occurred through rising house prices, an important asset of middle class families. Our 1998 survey, which is now in the field, will yield a clearer reading both on how wealth concentration has changed and on the relative importance of different assets in that change. Despite our best efforts to measure trends in income and wealth, I believe that even those measures--by themselves--cannot yield a complete answer to the question of trends in material or economic well-being. In the United States, we observe a noticeable difference between trends in the dispersion of holdings of claims to goods and services--that is, income and wealth--and trends in the dispersion of actual consumption, the bottom-line determinant of material well-being. Ultimately, we are interested in whether households have the means to meet their needs for goods and for services, including those such as education and medical care, that build and maintain human capital. Using data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey that the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics conducts, researchers have found that inequality in consumption, when measured by current outlays, is less than inequality in income. These findings are not surprising. As is well known, consumers tend to maintain their levels of consumption in the face of temporary fluctuations in income. Variations in asset holdings and debt typically act as buffers to changes in income. Thus, consumption patterns tend to look more like patterns in income that have been averaged over several years--a finding that should remind us of the pitfalls of reading too much into any year-to-year change in our measures of economic well-being. The BLS's consumer expenditure data suggest a rise in inequality over the 1980s comparable to that shown by the Census family income figures. However, during the first half of the 1990s, inequality partially receded for consumer expenditures while for income it continued to rise ( ). The consumption data used in these calculations include only what individuals purchase directly out of their incomes and accumulated savings. Recently, researchers have extended the analysis using a more complete and more theoretically appealing measure of consumption that includes the indirect flow of services from the stock of durable goods that they already own--houses, vehicles, and major appliances. As one might expect, although this measure of consumption has a profile somewhat similar to that seen in the current expenditure data over the 1980s and the first half of the 1990s, it shows still lower levels of inequality overall and a clearer pattern of consumption smoothing during the 1981-83 recession. The information available from the Consumer Expenditure Survey can be used to calculate another interesting measure of the well-being of households: changes in inequality in the ownership of consumer durables. The BLS staff has updated tabulations of these data that they prepared for me several years ago ( ). Of course, ownership rates for household durables clearly rise with income. But for a number of goods--for example, dishwashers, clothes dryers, microwaves, and motor vehicles--the distribution of ownership rates by income decile has become more equal over time. Even though we may be able to develop an array of measures of current and past trends in inequality--such as those that I have described and potentially others that may be presented at this symposium--we will likely still face considerable uncertainty about how to interpret those measures and about what the future may hold for the trend and the distribution of economic well-being. Wealth has always been created, virtually by definition, when individuals use their growing knowledge, in conjunction with an expanding capital stock, to produce goods and services of value. The process of wealth creation in the United States has evolved in a number of important ways. Over the last century, we have learned how to be more efficient in meeting the needs of consumers, and thus we have moved from producing essentials to the production of more discretionary goods and services. Moreover, these goods and services have been, over time, increasingly less constrained by the limits of physical bulk. More recently, we have found ways to unbundle the particular characteristics of each good and service to maximize its value to each individual. That striving to expand the options for satisfying the particular needs of individuals has resulted in a shift toward value created through the exploitation of ideas and concepts and away from the more straightforward utilization of physical resources and manual labor. The new thrust has led to structural changes in the way that we organize the production and the distribution of goods and services. It has increased the demand for, and the compensation of, workers who have the ability to create, analyze, and transform information and to interact effectively with others. Most important, it has accorded particularly high value to the application of advanced computer and telecommunications technologies to the generation of economic wealth. At the same time, however, the consequences of technological advances and their implications for the creation of wealth have become increasingly unpredictable. We have found that we cannot forecast with any precision which particular technology or synergies of technologies will add significantly to our knowledge and to our ability to gain from that knowledge. Even if future technological change were to occur at a steady rate, variations in our capacity to absorb and apply advances would likely lead to an uneven rate of increase--over time and across individuals--in returns to expanded investment in knowledge: Supplies of appropriately skilled workers can vary. In some cases, the initial choices in the exploitation of advances may turn out to be sub-optimal. In other cases, the full potential of advances may be realized only after extensive improvements or after complementary innovations in other fields of science. As we consider the causes and consequences of inequality, we should also be mindful that, over time, the relationship of economic growth, increases in standards of living, and the distribution of wealth has evolved differently in various political and institutional settings. Thus, generalizations about the past and the future may be hard to make, particularly in the current dynamic and uncertain environment of economic change. We need to ask, for example, whether we should be concerned with the degree of income inequality if all groups are experiencing relatively rapid gains in their real incomes, though those rates of gain may differ. And, we cannot ignore what is happening to the level of average income while looking at trends in the distribution. In this regard, our goal as central bankers should be clear: We must pursue monetary conditions in which stable prices contribute to maximizing sustainable long-run growth. Such disciplined policies will offer the best underpinnings for identifying opportunities to channel growing knowledge, innovation, and capital investment into the creation of wealth that, in turn, will lift living standards as broadly as possible. Moreover, as evidenced by this symposium, sustaining a healthy economy and a stable financial system naturally permits us to take the time to focus efforts on addressing the distributional issues facing our society and on other challenging issues that may remain out in the cold. .290 .365 .285 .369 .302 .380 .305 .382 .312 .383 .319 .389 .327 .392 .328 .393 .323 .395 .325 .401 .328 .396 .320 .397 .329 .404 .320 .429 .318 .426 .317 .421 n.a. .425 .28 .07 .29 .23 .17 .12 .26 .21 .09 .07 .06 .07 .08 .09 .01 .01 .01 .01 Source: Based on tabulations from the Consumer Expenditure Survey , U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Note: The Gini coefficient is defined as one minus twice the area under the cumulative probability distribution (CPD). The Ginis computed here do not have the properties of a " true " Gini coefficient. For example, a true Gini must lie between zero and one. The Ginis calculated here could be negative if low-income individuals had a higher ownership rate than high- income individuals. Using percent ownership. The percent ownership rates by decile are transformed into a discrete probability distribution. The formula is: p i = r i / 3 r i the sum is over i = 1 to 10 where p i is the fraction of all households that own the durable good who are in income decile i or r i is the actual ownership rate for the i th decile. By construction, the sum of the p i = s is equal to one. For goods that have ownership rates that are relatively equal across deciles, regardless of the level of the ownership rate, the probability distributions are fairly flat with values for p i close to 0.1. For goods that are more concentrated among the affluent households, the probability distributions tend to rise across the income deciles. Footnotes Arthur B. Kennickell and R. Louise Woodburn, "Consistent Weight Design for the 1989, 1992 and 1995 SCFs, and the Distribution of Wealth," manuscript, August 1997. Arthur B. Kennickell and Annika E. Sunden, "Pensions, Social Security, and the Distribution of Wealth," Finance and Economics Discussion Series, 1997-55, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November 1997. Martha Starr-McClure, "Stock Market Wealth and Consumer Spending," Finance and Economics Discussion Series, 1998-20, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April 1998. These results were originally reported in Report on the American Workforce, U.S. Department of Labor, 1995 and will appear in David S. Johnson and Stephanie Shipp, " Inequality and the Business Cycle: A Consumption Viewpoint," forthcoming, Journal of Empirical Economics. David S. Johnson of the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics provided the updated data shown in table 1. David S. Johnson and Timothy M. Smeeding, "Measuring Trends in Inequality and Individuals and Families: Income and Consumption," mimeo., March 1998.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced a public meeting for Thursday, September 17, 1998, in Minneapolis on the proposal by Norwest Corporation, Minneapolis, Minnesota, to merge with Wells Fargo & Company, San Francisco, California. The purpose of the meeting is to collect information relating to the factors the Board is required to consider under the Bank Holding Company Act. These factors are the effects of the proposal on the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the companies and banks involved in the proposal, competition in the relevant markets, and the convenience and needs of the communities to be served. Convenience and needs considerations include consideration of the records of performance of Norwest and Wells Fargo under the Community Reinvestment Act. The Board also must determine whether conducting the proposed nonbanking activities can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interest, or unsound banking practices. The meeting will be held at the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, 90 Hennepin Avenue, Minneapolis, Minnesota, and will begin at 9 a.m. CDT. Persons wishing to testify at the meeting must submit a written request no later than 5:00 p.m. CDT, Friday, September 4, 1998, containing a brief statement of the nature of the expected testimony and the estimated time required for the presentation (together with their address, telephone number, and facsimile number if available), to JoAnne F. Lewellen, Community Affairs Officer, Banking Supervision Department, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, 90 Hennepin Avenue, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55480 (facsimile: 612-204-5163). Persons interested only in attending the meeting do not need to submit a written request to attend. On the basis of the requests to testify, the presiding officer of the public meeting will establish a schedule of appearances and prescribe all necessary procedures to ensure that the meeting proceeds in a fair and orderly manner. An agenda for the meeting, which will include the scheduled time for each person's testimony, will be provided to participants at a later date. Attached is a copy of the Notice of Public Meeting, which sets forth the procedures to be followed at the meeting. In connection with this action, the Board also announced that the period for public comment on the proposal will close at 5:00 p.m. CDT, Thursday, September 17, 1998. Norwest Corporation Minneapolis, Minnesota Wells Fargo & Company San Francisco, California Notice of Public Meeting Minneapolis, Minnesota Background and Public Meeting Notice Norwest Corporation, Minneapolis, Minnesota ("Norwest"), has requested the Board's approval under the Bank Holding Company Act (12 U.S.C. § 1841 et seq. ) ("BHC Act") and related statutes to merge with Wells Fargo & Company, San Francisco, California ("Wells Fargo"). The General Counsel of the Board, acting pursuant to authority delegated by the Board (12 C.F.R. 265.6(a)(2)), hereby orders that a public meeting on the Norwest/Wells Fargo proposal be held in Minneapolis, Minnesota, on Thursday, September 17, 1998. The public meeting will be held at the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, 90 Hennepin Avenue, Minneapolis, Minnesota, and will begin at 9 a.m. CDT. Purpose and Procedures The purpose of the public meeting is to collect information relating to factors the Board is required to consider under the BHC Act. These factors are the effects of the proposal on the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the companies and banks involved in the proposal, competition in the relevant markets, and the convenience and needs of the communities to be served. Convenience and needs considerations include a review of the records of performance of Norwest and Wells Fargo under the Community Reinvestment Act, which requires the Board to take into account in its consideration of a bank acquisition or merger proposal each institution's record of meeting the credit needs of its entire community, including low- and moderate-income neighborhoods, consistent with the safe and sound operation of the institution. 12 U.S.C. § 2903. The transaction also involves the proposed acquisition of a number of nonbanking companies engaged in activities permissible for bank holding companies. The Board must determine whether conducting the proposed nonbanking activities can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interest, or unsound banking practices. Testimony at the public meeting will be presented to a panel consisting of a Presiding Officer, or her designee, and other panel members appointed by the Presiding Officer. The Presiding Officer at the meeting will be Dolores S. Smith, Director of the Board's Division of Consumer and Community Affairs. In conducting the public meeting, the Presiding Officer will have the authority and discretion to ensure that the meeting proceeds in a fair and orderly manner. In contrast to a formal administrative hearing, the rules for taking evidence in an administrative proceeding do not apply to this public meeting. Panel members may question witnesses, but no cross-examination of witnesses will be permitted. The public meeting will be transcribed and information regarding procedures for obtaining a copy of the transcript will be announced at the public meeting. All persons wishing to testify at the public meeting must submit a written request to JoAnne F. Lewellen, Community Affairs Officer, Banking Supervision Department, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, 90 Hennepin Avenue, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55480 (facsimile: 612-204-5163) not later than 5:00 p.m. CDT, Friday, September 4, 1998. The request must include the following information: (i) a brief statement of the nature of the expected testimony and the estimated time required for the presentation; (ii) address and telephone number (and facsimile number, if available) of the person testifying; and (iii) identification of any special needs, such as from persons desiring translation services, persons with a physical disability who may need assistance, or persons requiring visual aids for their presentation. To the extent available, translators will be provided to persons wishing to present their views in a language other than English if this information is included in the request to testify. Persons interested only in attending the meeting do not need to submit a written request to attend. On the basis of the requests received, the Presiding Officer will prepare a schedule for persons wishing to testify and establish the order of presentation. To ensure an opportunity for all interested commenters to present their views, the Presiding Officer may limit the time for presentation. Persons not listed on the schedule may be permitted to speak at the public meeting if time permits at the conclusion of the schedule of witnesses, at the discretion of the Presiding Officer. Copies of testimony may, but need not, be filed with the Presiding Officer before a person's presentation. By order of the General Counsel, effective August 31, 1998. (signed) J. Virgil Mattingly, Jr. J. Virgil Mattingly, Jr. General Counsel