Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan Private-sector refinancing of the large hedge fund, Long-Term Capital Management Before the Committee on Banking and Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives October 1, 1998 Mr. Chairman and other members of the Committee, I thank you for this opportunity to report on the Federal Reserve's role in facilitating the private-sector refinancing of the large hedge fund, Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM). In my remarks this morning, I will attempt to put into some perspective the events of the past few weeks and discuss some questions of importance to public policy makers that they raise. The Federal Reserve Bank of New York's efforts were designed solely to enhance the probability of an orderly private-sector adjustment, not to dictate the path that adjustment would take. As President McDonough just related, no Federal Reserve funds were put at risk, no promises were made by the Federal Reserve, and no individual firms were pressured to participate. Officials of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York facilitated discussions in which the private parties arrived at an agreement that both served their mutual self interest and avoided possible serious market dislocations. Financial market participants were already unsettled by recent global events. Had the failure of LTCM triggered the seizing up of markets, substantial damage could have been inflicted on many market participants, including some not directly involved with the firm, and could have potentially impaired the economies of many nations, including our own. With credit spreads already elevated and the market prices of risky assets under considerable downward pressure, Federal Reserve officials moved more quickly to provide their good offices to help resolve the affairs of LTCM than would have been the case in more normal times. In effect, the threshold of action was lowered by the knowledge that markets had recently become fragile. Moreover, our sense was that the consequences of a fire sale triggered by cross-default clauses, should LTCM fail on some of its obligations, risked a severe drying up of market liquidity. The plight of LTCM might scarcely have caused a ripple in financial markets or among federal regulators 18 months ago--but in current circumstances it was judged to warrant attention. What is remarkable is not this episode, but the relative absence of such examples over the past five years. Dynamic markets periodically engender large defaults. Events of the Past Few Weeks LTCM is a hedge fund, or a mutual fund that is structured to avoid regulation by limiting its clientele to a small number of highly sophisticated, very wealthy individuals and that seeks high rates of return by investing and trading in a variety of financial instruments. Since its founding in 1994, LTCM has had a prominent position in the community of hedge funds, in part because of its assemblage of talent in pricing and trading financial instruments, as well as its large initial capital stake. In its first few years of business, it earned an enviable reputation by racking up a string of above-normal returns for its investors. LTCM appears principally to have garnered those returns by making judgments on interest rate spreads and the volatilities of market prices. In its search for high return, LTCM levered its capital through securities repurchase contracts and derivatives transactions, relying on sophisticated mathematical models of behavior to guide those transactions. As long as the configuration of returns generally mimicked their historical patterns, LTCM's mathematical models of asset pricing could be used to ferret out temporary market price anomalies. Their trading both closed such price gaps and earned an extra bit of return on capital for them. But it is the nature of the competitive process driving financial innovation that such techniques would be emulated, making it ever more difficult to find market anomalies that provided shareholders with a high return. Indeed, the very efficiencies that LTCM and its competitors brought to the overall financial system gradually reduced the opportunities for above-normal profits. Indeed, LTCM acknowledged this when returning $2-3/4 billion of capital to investors at the end of 1997. To counter these diminishing opportunities, LTCM apparently reached further for return over time by employing more leverage and increasing its exposure to risk, a strategy that was destined to fail. Unfortunately for its shareholders, LTCM chose this exposure just as financial market uncertainty and investor risk aversion began to rise rapidly around the world. In that environment--so at variance with the experience built into its models--LTCM's embrace of risk on a large scale produced stunning losses. As we now know, by the end of August the firm had lost half its capital base. And as September unfolded, the bleeding continued. The firm, however, apparently did not unwind its positions significantly. In our dynamic market economy, investors and traders, at times, make misjudgments. When market prices and interest rates adjust promptly to evidence of such mistakes, their consequences are generally felt mostly by the perpetrators and, thus, rarely cumulate to pose significant problems for the financial system as a whole. Indeed, the operation of an effective market economy necessitates that investment funds committed to capital projects that do not accurately reflect consumer and business preferences should incur losses and ultimately be liquidated. What value is left needs to be redirected to profitable uses--those that more accurately reflect market preferences. By such winnowing of inefficiencies, productivity is enhanced and standards of livings expand over time. Financial markets operate efficiently only when participants can commit to transactions with reasonable confidence that the risk of nonpayment can be rationally judged and compensated for. Effective and seasoned markets pass this test almost all of the time. On rare occasions, they do not. Fear, whether irrational or otherwise, grips participants and they unthinkingly disengage from risky assets in favor of those providing safety and liquidity. The subtle distinctions that investors make, so critical to the effective operation of financial markets, are abandoned. Assets, good and bad, are dumped indiscriminately in circumstances of high uncertainty and fear that are not conducive to planning and investment. Such circumstances, were they generalized and persistent, would be wholly inconsistent with the functioning of sophisticated economies supported by long-term capital investment. Quickly unwinding a complicated portfolio that contains exposure to all manner of risks, such as that of LTCM, in such market conditions amounts to conducting a fire sale. The prices received in a time of stress do not reflect longer-run potential, adding to the losses incurred. Of course, a fire sale that transfers wealth from one set of sophisticated market players to another, without any impact on the financial system overall, should not be a concern for the central bank. Moreover, creditors should reasonably be expected to put some weight on the possibility of a large market swing when making their risk assessments. Indeed, when we examine banks we expect them to have systems in place that take account of outsized market moves. However, a fire sale may be sufficiently intense and widespread that it seriously distorts markets and elevates uncertainty enough to impair the overall functioning of the economy. Sophisticated economic systems cannot thrive in such an atmosphere. The scale and scope of LTCM's operations, which encompassed many markets, maturities, and currencies and often relied on instruments that were thinly traded and had prices that were not continuously quoted, made it exceptionally difficult to predict the broader ramifications of attempting to close out its positions precipitately. That its mistakes should be unwound and losses incurred was never open to question. How they should be unwound and when those losses incurred so as to foster the continued smooth operation of financial markets was much more difficult to assess. The price gyrations that would have evolved from a fire sale would have reflected fear-driven judgments that could only impair effective market functioning and generate losses for innocent bystanders. While the principle that fire sales undermine the effective functioning of markets may be clear, deciding when a potential market disruption rises to a level of seriousness warranting central bank involvement is among the most difficult judgments that ever confronts a central banker. In situations like this, there is no reason for central bank involvement unless there is a substantial probability that a fire sale would result in severe, widespread, and prolonged disruptions to financial market activity. It was the judgment of officials at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, who were monitoring the situation on an ongoing basis, that the act of unwinding LTCM's portfolio in a forced liqudiation would not only have a significant distorting impact on market prices but also in the process could produce large losses, or worse, for a number of creditors and counterparties, and for other market participants who were not directly involved with LTCM. In that environment, it was the FRBNY's judgment that it was to the advantage of all parties--including the creditors and other market participants--to engender if at all possible an orderly resolution rather than let the firm go into disorderly fire-sale liquidation following a set of cascading cross defaults. As President McDonough has detailed, officers of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York contacted a number of creditors and asked if there were alternatives to forcing the firm into bankruptcy. At the same time, FRBNY officers informed some of their colleagues at the Federal Reserve Board, the Treasury, and other financial regulators of their ongoing activities. The troubles of LTCM were not a complete surprise to its counterparties. After all, LTCM's earlier statements regarding its August losses were well known, and sophisticated counterparties understood the difficulties in closing out large losing positions. In addition, the commercial banks among its creditors had already begun taking normal precautionary measures associated with exposure to counterparties whose condition is deteriorating. Still, creditors as a whole most likely underestimated the size and scope of the market bets that LTCM was undertaking, an issue that is currently under review. On September 23, the private sector parties arrived at an agreement providing a capital infusion of about $3-1/2 billion in return for substantially diluting existing shareholders' stake in LTCM. Control of the firm passed from the current management to a committee determined from the outside by the new investors. Those investors intend to shrink LTCM's portfolio so as to reduce risk of loss and return the remaining capital to the investors as soon as practicable. I do not rule out the possibility that the new owners of what is left of LTCM may decide to keep part of it in business. That is their judgment to make. This agreement was not a government bailout, in that Federal Reserve funds were neither provided nor ever even suggested. Agreements were not forced upon unwilling market participants. Creditors and counterparties calculated that LTCM and, accordingly, their claims, would be worth more over time if the liquidation of LTCM's portfolio was orderly as opposed to being subject to a fire sale. And with markets currently volatile and investors skittish, putting a special premium on the timely resolution of LTCM's problems seemed entirely appropriate as a matter of public policy. Of course, any time that there is public involvement that softens the blow of private-sector losses--even as obliquely as in this episode--the issue of moral hazard arises. Any action by the government that prevents some of the negative consequences to the private sector of the mistakes it makes raises the threshold of risks market participants will presumably subsequently choose to take. Over time, economic efficiency will be impaired as some uneconomic investments are undertaken under the implicit assumption that possible losses may be borne by the government. But is much moral hazard created by aborting fire sales? To be sure, investors wiped out in a fire sale will clearly be less risk prone than if their mistakes were unwound in a more orderly fashion. But is the broader market well served if the resulting fear and other irrational judgments govern the degree of risk participants are subsequently willing to incur? Risk taking is a necessary condition for wealth creation. The optimum degree of risk aversion should be governed by rational judgments about the market place, not the fear flowing from fire sales. The Federal Reserve provided its good offices to LTCM's creditors, not to protect LTCM's investors, creditors, or managers from loss, but to avoid the distortions to market processes caused by a fire-sale liquidation and the consequent spreading of those distortions through contagion. To be sure, this may well work to reduce the ultimate losses to the original owners of LTCM, but that was a byproduct, perhaps unfortunate, of the process. I should add that, in order to keep incentives working in their favor, the creditors of LTCM apparently also understood the importance of some cushioning of the losses to the owners and managers of the firm. The private creditors and counterparties in the rescue package chose to preserve a sliver of equity for the original owners--one tenth--so that some of the management would have an incentive to stay with the firm to assist in the liquidation of the portfolio. Regrettably, the creditors felt that, given the complexity of market bets woven into a bewildering arrray of financial contracts, working with the existing management would be far easier than starting from scratch. Some Questions for Policy Makers Without doubt, extensive study will be required to put the events of the past few weeks into proper perspective. As a member of the President's Working Group on Financial Markets, I support Secretary Rubin's call for a special study on the public policy implications of hedge funds. While the affairs of LTCM are by no means settled, I would like to pose some tentative questions that may have to be addressed. First, how much dependence should be placed on financial modeling, which, for all its sophistication, can get too far ahead of human judgment? This decade is strewn with examples of bright people who thought they had built a better mousetrap that could consistently extract an abnormal return from financial markets. Some succeed for a time. But while there may occasionally be misconfigurations among market prices that allow abnormal returns, they do not persist. Indeed, efforts to take advantage of such misalignments force prices into better alignment and are soon emulated by competitors, further narrowing, or eliminating, any gaps. No matter how skillful the trading scheme, over the long haul, abnormal returns are sustained only through abnormal exposure to risk. Second, what steps could counterparties have taken to ensure that they had properly estimated their exposure, particularly in markets that are volatile? To an important degree, the creditors of LTCM were induced to infuse capital into the firm because they failed to stress test their counterparty exposures adequately and therefore underestimated the size of the uncollateralized exposure that they could face in volatile and illiquid markets. In part, this also reflected an underappreciation of the volume and nature of the risks LTCM had undertaken and its relative size in the overall market. By failing to make those determinations, its fellow market participants failed to put an adequate brake on LTCM's use of leverage. To be sure, sometimes decisions are based on judgments about the soundness of borrowers that are accepted from third parties or, possibly in this case, that are founded on the impressive qualifications of LTCM's principals. In some cases, such truncated risk appraisals may be accurate, but they are not a substitute for a rigorous analysis by the lender of the borrower's overall credit worthiness and risk profile. Third, in this regard what lessons are there for bank regulators? Domestic commercial bank exposure to LTCM included both direct lending and acting as counterparties to the firm in derivatives contracts. A preliminary review of bank dealings with LTCM suggests that the banks have collateral adequate to cover most of their current mark-to-market exposures with LTCM. The unexpected surge in risk aversion and the dramatic opening up of interest rate spreads in August obviously caught LTCM wrong footed. Counterparties, including banks, continued to collect collateral for marks to market. What they were not collateralized against was the losses that might have occurred when prices moved even further and market liquidity dried up in a fire sale. Supervisors of banks and security firms must assess whether current procedures regarding stress testing and counterparty assessment could have been improved to enable counterparties to take steps to insulate themselves better from LTCM's debacle. More important will be the assessment of whether those procedures are adequate for the future. But this is an area in which much work has been ongoing. During the fourth quarter of 1997 and the first quarter of 1998, supervision staff of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and the Board met with managers at several major New York banking institutions to discuss their current relationships with hedge funds, updating a similar study conducted 3-1/2 years earlier. Fourth, does the fact that investors have lost most of their capital and creditors may take some losses on their exposure to LTCM call for direct regulation of hedge funds? It is questionable whether hedge funds can be effectively directly regulated in the United States alone. While their financial clout may be large, hedge funds' physical presence is small. Given the amazing communication capabilities available virtually around the globe, trades can be initiated from almost any location. Indeed, most hedge funds are only a short step from cyberspace. Any direct U.S. regulations restricting their flexibility will doubtless induce the more aggressive funds to emigrate from under our jurisdiction. The best we can do in my judgment is what we do today: Regulate them indirectly through the regulation of the sources of their funds. We are thus able to monitor far better hedge funds' activity, especially as they influence U.S financial markets. If the funds move abroad, our oversight will diminish. In the first line of risk defense, if I may put it that way, are hedge funds' lenders and counterparties. Commercial and investment banks especially have the analytic skills to judge the degree of risk to which the funds are exposed. Their self interest has, with few exceptions but including the one we are discussing today, controlled the risk posed by hedge funds. Banking supervisors are the second line of risk defense in their examination of lending procedures for safety and soundness. We neither try, nor should we endeavor, to micro-manage bank lending activity. We have nonetheless built up significant capabilities in evaluating the complex lending practices in OTC derivatives markets and hedge funds. If, somehow, hedge funds were barred worldwide, the American financial system would lose the benefits conveyed by their efforts, including arbitraging price differentials away. The resulting loss in efficiency and contribution to financial value added and the nation's standard of living would be a high price to pay--to my mind, too high a price. Fifth, how much weight should concerns about moral hazard be given when designing mechanisms for governmental regulation of markets? By way of example, we should note that were banks required by the market, or their regulator, to hold 40 percent capital against assets as they did after the Civil War, there would, of course, be far less moral hazard and far fewer instances of fire-sale market disruptions. At the same time, far fewer banks would be profitable, the degree of financial intermediation less, capital would be more costly, and the level of output and standards of living decidely lower. Our current economy, with its wide financial safety net, fiat money, and highly leveraged financial institutions, has been a conscious choice of the American people since the 1930s. We do not have the choice of accepting the benefits of the current system without its costs. Conclusion For so long as there have been financial markets, participants have had on occasion to weigh the costs and, especially, the externalities associated with fire-sale liquidations of troubled entities against short-term assistance to tide the firms over for a time. It was such a balancing of near-term costs and longer-term benefits that presumably led J.P. Morgan to convene the leading bankers of his age--both commercial and investment--in his library in 1907 to address the severe panic of that year. Such episodes were recognized as among those rare occasions when otherwise highly effective markets seize up and temporary ad hoc responses were required. The convening of LTCM investors and lenders last week at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York could be viewed in that long tradition. It should similarly be viewed as a rare occasion, warranted because of the potential for serious disruptions to markets. We must also remain mindful where to draw the line at which public-sector involvement ends. The efforts last week were limited to facilitating a private-sector agreement and had no implications for Federal Reserve resources or policies. Footnotes At the same time, not all fire sales are without merit. The Resolution Trust Corporation earlier this decade chose to offer commercial real estate in what might be termed a fire sale because it was the only way an otherwise seized-up market could be galvanized. Some level of market prices had to be established--even if below "intrinsic" or longer-run value in order to re-establish a two-way market. This was a special case.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application of Chinatrust Commercial Bank, Ltd., Taipei, Taiwan, to establish a state-licensed branch in New York, New York. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Chinatrust Commercial Bank, Ltd. Taipei, Taiwan Order Approving Establishment of a Branch Chinatrust Commercial Bank, Ltd. ("Bank"), Taipei, Taiwan, a foreign bank within the meaning of the International Banking Act ("IBA"), has applied under section 7(d) of the IBA (12 U.S.C. § 3105(d)) to establish a state-licensed branch in New York, New York. The Foreign Bank Supervision Enhancement Act of 1991 ("FBSEA"), which amended the IBA, provides that a foreign bank must obtain the approval of the Board to establish a branch in the United States. Notice of the application, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published in a newspaper of general circulation in New York, New York ( New York Times , November 12, 1997). The time for filing comments has expired, and all comments have been considered. Bank, with assets equivalent to approximately $16.9 billion, is the ninth largest bank in Taiwan. Bank's shares are publicly traded and widely held, with no single shareholder directly owning more than 2 percent. Bank operates more than 30 branches in Taiwan and also has branches in Hong Kong, India, and Paraguay. In addition, Bank operates an offshore banking unit in Taiwan and commercial bank subsidiaries in the Philippines and Indonesia. Bank's primary purpose for establishing the proposed branch is to provide banking services to the U.S. subsidiaries of Bank's existing customers in Taiwan, and to facilitate international trade between the United States and Asia. Bank does not engage directly or indirectly in any nonbanking activities in the United States, and, after establishing the proposed branch, would be a qualifying foreign banking organization within the meaning of Regulation K (12 C.F.R. 211.23(b)). Bank has received approval to establish the proposed branch from the Taiwan authorities. The New York State Banking Department also has approved Bank's application to establish the proposed branch. In order to approve an application by a foreign bank to establish a branch in the United States, the IBA and Regulation K require the Board to determine that the foreign bank applicant engages directly in the business of banking outside of the United States, and has furnished to the Board the information it needs to assess the application adequately. The Board also must determine that the foreign bank is subject to comprehensive supervision or regulation on a consolidated basis by its home country supervisor (12 U.S.C. § 3105(d)(2); 12 C.F.R. 211.24)). The Board also may take into account additional standards as set forth in the IBA and Regulation K (12 U.S.C. § 3105(d)(3)-(4); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)). As noted above, Bank engages directly in the business of banking outside the United States. Bank also has provided the Board with the information necessary to assess the application through submissions that address the relevant issues. Regulation K provides that a foreign bank will be considered to be subject to comprehensive supervision or regulation on a consolidated basis if the Board determines that the bank is supervised and regulated in such a manner that its home country supervisor receives sufficient information on the foreign bank's worldwide operations, including the relationship of the foreign bank to any affiliate, to assess the overall financial condition of the foreign bank and its compliance with law and regulation (12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)(1)). With respect to the issue of supervision by home country authorities, the Board has considered the following information. Bank is supervised and regulated by the Ministry of Finance ("Ministry") and the Taiwan Central Bank ("Central Bank"), which share responsibility for the supervision of banks in Taiwan. The Banking Law of Taiwan grants the Ministry overall authority for the regulation and supervision of banks in Taiwan, including Bank. The Ministry has delegated the authority to the Central Bank to act as the primary examiner of banks in Taiwan, in which capacity the Central Bank conducts mandatory annual examinations. The Board previously has determined, in connection with applications involving other banks in Taiwan, that these banks were subject to home country supervision on a consolidated basis. Bank is supervised by the Ministry and the Central Bank on substantially the same terms and conditions as such other banks. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that Bank is subject to comprehensive supervision and regulation on a consolidated basis by its home country supervisors. The Board also has taken into account the additional standards set forth in section 7 of the IBA ( see 12 U.S.C. § 3105(d)(3)-(4); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)(2)). As noted above, Bank has received the consent of its home country authorities to establish the proposed state-licensed branch. Bank must comply with the minimum capital standards of the Basle Accord, as implemented by Taiwan. Bank's capital exceeds these minimum standards and can be considered equivalent to capital that would be required of a U.S. banking organization. Managerial and other financial resources of Bank are also considered consistent with approval, and Bank appears to have the experience and capacity to support the proposed branch. Bank has established controls and procedures for the proposed branch in order to ensure compliance with U.S. law, as well as controls and procedures for its worldwide operations generally. The Board has reviewed the restrictions on disclosure in relevant jurisdictions in which Bank operates and has communicated with relevant authorities about access to information. Bank has committed that it will make available to the Board such information on the operations of Bank and any affiliate of Bank that the Board deems necessary to determine and enforce compliance with the IBA, the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956, as amended, and other applicable federal law. To the extent that the provision of such information is prohibited or impeded by law, Bank has committed to cooperate with the Board to obtain any consents or waivers that might be required from third parties in connection with disclosure of such information. In addition, subject to certain conditions, the Ministry and the Central Bank may share information on Bank's operations with other supervisors, including the Board. In light of these commitments and other facts of record, and subject to the condition described below, the Board concludes that Bank has provided adequate assurances of access to any necessary information the Board may request. On the basis of all the facts of record, and subject to the commitments made by Bank, and the terms and conditions set forth in this order, the Board has determined that Bank's application to establish a state-licensed branch should be, and hereby is, approved. Should any restrictions on access to information on the operations or activities of Bank or any of its affiliates subsequently interfere with the Board's ability to obtain information to determine and enforce compliance by Bank or its affiliates with applicable federal statutes, the Board may require termination of any of Bank's direct or indirect activities in the United States. Approval of the application also is specifically conditioned on compliance by Bank with the commitments made in connection with this application, and with the conditions in this order. The commitments and conditions referred to above are conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its decision, and may be enforced in proceedings under 12 U.S.C. § 1818 or 12 U.S.C. § 1847 against Bank, its offices, and its affiliates. By order of the Board of Governors, effective October 5, 1998 . (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Footnotes All data are as of December 31, 1997, unless otherwise noted. In assessing this standard, the Board considers, among other factors, the extent to which the home country supervisors: (i) ensure that the bank has adequate procedures for monitoring and controlling its activities worldwide; (ii) obtain information on the condition of the bank and its subsidiaries and offices through regular examination reports, audit reports, or otherwise; (iii) obtain information on the dealings with and relationship between the bank and its affiliates, both foreign and domestic; (iv) receive from the bank financial reports that are consolidated on a worldwide basis, or comparable information that permits analysis of the bank's financial condition on a worldwide consolidated basis; (v) evaluate prudential standards, such as capital adequacy and risk asset exposure, on a worldwide basis. These are indicia of comprehensive, consolidated supervision. No single factor is essential and other elements may inform the Board's determination. This authority permits the Ministry, among other things, to issue licenses, limit activities and expansion, conduct examinations, set minimum capital and liquidity ratios, limit credit extensions, restrict director interlocks, define qualifications for management, and take enforcement actions. See Taipei Bank, 79 Federal Reserve Bulletin 143 (1993); United World Chinese Commercial Bank, 79 Federal Reserve Bulletin 146 (1993); Bank of Taiwan, 79 Federal Reserve Bulletin 541 (1993); Chiao Tung Bank, 79 Federal Reserve Bulletin 543 (1993); The Farmers Bank of China, 81 Federal Reserve Bulletin 620 (1995); Taiwan Business Bank, 81 Federal Reserve Bulletin 746 (1995); Land Bank of Taiwan, 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin 336 (1997); Bank SinoPac, 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin 669 (1997). The Board's authority to approve the establishment of the proposed office parallels the continuing authority of the State of New York to license offices of a foreign bank. The Board's approval of the application does not supplant the authority of the State of New York and the New York State Banking Department ("Department") to license the proposed office of Bank in accordance with any terms or conditions that the Department may impose. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Meyer, Ferguson, and Gramlich.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the appointments of Karen H. Johnson as Director of the Division of International Finance and Lewis S. Alexander and Peter Hooper as Deputy Directors, all effective October 17, 1998. Ms. Johnson joined the Board's staff in 1979, was promoted to Assistant Director in 1985, and has been Associate Director since 1997. She holds a B.A. from Radcliffe College and a Ph.D. from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Mr. Alexander first joined the Board's staff in 1985, left to become the Chief Economist of the Department of Commerce in 1993, rejoined the staff in 1996, and was promoted to Associate Director in 1997. He holds an A.B. from Stanford University and a Ph.D. from Yale University. Mr. Hooper joined the Board's staff in 1973, was promoted to Assistant Director in 1984, and has been Associate Director since 1997. He holds a B.A. from Princeton University and a Ph.D. from the University of Michigan. Effective October 17, 1998, Edwin M. Truman will be Senior Adviser. President Clinton has announced his intention to nominate Mr. Truman as Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for International Affairs.
For immediate release Chairman Greenspan, on behalf of the Federal Reserve Board, today issued the following statement on the announcement of President Clinton's intention to nominate Edwin M. Truman, Staff Director, Division of International Finance, as Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for International Affairs: "Our valued associate and good friend Ted Truman has been an integral fixture of the Federal Reserve for twenty-six years. His influence has been both pervasive and beneficial and while we will miss him, we wish him well in his new association and expect the continuing benefit of his wisdom."
Testimony of Theodore E. Allison Assistant to the Board for Federal Reserve System Affairs Overall impact of euro banknotes on the demand for U.S. currency Before the Subcommittee on Domestic and International Monetary Policy, Committee on Banking and Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives October 8, 1998 Thank you for the opportunity to comment on the implications for the demand for Federal Reserve notes that are likely to follow from the issuance of euro banknotes, which will--early in the next decade--replace the national currency notes of eleven participating nations in Europe. You have asked the Federal Reserve to address both the overall impact of euro banknotes on the demand for U.S. currency and, in particular, what impact the issuance of higher denomination euro notes might have. Plans for the euro Eleven member countries of the European Union are planning to adopt the euro as a single currency, which will be issued in eight coin denominations--2, 5, 10, 20, and 50 euro cents, 1 euro, and 2 euros--and seven note denominations--5, 10, 20, 50, 100, 200, and 500 euros. The value of the euro in relation to other currencies, including the dollar, will not be known until January 1, 1999, but it is likely to be near the value of the ECU, which is presently about $1.20. (The ECU is a currency basket whose value is based on the currencies of the eleven euro participants, as well as the Danish krone, the Greek drachma, and the British pound sterling, whose issuers will not initially be among the euro group.) Thus the value of the two highest euro notes--200 and 500--will be about $240 and $600 respectively. Euro notes and coins will be introduced on January 1, 2002, and will be exchanged for the banknotes of the individual countries during the following six months. Banknotes denominated in German marks, French francs, and the like will cease to be legal tender on July 1, 2002. The use of U.S. currency outside the United States and associated benefits For most of this century, U.S. currency has been used outside this country as a store of value by people facing economic and political uncertainty. Board staff estimate, for example, that as far back as 1960, a bit less than half of all U.S. currency in circulation was held abroad. That proportion has grown steadily over the last four decades and has accelerated during the 1990s. We believe that as much as two-thirds of all Federal Reserve notes in circulation--perhaps $250 to $300 billion--are now held abroad. The main force behind the recent increase in the holding and use of U.S. currency abroad has been the opening up and privatizing of previously state-dominated economic systems--chiefly in the former Soviet bloc but also in Latin America and numerous Asian countries. In many of these transition economies, citizens and small businesses still face unstable local currencies and underdeveloped banking and payment systems. Under these conditions, it becomes difficult to save, to make business-to-business transactions, and to buy and sell a range of consumer goods. As a result, many residents of transition economies have chosen to carry out critical and large saving and transaction functions in a "hard" currency, very often U.S. dollars. The availability of U.S. currency in these economies is of value to the people there, as demonstrated by the large quantity used. The functions of saving and making business transactions efficiently are essential to the improvement of economic conditions and living standards. The United States also benefits from the use of its currency outside the country. The ease with which dollars can be spent in many places around the globe, for example, is a convenience for American travelers. Moreover, the U.S. Treasury earns income on all of the currency in circulation--including that which is held outside the country--in the form of interest on assets that are held by the Federal Reserve as a consequence of the currency having been issued. The $250 to $300 billion of Federal Reserve notes that appear to be in use outside the United States earn the Treasury and U.S. taxpayers about $12 to $15 billion per year. The history of large-denomination notes in the United States Notes of $500, $1,000, $5,000, and $10,000 were first authorized in 1918, primarily for interbank transactions. In 1946, with demand for the notes declining, printing of new notes of these denominations was discontinued, and in 1969, the Treasury Department and Federal Reserve decided to discontinue their issuance as well. Since 1969, all high denomination notes that have been deposited at the Federal Reserve have been destroyed. The Secretary of the Treasury, however, retains the authority to have printed, and the Federal Reserve the authority to issue, notes in all four high denominations. Implications of the euro for the demand for Federal Reserve notes The availability of euro notes will reduce the use of dollars outside the United States, to some extent, for a variety of good reasons. Some U.S. currency is used within the euro area to facilitate travel to other countries. For example, a Finnish family headed for a vacation on the Costa del Sol might convert some Finnish markkas into dollars before leaving home, both because the dollars are more likely to be accepted in Spain, without having to be converted, than would be markkas and because, when the dollars are converted to pesetas, the exchange transactions involved--markkas to dollars and then dollars to pesetas--may involve a lower cost overall than a single markkas-to-pesetas transaction conducted in either Finland or Spain. Beginning in 2002, the Finnish family will of course find its local currency--the euro--used in Spain as well. That development will improve efficiency, and we should be glad to see it, even though the United States will experience some reduction in income as a result. Outside the euro area, some substitution of euros for dollars may take place, especially in eastern Europe, if the cost to banks and currency exchanges of acquiring euros is lower than the cost of acquiring dollars, and if the cost advantage is reflected in better exchange rates to citizens and business firms. In general, however, dollar currency has a lot going for it as a store of value in areas with unstable political or economic environments. It is accepted and readily available in most parts of the world. The United States has never recalled any outstanding notes, so holders are confident that their dollars will always be accepted. The United States has a strong history of political stability, and the dollar has held its value reasonably well over a long period. Our financial institutions and markets are highly regarded. As a consequence, the worldwide demand for dollar notes is based on an unusually favorable combination of wide acceptability, political and financial continuity, and esteem. The euro may in time earn a similar kind of status. It seems likely, however, that any major substitution of euros for dollars as a trusted store of value would take place fairly gradually. Nevertheless, there are two aspects of the foreign demand for hard currency notes that could hasten somewhat a substitution of euro notes for dollars. The first would be the availability of higher denomination euro notes, which could make euros more convenient and efficient than dollars for some transactions. The second would be a public perception that dollar notes are significantly less secure against counterfeiting. The role of high denomination notes If the $100 note remains our highest denomination, it does seem plausible that some users would find the high denomination euro notes more efficient and would shift some currency holdings from $100 notes to 200 and 500 euro notes. The magnitude is impossible to predict, but the heavy concentration of U.S. currency in $100 notes, as shown in table 1, suggests that there may be some unmet demand for a more efficient and convenient higher denomination. Table 1 Quantities of U.S. currency notes in circulation December 31, 1997 Denomination Number of Notes (thousands) Value (thousands) $1 6,718,483 $6,718,483 $2 564,203 $1,128,405 $5 1,569,630 $7,848,150 $10 1,420,104 $14,201,043 $20 4,397,679 $87,953,394 $50 964,801 $48,240,047 $100 2,915,812 $291,581,250 $500 289 $144,284 $1,000 167 $167,495 $5,000 less than 1 $1,755 $10,000 less than 1 $3,450 Totals 18,551,168 $457,987,756 Source: U.S. Department of the Treasury Bulletin, March 1998. The efficiency with which U.S. currency could be shipped and stored would be increased fivefold to the extent that $500 notes were used in place of $100 notes. Likewise, the availability of a $500 note would reduce transaction times in the substantial number of large-value transactions that are conducted in $100 bills in many "dollarized" economies--most notably sales of real estate and consumer durable goods such as automobiles. And some households would find higher denomination U.S. currency more efficient for saving. The United States does not issue currency for the purpose of generating revenue (but rather to meet the convenience and needs of the public), and it neither promotes the use of dollars internationally nor competes with other issuers in this regard. Nonetheless, the demand for dollars from abroad does provide significant benefits to the United States, and if making the use of U.S. currency more efficient and convenient for foreign users by reissuing the $500 note could help preserve those benefits, that would be an argument for doing so. We doubt that $500 and $1,000 notes would improve convenience or efficiency to any significant degree within the United States. Research at the Federal Reserve suggests that, with the availability of a $500 note, domestic cash holdings might rise somewhat, with an attendant increase in Treasury revenue, but any such effect is likely to be small. There are public policy arguments against reissuing the $500 note, particularly because any efficiency gains, such as lower shipment and storage costs, would accrue not only to legitimate users of dollar notes but also to money launderers, tax evaders, and a variety of other lawbreakers who use currency in their criminal activity. While it is not at all clear that the volume of illegal drugs sold or the amount of tax evasion would necessarily increase just as a consequence of the availability of a larger denomination bill, it no doubt is the case that, if wrongdoers were provided with an easier mechanism to launder their funds and hide their profits, enforcement authorities could have a harder time detecting certain illicit transactions occurring in cash. Consequently, we believe that the law enforcement community should be consulted in any final decision about reissuing $500 notes. The perception of security against counterfeiting A second, and potentially important, consideration for people around the globe who now keep their saving and business working capital in U.S. currency, and who might consider using an alternative, is likely to be their perception of the relative security of notes against counterfeiting. The fear of taking a possible loss on a $100 bill could be an inducement to use an alternative currency if the alternative were perceived as being less susceptible to counterfeiting. This is not the subject of your hearing, and I won't spend more time on it, except to note that (a) the interagency committee on Advanced Counterfeit Deterrence is seriously studying further possible design improvements, especially for the $100 and $50, and (b) if the $500 note were issued again, it would have to be seen as highly secure in order to be accepted. Thank you for this opportunity to meet with the Subcommittee. Denomination Number of Notes (thousands) Value (thousands) $1 6,718,483 $6,718,483 $2 564,203 $1,128,405 $5 1,569,630 $7,848,150 $10 1,420,104 $14,201,043 $20 4,397,679 $87,953,394 $50 964,801 $48,240,047 $100 2,915,812 $291,581,250 $500 289 $144,284 $1,000 167 $167,495 $5,000 less than 1 $1,755 $10,000 less than 1 $3,450 Totals 18,551,168 $457,987,756 Footnotes The eleven participating countries are Austria, Belgium, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Portugal, and Spain. More information on the euro can be found at the Internet site maintained by the European commission. The U.S. dollar is not the only currency that circulates internationally. The German mark, for example, is held fairly widely outside Germany.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced procedures to manage changes to its information systems in 1999 and the first quarter of the Year 2000. The change management procedures were developed in conjunction with the Federal Reserve's Century Date Change Project. The procedures establish guidelines to limit Federal Reserve policy and operational changes as well as internal hardware and software changes during late 1999 and early 2000. The Federal Reserve plans to complete renovation and testing of its critical information systems by year-end 1998. Subsequent changes to Federal Reserve policies, rules, regulations, and services could impair the Year 2000 readiness of critical information systems. The procedures are designed to balance the need to support changes to critical business processes with the need to limit changes to information systems during this critical period. Governor Edward W. Kelley, Jr., Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board's Committee on Federal Reserve Bank Affairs, stated "By limiting these changes to its systems, the Federal Reserve will also minimize changes that its customers could be required to make to their applications that interface with Federal Reserve System software. In addition, we intend to coordinate our activities with other institutions that typically generate policy and operational changes in the financial industry." In that spirit, the Federal Reserve will disseminate its guidelines to assist other organizations that establish rules, regulations and standards for the financial services industry. A summary of the change management procedures is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the proposal of Norwest Corporation, Minneapolis, Minnesota, to acquire Wells Fargo & Company, San Francisco, California, and thereby acquire all of Wells Fargo's bank, nonbank, and foreign subsidiaries. The Board's approval is conditioned on the divestiture of 26 branches in 14 banking markets in Arizona and Nevada. Norwest also must report to the Federal Reserve System semiannually during the two-year period after consummation of the merger all branch closings that occur as a result of this proposal. Attached is the relating to this action.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today its approval of the application of Erste Bank der österreichischen Sparkassen Aktiengesellschaft, Vienna, Austria, to establish a federally licensed branch in New York, New York. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Erste Bank der österreichischen Sparkassen Aktiengesellschaft Vienna, Austria Order Approving Establishment of a Branch Erste Bank der österreichischen Sparkassen Aktiengesellschaft, Vienna, Austria ("Bank"), a foreign bank within the meaning of the International Banking Act ("IBA"), has applied under section 7(d) of the IBA (12 U.S.C. § 3105(d)) to establish a federally licensed branch in New York, New York. The Foreign Bank Supervision Enhancement Act of 1991, which amended the IBA, provides that a foreign bank must obtain the approval of the Board to establish a branch in the United States. Notice of the application, affording interested persons an opportunity to comment, has been published in a newspaper of general circulation in New York ( The New York Times , May 28, 1998). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the application and all comments received. Bank, with total consolidated assets of approximately $57 billion, is one of the largest banks in Austria. Die Erste österreichische Spar-Casse Anteilsverwaltungssparkasse, Vienna, Austria ("AVS"), which owns 43 percent of Bank's voting shares, is Bank's largest shareholder. No other single shareholder holds 10 percent or more of the outstanding voting shares of Bank. In addition to its network of domestic branches, Bank operates bank and nonbank subsidiaries that engage in a number of activities in Austria, including commercial banking, finance, insurance, real estate, and travel-related services. International operations include branches, representative offices, and bank and nonbank subsidiaries located in Europe, Asia, and the United States. Bank is a qualifying foreign banking organization within the meaning of Regulation K (12 C.F.R. 211.23(b)). Bank was formed as the result of the merger of GiroCredit Bank Aktiengesellschaft der Sparkassen AG ("GiroCredit") into Die Erste österreichische Spar-Casse Bank Aktiengesellschaft ("Die Erste"), both of Vienna, Austria. Before the merger, Die Erste had no banking operations in the United States. GiroCredit operated a federally licensed, uninsured branch in New York, which Bank seeks authority to operate through the instant application. Pursuant to Regulation K, the Board allowed the merger to proceed before an application to establish the office was filed and acted on by the Board. The Austrian Federal Ministry of Finance (the "Ministry"), which approved the merger of Die Erste and GiroCredit, has no objection to the continued operation of the existing branch of Bank. In order to approve an application by a foreign bank to establish a branch in the United States, the IBA and Regulation K require the Board to determine that the foreign bank applicant engages directly in the business of banking outside of the United States and has furnished to the Board the information it needs to assess the application adequately. The Board generally also must determine that the foreign bank is subject to comprehensive supervision or regulation on a consolidated basis by its home country supervisor (12 U.S.C. § 3105(d)(2)). The Board may also take into account additional standards as set forth in the IBA and Regulation K (12 U.S.C. § 3105(d)(3)-(4); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)). Bank engages directly in the business of banking outside of the United States through its banking operations in Austria and elsewhere. Bank also has provided the Board with the information necessary to assess the application through submissions that address the relevant issues. Regulation K provides that a foreign bank will be considered to be subject to comprehensive supervision or regulation on a consolidated basis if the Board determines that the bank is supervised and regulated in such a manner that its home country supervisor receives sufficient information on the foreign bank's worldwide operations, including the relationship of the foreign bank to any affiliate, to assess the overall financial condition of the foreign bank and its compliance with law and regulation (12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)(1)). In this case, with respect to the issue of supervision by home country authorities, the Board has considered the following information. Bank is supervised and regulated by the Ministry and the Austrian National Bank ("Central Bank"). The Board previously has determined that another Austrian credit institution is subject to comprehensive supervision on a consolidated basis by the Ministry and the Central Bank. The Board has determined that Bank is supervised on substantially the same terms and conditions as that other institution. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that Bank is subject to comprehensive supervision on a consolidated basis by its home country supervisor. The Board also has taken into account the additional standards set forth in section 7 of the IBA ( see 12 U.S.C. § 3105(d)(3)-(4); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)(2)). As noted above, the Ministry has not objected to Bank establishing the proposed federally licensed uninsured branch. Austria is a signatory to the Basle risk-based capital standards, and Austrian risk-based capital standards meet those established by the Basle Capital Accord and the European Union. Bank's capital is in excess of the minimum levels that would be required by the Basle Capital Accord and is considered equivalent to capital that would be required of a U.S. banking organization. Managerial and other financial resources of Bank also are considered consistent with approval, and Bank appears to have the experience and capacity to support the branch. Bank has established controls and procedures for the branch to ensure compliance with U.S. law, as well as controls and procedures for its worldwide operations in general. Finally, the Board has reviewed the restrictions on disclosure in relevant jurisdictions in which Bank operates and has communicated with relevant government authorities about access to information. Bank and Verein DE have committed to make available to the Board such information on the operations of Bank and any affiliate of Bank that the Board deems necessary to determine and enforce compliance with the IBA, the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956, as amended, and other applicable federal law. To the extent that the provision of such information is prohibited or impeded by law, Bank and Verein DE have committed to cooperate with the Board to obtain any necessary consents or waivers that might be required from third parties in connection with disclosure of certain information. In addition, subject to certain conditions, the Ministry may share information on Bank's operations with other supervisors, including the Board. In light of these commitments and other facts of record, and subject to the condition described below, the Board concludes that Bank has provided adequate assurances of access to any necessary information the Board may request. On the basis of all the facts of record, and subject to the commitments made by Bank, as well as the terms and conditions set forth in this order, the Board has determined that Bank's application to establish a federally licensed branch should be, and hereby is, approved. Should any restrictions on access to information on the operations or activities of Bank and its affiliates subsequently interfere with the Board's ability to obtain information to determine and enforce compliance by Bank or its affiliates with applicable federal statutes, the Board may recommend termination of any of Bank's direct or indirect activities in the United States. Approval of this application is also specifically conditioned on Bank's compliance with the commitments made in connection with this application and with the conditions in this order. The commitments and conditions referred to above are conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its decision, and may be enforced in proceedings under 12 U.S.C. § 1818 or 12 U.S.C. § 1847 against Bank, its offices, and its affiliates. By order of the Board of Governors, effective October 14, 1998 . (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Footnotes All data are as of June 30, 1998. AVS, an inactive savings bank that acts as a holding company for Bank, is controlled by Verein - Die Erste österreichische Spar-Casse Anteilsverwaltungssparkasse ("Verein DE"), a savings bank association. Verein DE engages in no activities other than controlling AVS. 12 C.F.R. 211.24(a)(3). In assessing this standard, the Board considers, among other factors, the extent to which the home country supervisors: (i) ensure that the bank has adequate procedures for monitoring and controlling its activities worldwide; (ii) obtain information on the condition of the bank and its subsidiaries and offices through regular examination reports, audit reports, or otherwise; (iii) obtain information on the dealings with and relationship between the bank and its affiliates, both foreign and domestic; (iv) receive from the bank financial reports that are consolidated on a worldwide basis, or comparable information that permits analysis of the bank's financial condition on a worldwide consolidated basis; (v) evaluate prudential standards, such as capital adequacy and risk asset exposure, on a worldwide basis. These are indicia of comprehensive, consolidated supervision. No single factor is essential and other elements may inform the Board's determination. See Creditanstalt-Bankverein, 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin, 594 (1996). The Board's authority to approve establishment of the proposed branch office parallels the continuing authority of the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency ("OCC") to license federal offices of a foreign bank. The Board's approval of this application does not supplant the authority of the OCC to license the proposed branch office of Bank in accordance with any terms or conditions that the OCC may impose. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Meyer, Ferguson, and Gramlich. Absent and not voting: Governor Kelley.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of an Order of Prohibition against Lois A. Brigham, the former Senior Vice President and a Director of the former Towne Bank, Perrysburg, Ohio, and the banks former bank holding company, Towne Bancorp, Inc. Ms. Brigham, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order due to her alleged participation in violations of law and unsafe or unsound practices regarding the lending function at the Towne Bank. A copy of the Order is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of an Order of Prohibition against Jerome C. Bechstein, the former President, Chief Executive Officer, and a Director of the former Towne Bank, Perrysburg, Ohio, and the banks former bank holding company, Towne Bancorp, Inc. Mr. Bechstein, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order due to his alleged participation in violations of law and unsafe or unsound practices regarding the lending function at the Towne Bank. A copy of the Order is attached.
Remarks by Governor Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. At the Global Year 2000 Summit, London, England October 16, 1998 The Challenge of Preparing for the Year 2000 It is a pleasure to speak with you today in my role as Chairman of the Joint Year 2000 Council. These summits are highly valuable as a forum for sharing information and fostering a shared sense of purpose. Today, I would like to reinforce the importance of the Year 2000 challenge, describe some of the work of the Joint Year 2000 Council, and suggest some actions that you might wish to undertake in order to help your firms, your countries, and the world to prepare for the century date change. Year 2000 Challenge in the Context of Current Financial Turmoil In the past weeks we have heard much about the current challenges facing the global financial system. National economies and international capital markets are facing turmoil, with liquidity and risk being repriced rapidly. Recession is impacting significant numbers of nations, and even the world's strongest economies are facing unusual threats to continued healthy growth. These uncertain economic times create a difficult backdrop for keeping the appropriate level of focus on long-term challenges, such as the Year 2000 problem. Without in any way diminishing the importance and urgency of the immediate financial challenges, I do want to emphasize the importance of giving continued attention to the challenge of completing preparations for the Year 2000. This may seem like a somewhat archane topic to discuss as world financial markets struggle to right themselves. However, the current global financial upset has reminded us that the world is truly interdependent and that counterparty and country risks can be, and are, reevaluated quickly. An exchange rate problem that started in a small economy in Southeast Asia has, within a little more than one year, created a contagion that may potentially impact the growth performance, as well as financial performance, in the most highly developed industrial economies. Similarly Year 2000 problems, if not addressed, remedied and planned for, can have unexpected spillover effects. Because of this interconnectedness, it is most urgent that we complete our Year 2000 preparations and provide full information to the public so that markets are not surprised and can operate as smoothly as possible during the crossover to the new century. It is natural to turn attention to the immediate and very real financial problems; but those in this room, and many others, can provide an important service by remaining attentive to the important task that we face in preparing for the century date change. Interaction between Year 2000 and the Euro The current economic backdrop is not the only challenge facing those of us with a focus on the Year 2000 challenge. Most countries represented here today are also making a significant investment in preparing for the introduction of the euro . While the introduction of the euro is an event to be welcomed by market participants, it does raise several interesting challenges for Year 2000 preparations. First, of course, is the contention for scarce IT resources and the issue of whether there are either "economies of scope" in these two projects or at least a benefit in "learning by doing." The overlap between the two problems and two technical solutions is not as great as many would like. At the narrowest level, they involve different approaches to the technical solution. More generally, the testing approaches are different, with the euro relying on operational testing and Year 2000 being more of a technical test. Finally, Year 2000 involves embedded systems while the euro will not affect systems with embedded chips in most cases. There may also be contention for another limited resource, which is top management attention. Year 2000 was initially considered a technical problem, which many managers may have thought could be best handled by technicians. The euro conversion is obviously a business issue, which entails strategy and is more accessible to the well-informed senior manager. More importantly, the euro may be seen by some as having revenue potential that comes from offering new services ahead of competitors. Year 2000 may offer some revenue opportunities, but it is probably most correctly perceived as a cost concern for many senior managers. Both conversions must be managed as business issues because of the significant risks they both pose to operations. Some commentators may have created another, false, relationship between these two technical challenges by suggesting that the Year 2000 problem is a creation of some that want to distract attention and resources from the euro . I know of no responsible person who would create the need to spend the large sums necessary to prepare for the century date change or risk other disruptions for the purpose of diverting attention from a legitimate and beneficial effort of creating a common currency for a major economic region. In addition, computer professionals have known of this problem for years and are, I believe, universal in recognizing its importance. However, the story is more complex than these elements of resource contention; there are some benefits from having these two major systems changes in close proximity. First, we can all learn about the importance of cross-firm coordination in tackling these systems issues in the new era. In addition, there will be learning on how best to perform contingency planning for these cross-firm, cross-border events. Finally, the euro -conversion experience may be seen as a leading indicator for the Year 2000 weekend that will follow a year later. If things proceed well, many may interpret that as lessening the pressure, and efforts to prepare for Year 2000 might appear to have a lower priority. If euro conversion is not as seamless as expected, the perceptions of Year 2000 risk will likely increase, possibly leading to excessive concern and overreaction. It will be incumbent upon knowledgeable and balanced commentators to assess the situation coolly and point out appropriate similarities and differences between the two events. Disclosure and Transparency One way in which we can all ensure that balanced and rational discussion prevails is by adequate disclosure and transparency. The lack of adequate information on Year 2000 preparations by firms and countries is a significant concern because, as we have seen recently, lack of information may feed negative perceptions in the marketplace. The interdependence of financial institutions, markets and payments systems, and the overall dependence by firms on the readiness of the public infrastructure, make it very important for firms and countries to share information on the status of plans and preparations. The Year 2000 problem could potentially lead to a cross-border reassessment of counterparty and country risks similar to that occurring now. Unless we continue to make steady progress in preparing for the century change and communicate clearly how we are doing, we may experience what I call the "Year 2000 shadow" in the financial markets. Financial market participants, and entire countries, may find that capital will become scarce, or at least dear, if they are not seen to be making sufficient progress toward resolving this problem. The uncertainty surrounding preparedness for Year 2000 may make markets less liquid as institutions seek to insulate themselves from risk with counterparties who are thought to be unprepared. The financial cost of this is not clear, and I am not one of those forecasting recession as a result of a Year 2000 slowing, but we know from recent events that a flight to liquidity can have severe repercussions in the real economy. In the United States, legislation has recently been passed by Congress to protect firms that share information in good faith on the status of their Year 2000 projects. In July, the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission issued new guidance for publicly traded companies requiring them to disclose information regarding the scope of their Year 2000 problem and the status of their Year 2000 readiness. These actions are intended to prompt firms to be more forthcoming in providing information so that firms and investors may respond appropriately. While disclosure rules like those mandated by the SEC are a positive development, the Year 2000 process itself is constantly evolving, so formal disclosures will almost certainly be months behind the marketplace in accessing the status of firms. Voluntary disclosure, therefore, must form an integral part of plans. Firms that are forthcoming and disclose their status in forums like the Global 2000 meetings set an example for other firms in their countries and provide the marketplace with vital information. In the United States, the oil and gas industry associations recently surveyed their members on the status of company readiness. While the survey revealed that 45 percent of the respondents are still in the assessment phase, there has been no negative reaction in the marketplace or in the public press to the information. One probable reason for this reaction is that the survey and public disclosure conveys a message that companies have recognized the risks and have implemented programs and resources necessary to address the Year 2000 problem; information is reassuring. The Joint Year 2000 Council The Joint Year 2000 Council is providing a complement to these private sector efforts. We do not represent the global "official sector," but we are attempting to coordinate and share information among the world's financial regulators. To that end, we have issued a number of policy papers to provide regulators with a strong sense of better practice. The Council also provides information through a bulletin and a website. We also plan to sponsor a series of regional meetings before the end of the year to bring together regulators at a regional level to discuss progress and to provide solutions to challenges. Finally, we have held conversations with senior members of the private sector who are members of our External Consultative Committee to impress upon them the important role that they play in making these preparations. Early in its life, the Joint Year 2000 Council issued a statement emphasizing the importance of each country's developing a national Year 2000 strategy, including having senior government coordination. In the United States we have created a President's Council, which is one example of government coordination of Year 2000 preparations. This has been a particularly useful tool for allowing further information sharing and disclosure, as well as speeding preparations. In spite of these efforts and examples of good practice, some countries will probably not be as prepared as we would hope. Time will run out for a few; however, that should not stop all countries and firms from continuing their best efforts. It is never too late to start the remediation process, focused in the first instance on the most critical systems, and working diligently to seek the highest level of preparation possible. The risks of some disruption to international trade and financial markets are certainly not negligible, but those risks can best be handled by continued hard work and by planning for current and likely contingencies. Plan of Action As we move forward, I would like to suggest some steps we can all take. First, you and your colleagues are critical in continuing to build awareness within your financial and business communities and within your countries, about the importance of focusing on the Year 2000 so this event does not become the next crisis impacting financial markets. Second, some governments do not yet fully appreciate the magnitude of the Year 2000 problem. The Joint Year 2000 Council has an active program to raise awareness among financial regulators worldwide and to share information on important Year 2000 tasks. You can assist these efforts by raising the topic with political and regulatory leaders in countries in which your firms are active and providing your market-based sense of the risks. Third, I believe that accurate and timely information is the best antidote to the misinformation that is likely to spread as we get closer to the critical dates. I would, therefore, strongly encourage the efforts like those currently underway by Global 2000 to obtain voluntary disclosure of information about the status and readiness of firms. I expect that market participants and the public at large will start to expect more information, and those that do not disclose face the risk of being considered unprepared for the Year 2000 transitions, raising business viability and even systemic concerns. Fourth, the "dependencies" in the public infrastructure that we all have, namely telecommunications, power, and water, need further attention. This is a vital link that is becoming increasingly obvious. I would encourage you to have conversations with your utilities and telecommunications providers, and with appropriate regulatory authorities, about preparedness of the industries that are vital in operating the public infrastructure. Utilities have been particularly cautious in explaining their preparedness. More disclosure from them would be useful. Finally, an important and responsible part of any project includes contingency planning. Contingency planning should be recognized as a legitimate exercise, not an admission that you expect failure in the core effort of preparing for Year 2000. Conclusion In closing, let me say that we have achieved much in the past few months. The level of awareness and appreciation for the seriousness of the risks posed by the Year 2000 is growing every day. For example, despite many competing issues and concerns, the Year 2000 was addressed during the recent meetings of the IMF and World Bank. The Joint Year 2000 Council is committed to accomplishing its goals of sharing information and helping supervisory authorities perform their duties. We also remain committed to work with our colleagues in Global 2000 as they encourage the private-sector to take responsibility for their preparations. We must also continue to work hard to encourage governments and companies that provide public infrastructure services to prepare for the Year 2000. Finally, we should all encourage disclosure and sharing of information by firms and governments. I am confident that the current business and technical headlines, whether they regard international financial contagion or euro conversion, will continue to receive the appropriate level of private-sector and official attention. However, the clock will march inexorably forward, and within the next fourteen months we will all know how prepared we collectively are for the century date change. With concerted effort, I hope that we will not be found wanting. Thank you.
For immediate release As part of its ongoing work to improve the transparency of banking organizations, the Basle Committee on Banking Supervision (Basle Committee) has issued a policy paper entitled Sound Practices for Loan Accounting, Credit Risk Disclosure and Related Matters. Once finalized, the Basle Committee policy paper will represent the first comprehensive international supervisory guidance on sound practices for loan loss allowances, accounting for troubled loans, and related credit risk disclosures of banking organizations. The policy paper presents guidance on sound practices through the discussion of 25 principles. The paper provides guidance on sound practices with respect to key loan accounting issues, such as the initial recognition and measurement of loans, subsequent measurement of impaired loans, the establishment of loan loss allowances, income recognition and issues relating to troubled debt restructurings. Moreover, the paper presents sound disclosure practices for loan portfolios, troubled loans, loan loss allowances and related credit risk management practices. The paper concludes with a brief discussion of the role of supervisors in assessing a bank's management of asset quality and the adequacy of loan loss allowances. The paper has been issued by the Basle Committee as a proposal for public comment, with comments requested by March 15, 1999. The Basle Committee's press release and paper can be obtained from the Internet ( ) or from the Basle Committee Secretariat at the Bank for International Settlements.
For immediate release
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice of KeyCorp, Cleveland, Ohio, to acquire McDonald & Company Investments, Inc., Cleveland, Ohio, and thereby engage in underwriting and dealing, to a limited extent, in all types of debt and equity securities, and in certain other nonbanking activities. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. KeyCorp Cleveland, Ohio Order Approving Notice to Engage in Nonbanking Activities KeyCorp, Cleveland, Ohio, a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8)) and section 225.24 of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.24) to merge with McDonald & Company Investments, Inc., Cleveland, Ohio ("McDonald"), and thereby acquire control of its subsidiaries, including McDonald & Company Securities, Inc. ("Company"). KeyCorp would thereby engage in the following nonbanking activities: extending credit and servicing loans, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(1) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(1)); engaging in activities related to extending credit, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(2)(ii), (vi) and (vii) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(2)(ii), (vi) and (vii)); providing leasing services, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(3) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(3)); performing functions or activities that may be performed by a trust company, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(5) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(5)); providing financial and investment advisory services, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(6) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(6)); providing securities brokerage, riskless principal, private placement, futures commission merchant, and other agency transactional services, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(7) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(7)); underwriting and dealing in government obligations and money market instruments in which state member banks may underwrite and deal under 12 U.S.C. §§ 335 and 24(7) ("bank-eligible securities"), engaging in investing and trading activities, and buying and selling bullion and related activities, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(8) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(8)); providing management consulting and employee benefit consulting services, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(9) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(9)); underwriting and dealing in, to a limited extent, all types of debt and equity securities other than interests in open-end investment companies ("bank-ineligible securities"); providing administrative and other services to open-end investment companies ("mutual funds"); and acting as the general partner of private investment limited partnerships that invest in assets in which a bank holding company is permitted to invest. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (63 Federal Register 48,509 (1998)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the notice and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. KeyCorp, with total consolidated assets of approximately $76 billion, is the 15th largest banking organization in the United States. KeyCorp operates subsidiary banks in 13 states, and engages through other subsidiaries in a broad range of permissible nonbanking activities. McDonald, with total consolidated assets of $987 million, engages in a broad range of securities underwriting and dealing, brokerage, investment advisory, and other activities. KeyCorp proposes to merge its wholly owned subsidiary, Key Capital Markets, Inc., Cleveland, Ohio ("KCMI"), with and into Company. After consummation of the proposal, Company would be renamed McDonald Key Investments, Inc. Company is, and after consummation of the proposal will continue to be, registered as a broker-dealer with the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. § 78a et seq. ), registered as an investment adviser with the SEC under the Investment Advisers Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. § 80b-1 et seq. ), a member of the National Association of Securities Dealers, Inc. ("NASD"), and registered as a futures commission merchant with the Commodity Futures Trading Commission ("CFTC") under the Commodity Exchange Act (7 U.S.C. § 2 et seq. ). Accordingly, Company is, and will continue to be, subject to the record-keeping and reporting obligations, fiduciary standards, and other requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the Investment Advisers Act of 1940, the Commodity Exchange Act, the SEC, the CFTC, and the NASD. Underwriting and Dealing in Bank-Ineligible Securities The Board has determined that, subject to the framework of prudential limitations established in previous decisions to address the potential for conflicts of interests, unsound banking practices, or other adverse effects, underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities is so closely related to banking as to be a proper incident thereto within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. The Board also has determined that underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities is consistent with section 20 of the Glass-Steagall Act (12 U.S.C. § 377), provided that the company engaged in the activity derives no more than 25 percent of its gross revenues from underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities. KeyCorp has committed that Company will conduct its underwriting and dealing activities using the methods and procedures and subject to the prudential limitations established by the Board in the Section 20 Orders. KeyCorp also has committed that Company will conduct its bank-ineligible securities underwriting and dealing activities subject to the Board's revenue restriction. As a condition of this order, KeyCorp is required to conduct its bank-ineligible securities activities subject to the revenue restrictions and Operating Standards established for section 20 subsidiaries ("Operating Standards"). Mutual Fund Activities KeyCorp proposes, through Company, to provide to mutual funds ("funds") investment advisory, administrative, and other services that previously have been approved by the Board. KeyCorp has committed that the proposed activities will be conducted in compliance with Regulation Y and Board orders governing these activities and subject to the prudential and other limitations established by the Board. KeyCorp proposes to have certain director and officer interlocks with the funds. In particular, KeyCorp proposes that up to 25 percent of the directors of a mutual fund would be employees, officers, or directors of KeyCorp or one of its subsidiaries, including Company. KeyCorp proposes that one of these directors may serve as chairman of the board of the fund. In addition, KeyCorp seeks to have up to three directors, officers, or employees of KeyCorp or its subsidiaries, including Company, serve as senior officers of the fund and have other KeyCorp personnel serve as junior-level officers of the fund. The Board previously has authorized a bank holding company and its nonbank subsidiaries to have limited director and officer interlocks with mutual funds that the bank holding company advises and administers. The Board noted that the independent directors of the funds would be responsible for the selection and review of the investment adviser, the underwriter, and the other major service contractors of the fund. In this case, KeyCorp's personnel would not comprise more than 25 percent of any fund's board of directors. Accordingly, all the funds to which KeyCorp would provide advisory and administrative services would have boards of directors in which 75 percent of the directors are unaffiliated with KeyCorp. In addition, any director of a fund who also serves as a director, officer, or employee of KeyCorp would be an "interested person" under the 1940 Act and, therefore, would be required to abstain from voting on investment advisory and other major contracts of the fund. The director and officer interlocks proposed by KeyCorp would not appear to affect the independence of the other directors of the funds. The independent members of the boards of directors would continue to have authority to review brokerage, advisory, administrative, and other major contracts and would retain authority to change the distributor of fund shares. Based on the foregoing, the Board concludes that the proposed director and officer interlocks would not compromise the independence of the boards of the funds or permit KeyCorp to control the funds for purposes of the BHC Act or Glass-Steagall Act. Other Activities Approved by Regulation or Order The Board previously has determined that credit and credit-related activities; leasing activities; trust company activities; financial and investment advisory activities; securities brokerage, riskless principal, private placement, futures commission merchant, and other agency transactional activities; bank-eligible securities underwriting and dealing; investing and trading activities; buying and selling bullion and related activities; and management consulting and employee benefits consulting services are closely related to banking within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. In addition, the Board previously has determined by order that the proposed private investment limited partnership activities are permissible for bank holding companies. KeyCorp has committed that it will conduct these activities in accordance with the provisions and limitations set forth in Regulation Y and the Board's orders and interpretations relating to each of the activities. Other Considerations In order to approve this notice, the Board also must determine that the proposed activities "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public, such as greater convenience, increased competition, or gains in efficiency, that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices." As part of its review of these factors, the Board considers the financial and managerial resources of the notificant and its subsidiaries and the effect the transaction would have on such resources. In considering the financial resources of the notificant, the Board has reviewed the capitalization of KeyCorp and Company in accordance with the standards set forth in the Section 20 Orders and finds the capitalization of each to be consistent with approval. This determination is based on all the facts of record, including KeyCorp's projections of the volume of Company's underwriting and dealing activities in bank-ineligible securities. The Board also has reviewed the managerial resources of each of the entities involved in this proposal in light of examination reports and other supervisory information. In connection with the proposal, the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland ("Reserve Bank") has reviewed the policies and procedures of Company to ensure compliance with this order and the Section 20 Orders, including Company's operational and managerial infrastructure, computer, audit, and accounting systems and internal risk management procedures and controls. On the basis of the Reserve Bank's review and all other facts of record, including the commitments provided in this case and the proposed managerial and risk management systems of Company, the Board has concluded that financial and managerial considerations are consistent with approval of the notice. The Board has carefully considered the competitive effects of the proposal. KeyCorp represents that KCMI and Company offer largely complementary services with few significant overlaps. KeyCorp has indicated that KCMI has not developed the type of equity underwriting and other equity-based capital markets products, private client brokerage, and high-yield debt underwriting services offered by Company. To the extent that KCMI and Company offer different types of products and services, the proposed acquisition would result in no loss of competition. In those markets where the product offerings of KeyCorp's nonbanking subsidiaries and McDonald overlap, such as securities brokerage, investment advisory, trust, and insurance agency activities, there are numerous existing and potential competitors. Consummation of the proposal, therefore, would have a de minimis effect on competition in the market for these services, and the Board has concluded that the proposal would not have significantly adverse competitive effects in any relevant market. In order to approve the proposal, the Board also must find that the performance of the proposed activities by KeyCorp can reasonably be expected to produce benefits that would outweigh possible adverse effects under the proper incident to banking standard of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Under the framework established in this and prior decisions, consummation of the proposal is not likely to result in any significantly adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices that outweigh the public benefits of the proposal. The Board expects that consummation of the proposal would provide added convenience to the customers of KeyCorp and McDonald. KeyCorp has indicated that consummation of the proposal would expand the range of products and services available to its customers and those of McDonald. KeyCorp also has stated that the acquisition would permit it to improve the operating efficiency of KCMI and further diversify its nonbanking operations, thereby making it less vulnerable to economic fluctuations in individual business lines. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that performance of the proposed activities by KeyCorp can reasonably be expected to produce public benefits that outweigh any adverse effects of the proposal. Accordingly, the Board has determined that the performance of the proposed activities by KeyCorp is a proper incident to banking for purposes of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Conclusion On the basis of all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the notice should be, and hereby is, approved, subject to all the terms and conditions described in this order. The Board's approval of the proposal extends only to activities conducted within the limitations of this order, including the Board's reservation of authority to establish additional limitations to ensure that Company's activities are consistent with safety and soundness, avoidance of conflicts of interests, and other relevant considerations under the BHC Act. Underwriting and dealing in any manner other than as approved in this order is not within the scope of the Board's approval and is not authorized for Company. The Board's determination also is subject to all the terms and conditions set forth in Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.25(c) (12 C.F.R. 225.7 and 225.25(c)), and to the Board's authority to require modification or termination of the activities of a bank holding company or any of its subsidiaries as the Board finds necessary to ensure compliance with, or to prevent evasion of, the provisions and purposes of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders issued thereunder. The Board's decision is specifically conditioned on compliance with all the commitments made in connection with this notice, including the commitments discussed in this order and the conditions set forth in this order and the Board regulations and orders noted above. The commitments and conditions are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision, and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. This proposal shall not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or the Reserve Bank, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective October 21, 1998 . (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Appendix List of Administrative Services Maintaining and preserving certain records of the funds, including financial and corporate records; Computing net asset value, dividends, performance data and financial information regarding the funds; Furnishing statistical and research data to the funds; Preparing and filing with the SEC and state securities regulators registration statements, notices, reports, and other materials required to be filed under applicable laws; Preparing reports and other informational materials regarding the funds, including prospectuses, proxies, and other shareholder communications; Providing legal and other regulatory advice to the funds in connection with their other administrative functions; Providing office facilities and clerical support for the funds; Developing and implementing procedures for monitoring compliance with regulatory requirements and compliance with the funds' investment objectives, policies, and restrictions as established by the boards of directors of the funds; Providing routine fund accounting services to the funds and liaison with outside auditors; Preparing and filing tax returns, and monitoring tax compliance; Reviewing and arranging for payment of fund expenses; Providing communication and coordination services with regard to the funds' investment advisors, transfer agent, custodian, distributor, and other service organizations that render distribution, recordkeeping, or shareholder communication services; Reviewing and providing advice to the distributor, the funds, and the investment advisors regarding sales literature and marketing plans for the funds; Providing information to the distributor's personnel concerning performance and administration of the funds; Providing marketing support with respect to sales of the funds through financial intermediaries, including participating in seminars, meetings, and conferences designed to present information concerning the funds; Assisting in the development of additional funds; Providing reports to the boards of directors of the funds with regard to the activities of the funds; and Providing telephone shareholder services through a toll-free number. Footnotes KeyCorp also has requested the Board's approval to hold and exercise an option to acquire up to 19.9 percent of the voting shares of McDonald if certain events occur. The option would expire on consummation of the proposal. A list of the administrative services that KeyCorp would provide to mutual funds is included in the Appendix. Asset and ranking data are as of June 30, 1998. McDonald currently engages in certain insurance and real estate activities and has, and controls certain limited partnerships and corporations that have, investments that are not permissible for bank holding companies. KeyCorp has committed to conform the activities, investments, and relationships of McDonald to those permissible for bank holding companies within two years of acquiring McDonald. KCMI currently engages in limited underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities, as permitted under section 20 of the Glass-Steagall Act (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 377). See KeyCorp, 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin 921 (1997). KCMI also is authorized to engage in a variety of other nonbanking activities. See id. See J.P. Morgan & Co. Inc., et al., 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 192 (1989), aff'd sub nom. Securities Industry Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 900 F.2d 360 (D.C. Cir. 1990); Citicorp, 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 473 (1987), aff'd sub nom. Securities Industry Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 839 F.2d 47 (2d Cir.), cert. denied, 486 U.S. 1059 (1988), as modified by Review of Restrictions on Director, Officer and Employee Interlocks, Cross-Marketing Activities, and the Purchase and Sale of Financial Assets Between a Section 20 Subsidiary and an Affiliated Bank or Thrift, 61 Federal Register 57,679 (1996); Amendments to Restrictions in the Board's Section 20 Orders, 62 Federal Register 45,295 (1997); and Clarification to the Board's Section 20 Orders, 63 Federal Register 14,803 (1998) (collectively, "Section 20 Orders"). Compliance with the revenue limitation shall be calculated in accordance with the method stated in the Section 20 Orders, as modified by the Order Approving Modifications to the Section 20 Orders, 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 751 (1989); 10 Percent Revenue Limit on Bank-Ineligible Activities of Subsidiaries of Bank Holding Companies Engaged in Underwriting and Dealing in Securities, 61 Federal Register 48,953 (1996); and Revenue Limit on Bank-Ineligible Activities of Subsidiaries of Bank Holding Companies Engaged in Underwriting and Dealing in Securities, 61 Federal Register 68,750 (1996) (collectively, "Modification Orders"). In light of the fact that KeyCorp proposes to acquire a going concern, the Board believes that allowing Company to calculate compliance with the revenue limitation on an annualized basis during the first year after consummation of the acquisition and thereafter on a rolling quarterly average basis would be consistent with the Section 20 Orders. See U.S. Bancorp, 84 Federal Reserve Bulletin 483 (1998); Dauphin Deposit Corporation, 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 672 (1991). KeyCorp intends to merge KCMI with and into Company within a few weeks of the consummation of the KeyCorp/McDonald merger. Until the merger of KCMI and Company occurs, KeyCorp will operate Company as a separate corporate entity and both KCMI and Company will be independently subject to the 25-percent revenue limitation on underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities. See Citicorp, 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 473, 486 n.45 (1987), aff'd sub nom. Securities Industry Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 839 F.2d 47 (2d Cir.), cert. denied, 486 U.S. 1059 (1988). In view of the fact that Company is significantly larger than KCMI and will survive the merger with KCMI, the management structure of the proposed merged company, the activities of the merging companies and the proposed merged company, and the other aspects of this case, the Board believes the merger would not disqualify Company from calculating compliance with the revenue test in conformance with the annualized treatment described in this order. 12 C.F.R. 225.200. Company may provide services that are necessary incidents to the proposed underwriting and dealing activities. Unless Company receives specific approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act to conduct the activities independently, any revenues from the incidental activities must be treated as ineligible revenues subject to the Board's revenue limitation. The Board previously has determined that providing administrative services to mutual funds is closely related to banking within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. See, e.g., Bankers Trust New York Corporation, 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin 780 (1997) ( "BTNY" ); Commerzbank AG, 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin 679 (1997). In addition, the Board previously has determined that the Glass-Steagall Act does not prohibit a bank holding company from providing advisory and administrative services to a mutual fund. See 12 C.F.R. 225.125. See, e.g., BTNY. The administrative services that KeyCorp would provide to mutual funds through Company include computing the funds' financial data, maintaining and preserving the records of the funds, providing office facilities and clerical support for the funds, and preparing and filing tax returns for the funds. The services are listed in the Appendix. KeyCorp has committed that, on consummation of the acquisition of Company, Company will cease serving as a distributor for mutual funds and distribution activities of mutual funds would be the responsibility of an independent distributor, which would enter into contractual agreements with the mutual funds to serve as "principal underwriter." As defined in the Investment Company Act of 1940 ("1940 Act"), a principal underwriter is any underwriter who, as principal, purchases from a mutual fund any security for distribution, or who as agent for such fund sells or has the right to sell the fund's securities to a dealer and/or to the public. 15 U.S.C. § 80a-2(a)(29). The independent distributor also would be responsible for supervising sales as the principal underwriter for purposes of the federal securities laws. An independent distributor would enter into any sales agreements with brokers or other financial intermediaries to sell shares of mutual funds. The independent distributor would have legal responsibility under the rules of the NASD for the form and use of all advertising and sales literature and would be responsible for filing these materials with the NASD or the SEC. Senior officers include the president, secretary, treasurer, and vice presidents with policy-making functions. Junior officers include assistant secretaries, assistant treasurers, or assistant vice presidents of the funds. Junior officers are fund employees who have no authority or responsibility to make policy. See, e.g., BTNY; Lloyds TSB Group plc, 84 Federal Reserve Bulletin 116 (1998); BankAmerica Corporation, 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin 913 (1997); The Governor and Company of the Bank of Ireland, 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 1129 (1996). Under the 1940 Act, at least 40 percent of the board of directors of a mutual fund must be individuals who are not affiliated with the mutual fund, investment adviser, or any other major contractor to the fund. The 1940 Act and related regulatory provisions require that independent directors annually review and approve the mutual fund's investment advisory contract and any plan of distribution or related agreement. See 12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(1), (2), (3), (5), (6), (7), (8), and (9). See Dresdner Bank AG, 84 Federal Reserve Bulletin 361 (1998); Meridian Bancorp, Inc., 80 Federal Reserve Bulletin 736 (1994). 12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8). See 12 C.F.R. 225.26. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley and Meyer. Absent and not voting: Governors Ferguson and Gramlich.
Remarks by Governor Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. At a meeting of Women in Housing and Finance, Washington, D.C. October 22, 1998 Three Themes in Search of an Audience Thank you very much for inviting me to address this influential and important group. There is a famous play by the Italian playwright Luigi Pirandello entitled "Six Characters in Search of an Author." Today, I would like to discuss three themes for which I have been in search of a forum. These themes are the result of several events of the last two weeks. First, Congress left town without finally passing H.R. 10. Second, I have traveled literally around the globe involved in discussions of the Year 2000 problem or millennium bug. Third, the Federal Reserve took the unusual move of adjusting the federal funds target rate and the discount rate at a time other than a regular meeting. I would like to share some thoughts on each of these current events. Life after H.R. 10 Congress missed perhaps the best opportunity in 50 years to reform the Glass-Steagall Act. However, to paraphrase a famous author, the reports of the demise of H.R. 10 are exaggerated. I say that because, by the last week of the Congressional session, H.R. 10 had garnered quite a lot of support among bankers, securities firms, insurance companies, and insurance agents as a result of compromises that were brokered in the couple of weeks after the Senate Banking Committee markup. It seems that what held up H.R. 10 was a fight over CRA provisions that had been widely accepted by the banking industry. So it seems incorrect to think that H.R. 10 hasn't succeeded based on its merits. And it remains the only bill reforming the Glass-Steagall Act to ever pass the full House. Chairman Leach has already publicly announced that he will reintroduce H.R. 10, perhaps with the compromises reached in the Senate, early in the new Congress. That suggests that, rather than being dead, H.R. 10 is really in hibernation. Clearly the pressure from the market will continue to mount for reform of our laws governing the financial industry. There has been doubt about the wisdom of the Glass-Steagall Act from the start--even Senator Glass led a repeal effort within 3 years of the Act's initial passage. And the evolution of the markets during the past two decades has confirmed those doubts. The financial markets are evolving and have blurred the distinctions between banking products, securities, insurance and other financial instruments. As the products blur, the distinction between providers does as well. As long as our statutes do not evolve, these market changes will increase pressure on banking organizations to exploit loopholes in order to stay competitive. Similarly, regulators are forced to interpret old laws that were drafted under different times and may not be sufficiently flexible to cover today's circumstances. The result of this ad hoc approach to modernizing the legal structure is an unlevel playing field that helps the most aggressive and that, for all, is mined with legal uncertainties. It also means that different players will gain different advantages, depending on the aggressiveness of their functional regulator in interpreting the law. Only Congress has the ability to fix the over-arching framework in a way that is fair to all of the industry players. The difficulties over the past year in reaching the compromises in H.R. 10 show that this is not an easy task. That is why you may not hear many people saying that H.R. 10 is the perfect bill from their individual point of view. But maybe that is what makes it the perfect bill overall. In short, Congress missed an historic opportunity to enact H.R. 10. It did so once before in another banking area--interstate banking. Hopefully, Congress will do as it did there, and quickly enact legislation upon its return. Year 2000 Problem The Year 2000 problem has been much discussed, but I believe that it now requires a renewed focus, particularly, in light of the current global financial turmoil. Some have suggested that, against the backdrop of the current global financial uncertainties, the Year 2000 problem could tip the balance toward global recession in year 2000. I think that it is a possible scenario, but not the most probable scenario. However, to minimize the risk of major disruptions, business, government, and technical leaders must not allow the current financial turmoil, or in certain countries, the introduction of the euro, to distract them from the important job of Year 2000 preparedness. The current market turmoil, in addition to being an inhospitable background for serious technical work, reminds us of how interdependent global markets have become. As you know, a currency and current account crisis in Thailand a little more than a year ago initiated a series of events with profound effect on the financial markets and on the world's strongest economies. A few themes come to mind following my worldwide discussions of Year 2000. First, as I traveled there were many questions of what governments and international agencies will do to fix the problem. The reality is that we in the official sector have important roles to play, but the primary responsibility rests with the private sector. Private firms have the obligation to fix this problem. They must maintain Year 2000 as a top management priority, or quickly raise it to that level, if needed. At these various meetings, I was all too frequently met by the technicians asking me to help them to get senior management involved in solving this problem. Senior managers in internationally active firms and institutions must give sufficient attention to ensure that their firms are ready for the century date change. As my colleague, Bill McDonough of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, has said, "The Year 2000 problem is an issue for every country, firm, organization, government agency, bank, and piece of critical infrastructure in the world." The second responsibility of the private sector is to engage in full disclosure and information sharing with counterparties. This sharing should be either pursuant to officially-mandated standards or voluntary. Markets function most smoothly when full information is shared. The lack of full disclosure may lead to a vacuum in which inaccurate information can thrive. Soon financial markets will make Year 2000 preparedness an element in counter party credit risk assessment. Those firms not ready or those perceived not to be ready may find access to credit more difficult to obtain. One industry group in the private sector--the public infrastructure--has a particularly pressing need for fuller disclosure and information sharing. The public infrastructure sector is an important dependency upon which financial firms rely. These infrastructure providers, including telecommunication, power, and water utilities, have been noticeably reticent to share their degree of preparedness with others. The Year 2000 disclosure bill recently signed by the President reduces the risk of litigation for firms that share in information in good faith on the status of their Year 2000 preparations. All organizations should be more forthcoming to maintain public trust. The final obligation of the private sector is to engage in company-based contingency planning. We all hope that the century date change will be seamless. However, we know that with any system change for which the fix is so time consuming and labor intensive, and for which the deadline offers no extension, there will certainly be some transitions that are not as faultless as we would like. Therefore, contingency planning should not be seen as an admission of failure. Rather it is a responsible part of any system conversion. The public sector has its own set of responsibilities. First, all financial regulators must work hard at the oversight function. It is our obligation to hold the private sector participants that we supervise to the highest level of preparedness. We are not guarantors of private performance, but we do have a public obligation. I believe that the Federal Reserve is performing this function well. Also, it is critical that financial regulators worldwide continue to follow better practices in regulatory oversight of the Year 2000 problem. Additionally, my regulatory colleagues worldwide need to raise the level of cross-border planning. Year 2000 presents a novel problem that requires novel solutions, not bureaucratic dithering. Finally, governments, everywhere need to disclose as much accurate information on preparedness as they can, particularly the elements of government that provide service directly to the public. Monetary Policy Last week, the FOMC reached a consensus to lower the target federal funds rate by twenty-five basis points, and the Board of Governors decided to cut the discount rate by a similar amount. This move, coming between normally scheduled meetings, has received a bit of media attention. As we said in our press release, "growing caution by lenders and unsettled conditions in financial markets more generally are likely to be restraining aggregate demand in the future." The world's financial markets are in turmoil with risk being repriced rapidly and some markets showing an unusual lack of liquidity. Although we see few strong signs of it in the data at present, it is unlikely that real economic activity could maintain growth at or near trend if our financial markets are strained--at least not without some offsetting easing of monetary policy. Moreover, this financial situation in the United States emerges as several countries that are important trading partners for us face economic weakness; problems abroad have already had an impact on the growth of demand in the goods, commodities, and manufacturing sectors of our economy. It is unlikely that the economy will come through this period unaffected, and most forecasters foresee significant slowdown. For me, this combination of factors was sufficient to justify last week's movement. Many have asked, "What does the Fed know that we don't?" The answer to this question now, as in nearly every situation in which we change policy, is--"very little, if anything." The statement we released reflected the consensus that emerged from internal discussions and summarized the most salient elements of the discussion. We based our decision on our analysis of the general tenor of financial markets and their likely effects on the economy, not on foreknowledge of a major financial disaster, as some have speculated. I would not presume to predict the future trend of interest rates. I, as one policy maker, will take into consideration incoming data from the real and financial sectors. I do believe that, with inflation already quite low, the Federal Reserve should be as vigilant and forward looking as possible to offset as best we can shortfalls in aggregate demand just as we are vigilant to maintain price stability. In this we must recognize that it takes some time for monetary policy to transmit into the real sector, and, therefore, it is probably better to be ahead of challenges, not reacting to events. Conclusion As you can tell, this is an exciting time to be a central banker, and I enjoy it immensely. Thank you for giving me a chance to share some of the items on my mind currently.
Remarks by Governor Laurence H. Meyer At the 16th Annual Monetary Conference, Money in the New Millenium: The Global Financial Architecture, Cato Institute, Washington, D.C. October 22, 1998 Increasing Global Financial Integrity: The Roles of Market Discipline, Regulation and Supervision Recent developments, both at home and abroad, have reinforced the importance of efforts to increase the stability of global banking and financial markets. The central challenge of promoting the stability of the global banking system is sometimes viewed as bringing banking systems around the world up to best practice standards, as exemplified in the supervisory and regulatory frameworks of advanced industrial economies. While this is, to be sure, a priority--at least for internationally active banks around the world--let me offer a more comprehensive framework for thinking about enhancing the stability of the global banking system. First, best practices is a dynamic, not a static concept. The rapid change in banking markets and practices, and more generally in financial markets and instruments, challenges supervisors and regulators around the world to adapt in order to maintain the effectiveness of regulatory standards and supervisory practices. Best practices simply must get better over time or they will soon not be good enough. Second, best practices may not be the same for all banking organizations. It is time to think about not only enhancing the contributions of market discipline, reforming capital standards and enhancing supervisory practice at the largest and most complex banking organizations, but also about differentiating how we regulate and supervise these institutions relative to small and medium sized banks. Third, we have to continue to work on appropriate global norms and make greater progress in achieving greater convergence to best practices--including, perhaps, different best practices for different classes of institutions--around the world. This means appropriate investments in developing the standards, in technical assistance, and in monitoring compliance. I am going to apply this broader perspective on global banking to three pillars of an efficient and effective supervisory and regulatory framework for banking: market discipline, regulation, and supervision. First, I will discuss the potential for enhanced disclosure and improved incentives to increase the effectiveness of market discipline in controlling risk-taking by banks. Second, I will discuss the importance of reforming our international capital standards as an example of dynamic best practices. Third, I want to emphasize the important role for bank supervision. I. Market Discipline: Information and Incentives There appears to be a renaissance in appreciation of the contribution of market discipline in banking. This undoubtedly reflects a growing awareness that recent developments in banking and financial markets have made regulatory standards less effective and supervision more challenging, that it may be simply impossible to adapt regulatory standards and supervisory practices fast enough to keep pace with market developments. Of course, market discipline does not come easy to banking. We start by establishing a safety net for banks, including deposit insurance, access to a lender of last resort, and payment system guarantees. This immediately reduces the incentives of market participants to monitor the risk-taking of banks and, in turn, encourages excessive risk-taking by banks. We then put in place a regulatory and supervisory framework to counter these moral hazard incentives. And, when we are done, we complain about the absence of market discipline. I appreciate that this sounds just a bit contradictory. I could be more consistent and perhaps more appreciated at this institute if I urged the dismantling of the federal safety net and the full return to reliance on market discipline. But it is clear that society has made one of those irreversible choices and will not choose to eliminate deposit insurance, the discount window, a Federal Reserve payments system, or bank supervision and regulation. Moreover, my reading of history suggests that, despite the strong indications of the success of market discipline, the cost of the associated financial market disturbances on real economic activity are too high for market discipline to be the sole regulator of banking. I understand opinions differ on this, just as they must when supervisors and regulators make judgments to act at specific times. But, what is worth understanding is that there is now general agreement that moral hazard is a significant problem, that the markets are increasingly complex--making it more difficult for supervisors and regulators--and that supervision and regulation have significant costs and inefficiencies. As a result, we must begin to increase our reliance on market discipline both as a governor and as an indicator. When I talk about market discipline, some hear a call for a substitution of more market discipline for less regulation and supervision. Listen more closely. My concern is that the task of regulation and supervision has become more challenging and we therefore have to increase the effectiveness of our overall regulatory and supervisory framework to keep pace. I am referring here to the increased size, breadth and geographic scope of banking and to its increased globalization and complexity. I want to achieve this increased effectiveness by enhancing market discipline, modifying our regulatory standards, and adapting supervisory practice. We also want an efficient regulatory framework, one that achieves its objectives at the lowest cost. Where there are opportunities to achieve the same degree of stability through increased reliance on markets and reduced emphasis on regulation and supervision, we should, of course, do so. But right now, my focus is on increasing the overall effectiveness of the framework and in relying as much as possible on market discipline and improved capital standards to get this job done. It is one thing to extol the virtue of markets and another thing to find ways to make them work more effectively in controlling risk-taking in banking, at least in the presence of the safety net. The time has come to move beyond rhetoric to specific actions. Within the Federal Reserve System we have a variety of working groups and committees working to this end. We also have the benefit of ongoing work and recent reports by the Basle Supervisors Committee and the Group of 22. I expect that these efforts will result in concrete proposals soon. Market discipline is about information and incentives. Market participants must have access to reliable and timely information on the financial conditions and prospects of banking firms, and both the market participants and the firms must have incentives to respond to this information. With respect to information, we need to consider what additional disclosure would contribute to enhanced market discipline. Providing incentives is important because such incentives can encourage banks to provide voluntarily the information the market demands. I have not come with a specific set of recommendations for improved disclosure. But two common principles apply here as well as to issues related to regulatory reform and adaptation of supervisory practice. Banking systems in emerging economies have a long way to go to catch up to global norms with respect to disclosure. Banks that want to play in global markets should meet international standards with respect to transparency and disclosure. Banking systems in developed economies, in turn, should not be resting on their laurels when it comes to transparency and disclosure. Here again "best practices" has to be understood as a dynamic process. The increased complexity of banking, the speed with which risk positions can change, and the increased size and breadth of banking organizations all seem to point to the usefulness of improving disclosure to provide the raw material the markets need to continuously reevaluate changing risk profiles. Improved disclosures about risk management practices, risk profiles, and risk management performance--coupled with disclosures about regulatory capital and its components, risk weighted assets and related matters--could provide transparency that will facilitate market discipline. Timely disclosure of this information would enable market participants and supervisors to better assess how institutions maintain sound capital in relation to their changing risk exposures. Some of these types of disclosures are among those set forth in the recent Basle Committee paper on Enhancing Bank Transparency. International disclosure standards should include, for example, guidelines for reporting non-performing loans, for provisioning for non-performing loans, and for classifying the quality of loans. Upgrading international banking statistics to provide more detailed data on international exposures would enhance the ability of both supervisors and market participants to assess the vulnerability of domestic banking systems to financial shocks from abroad. It would also be useful to provide better information about the complex activities of the largest, internationally active banks, such as securitizations, credit risk modeling and credit derivatives. The second foundation of market discipline is incentives. One promising direction might be to require at least the largest and most complex banks to issue minimum amounts of subordinated debt as a way of enhancing market discipline. To a degree I view this as a metaphor for specific steps to enhance market discipline, to emphasize that we have to move beyond rhetorical praise for markets to specific steps to harness the role of markets in monitoring risk-taking by banks. There may be other approaches that can accomplish this task, as well or better than subordinated debt. But, right now, I do believe there is considerable promise in a subordinated debt requirement. An appealing aspect of this approach is that subordinated debt holders, so long as they are not bank "insiders," face only downside risk, and thus their risk preferences are very close to those of the FDIC. Subordinated debt holders would therefore be expected to impose market discipline on the bank that is quite consistent with what bank supervisors are trying to do, including encouraging banks to disclose more information about their financial conditions. Observed risk premiums on subordinated debt could perhaps be used to help the FDIC set more accurate risk-based deposit insurance premiums, and such debt would provide an extra cushion of protection to taxpayers. An additional benefit of having subordinated debt traded on the open market, at least if the market for subordinated debt was sufficiently liquid, is that price movements would provide a clear signal of the market evaluation of the bank's financial condition that would serve as an early warning signal to aid supervisors. Such an approach would most likely be limited to the largest banks for at least two reasons. First, it is the increased size of banking organizations and the financial innovations of the largest and most sophisticated banks that are challenging the effectiveness of the current regulatory and supervisory framework. Second, it is unclear just how deep and liquid a market for bank subordinated debt would be and what access small and medium sized banks would have to this market. This suggests that an operationally feasible program of mandatory subordinated debt would require a considerable amount of further thought. II. Reforming Capital Standards Market discipline, as I noted, is a complement to the regulation and supervision required by the safety net. The foundation for bank regulation has long been capital standards. Since 1998, these have been international standards as embodied in the Basle Accord. Capital standards can be thought of as a way of reinforcing market discipline, because they shift more of the risk to shareholders relative to taxpayers. In this way, capital is the closest relative to market discipline among bank regulations. That is the good news about capital standards. The bad news is they are becoming increasingly less meaningful and progressively undermined as a result of regulatory capital arbitrage. Regulatory capital arbitrage refers to the gaming of the capital standards, the exploitation of loopholes that allows banking organizations to lower the amount of capital for a given level of risk. Regulatory capital arbitrage has been encouraged by the limitations of and excessive rigidity in the current capital standards. To be sure, it serves as a kind of safety valve, preventing the capital rules from distorting bank behavior in non-economic ways. But capital arbitrage also undermines the effectiveness of our capital rules and creates some economic distortions. Banks engage in regulatory capital arbitrage mainly through securitizations and credit derivatives. These vehicles offer improved opportunities for banks to manage their risks and liquidity. Securitizations allow banks to transfer the risk of an underlying loan pool to capital markets, retaining their role in the origination of loans, but transferring more of the ultimate funding to the capital markets. Credit derivatives are another vehicle for shifting some of the risk of the underlying loan pool, while avoiding disclosure of an effective loan sale and possibly harming a customer relationship. There are two problems with the use of securitization and credit derivatives. First, banks often use these vehicles to reduce capital charges by more than they reduce the risk associated with the underlying loan pool. This is the problem of limited transference of risk. Banks generally retain the risk of "first dollar" or "second dollar" loss on the underlying assets via various credit enhancements. Indeed, through devices such as "remote origination" and "indirect credit enhancements" the regulatory capital associated with retained risks can be very low, even zero. As a result, some refinement in the capital treatment of securitizations and credit derivatives is needed to better match the capital with the retained risk by banking organizations. But the second problem is the more difficult one. Securitizations and credit derivatives are basically exercises in cherry picking. That is, they allow banks to transfer the high quality assets out of their banking book. Banks do so for good reason, to be sure. They do so because our current capital standards apply the same risk weight to all non-mortgage loans, and the regulatory capital charges for the highest quality loans are often well in excess of the economic capital that banks internally allocate to such loans. In a world of increased competition, banks have to use every opportunity to manage their risks and capital to best advantage. And that means either not originating such high quality loans or finding ways to make the regulatory capital converge to their estimate of the economic capital of such loans. Regulatory capital arbitrage is a safety valve because it allows banks to stay in the business of making such high quality loans. The main problem here is not the reduction in capital charges against the high quality loans, although this does raise tension with prevailing international capital standards. The most serious problem is the increased risk of the residual loan portfolio, the portfolio that has been effectively stripped of its high quality assets for which regulatory capital exceeds economic capital. The remaining loans, to the extent this process has been carried out to its logical conclusion, all have economic capital equal to or in excess of the regulatory capital charges. The 8 percent capital charge for the average loan portfolio may, as a result, be quite inadequate for the residual higher-risk loan portfolio. On the other hand, the 8 percent risk-based capital standard may still be adequate for banks that do not engage in cherry picking via securitizations and credit derivatives. Therefore, as we move toward reform of the international capital standards, we should not necessarily apply the same capital standards to all banks. The point here is not to blame banks for engaging in regulatory capital arbitrage. The fact is that regulatory capital arbitrage is an outgrowth of the considerable resources that banks have devoted to better measuring, pricing and managing risk. And it is also a response to serious shortcomings in our international capital standards. The solution is not to reign in banks, but to catch up to banks, specifically to reform our international capital standards in a way that takes advantage of some of the advances in credit risk measurement and management in the industry. I am not going to be more specific at this point. Here too the Federal Reserve has been actively engaged in analyzing the emerging tensions between bank practices and regulatory rules and has been working toward recommendations for reform. As you know, regulatory capital standards, at least those that apply to internationally active banks, require international consensus. The Basle Supervisors Committee, under the leadership of William McDonough, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, is moving toward active discussion of reform of the Basle Accord and the Federal Reserve will be an important contributor to this deliberation. Without laying out the specifics of a reform effort, the direction must be to ensure that regulatory capital charges, especially those related to the banking book, better match economic risks. The Federal Reserve Board's web site (federalreserve.gov) has several excellent staff papers on these issues that I call to your attention. Today the same capital charge is assessed against a loan to a AAA-rated company as to a loan to a junk-rated company. As a result, banks tend to have very similar regulatory capital ratios despite the fact that they have quite different risk profiles. Fortunately, the largest and most sophisticated banks can and do differentiate between their loans for the purpose of assigning internal economic capital as part of credit risk management. Regulators have to take advantage of the same improvements in credit risk measurement and management to achieve this improved matching of capital to underlying risks. The problem is that, at this point, there is a considerable diversity in the quality of such risk measurement and management across banks and some serious limitations to the robustness of internal risk measurement models. So we need to encourage both continued advances in risk measurement and management and convergence toward best practice within the industry, at least for the largest, most complex and internationally active banks. The fact is, we may not yet be where we need to be in terms of credit risk measurement and management to implement a new capital standard that effectively resolves problems associated with regulatory capital arbitrage. So as we move toward a reform of international capital standards that harnesses the risk measurement improvements in banking, we need parallel efforts in credit risk measurement and management within the banking industry. If we can match these two efforts, we will hopefully be able to achieve meaningful reform of our capital standards. This would hopefully allow us to eliminate or at least significantly reduce incentives for regulatory capital arbitrage, ensure that risk-based capital ratios are more meaningful, and enhance the role of capital standards as the foundation for bank regulation. III. The Importance of Supervision At its best, regulation is a rather blunt instrument and, as a result, in the U.S. great emphasis has been placed on bank-by-bank supervision, including on-site examinations. Historically, U.S. examiners focussed almost solely on uncovering deteriorated or troubled risk positions; in effect, they carried out a "classified assets" review. But we recognize now that good supervision is proactive. It is, of course, important to force banks to recognize problems promptly when they occur; it is even better to make sure that the probability of a problem occurring is contained to begin with. To this end U.S. supervisors now conduct examinations of bank risk measurement and management processes, not just examinations of bank assets. This also reflects the new dynamics of bank risk-taking, the prospect of rapid change in underlying risk because of the changed nature of bank practices, changes in the technology that speed changes through markets, and changes in financial instruments. The old approach was more like taking a snapshot of troubled assets at a point in time and returning the following year for another picture. The new approach is one that features monitoring of the systems and procedures used to measure risk by the bank on a continuous basis, with the details of the examination process tailored to the complexity of the transactions and to the areas within a banking organization where the greatest risks are concentrated. The pace at which financial innovation is occurring is leaving gaps in banking regulation, which will take time to fill. There is no alternative but for supervisors, during this interval, to be more alert and to recognize the greater role for supervisory discretion. In a recent supervisory letter, for example, the Federal Reserve encouraged its supervisors to be sure that the robustness of a bank's credit risk management was scaled appropriately to the complexity of its operations. Specifically, banks that aggressively participate in cherry picking via securitizations and credit derivatives should be expected to have in place a credible system of internal credit risk rating and should be prepared to assess the economic capital appropriate to the residual banking portfolio. Having said all this, we have been reminded over and over again that some things change, but others stay the same. It is important to recognize, as recent experience has forced us to, that new financial instruments often involve the same old types of risk. A good example is derivatives. U.S. banks, for example, hedged positions in rubles without adequately considering the credit quality of the hedge counterparties, specifically the Russian banks that were the counterparties to foreign exchange hedges. In the case of derivative positions that banks had with hedge funds, the risk was not so much the potential for rapid change in the value of the underlying position, given that banks insist on collateral backing on contracts for which they are in the money and also generally hedge these positions. However, assessment of the risk of the counterparties remains an important task, because when a counterparty defaults banks lose one end of their hedged positions and must quickly replenish such positions in volatile and illiquid markets. And, of course, in Asia, Russia, and elsewhere banks lent to domestic businesses with poor underlying financials, sometimes because of encouragement of the government, sometimes as a result of a system of connected lending, and often because of expectations that domestic governments would bail out the important businesses. Put differently, banks most often still lose money the old fashioned way--poor credit judgments and bad luck. We should not lose sight of this as we adopt new procedures and techniques. Whether for the old or new techniques and problems, the culture of on-site supervision is much less strong in other countries and in some cases is almost non-existent. Indeed, in some cases, supervision consists entirely of reviewing publicly available financial statements to determine compliance with prudential regulations. This is another area where convergence is badly needed. IV. Conclusion Banks in emerging economies are increasingly becoming players in global banking. To maintain the stability of the global banking system it is important that these banks converge toward best practice standards and that the regulatory and supervisory infrastructure in these economies similarly meet global norms. There is an important role in this process for international standard setting, technical assistance, and monitoring compliance with these standards. At the same time, consolidation, globalization, and the increased complexity and breadth of activities are increasing the challenge of regulating and supervising banks around the world. Best practices must therefore keep pace with market developments. I believe that a recipe for dynamic best practices involves enhancing the role of market discipline, reforming international capital standards, and improving supervisory practice.
Remarks by Vice Chair Alice M. Rivlin The world economy At the State University of New York-Brockport and Buffalo State College, Buffalo October 22, 1998 I am delighted to be here today and to have this opportunity to talk with you. I am particularly pleased to be here with my friend Congressman John LaFalce, who brings such energy and good sense to the Congress, especially to the hard work of the Banking Committee, which is where I see him most frequently. I want to talk with you this morning about the turmoil in the world economy and what it might mean for us here in the United States. Why should people in upstate New York care about the economy of Thailand or Russia or Brazil? What can we do to keep our own economy strong? We are all used to the cliche that the world is getting smaller, that the electronic age has brought us closer and put us in instant touch with remote parts of the globe. We know that cross-border trade and investment have increased enormously in recent years, bringing both greater prosperity and greater interdependence. Still, when bad news from Asian economies began flashing across our screens in the summer of 1997, it didn't seem to have much to do with us. Currencies with odd names, like the baht and the ringgit were said to be plunging, stocks prices on the Hang Seng or the Nikkei were falling, by the end of the year Korean banks were negotiating with their creditors. But here at home the economy was doing better than it had in a generation. The news from Asia seemed like a small dark cloud appearing on the horizon in the middle of a sunny day at an outdoor festivity. It might mean rain, but with any luck it would go away. We have been enjoying a truly extraordinary performance of the U.S. economy. Since the beginning of the 1990s, we have had a long period of growth that didn't seem to be sputtering out. In fact, growth accelerated in 1997 and early 1998, which is not the usual pattern for a "mature" business cycle. We have seen few signs of strain or imbalance. Although some areas, including Upstate New York, have lagged, we have experienced mostly good growth across the country and across sectors of the economy. Unemployment has been very low -- lower than most economists thought it could remain for long without igniting inflation. Wages have been increasing, but not so fast that the rise caused rapid escalation of costs. The slowdown in the rise of health benefit costs has held total compensation increases to moderate levels. Productivity increases have been offsetting compensation growth, keeping profits growing, at least until quite recently. Most remarkable of all, inflation has been falling and not showing any clear evidence of accelerating again. Even the Asian crisis at first seemed an ill-wind whose timing was actually blowing us some good. Some Americans felt the negative impact early, especially manufacturers whose exports to Asia declined and farmers who saw their prices drop on world markets as Asian demand fell off. At the national level, however, our economy was clearly growing at an unsustainable rate, and some slowdown was actually welcome. We were in danger of running out of workers. Sooner or later cost pressures would lead to inflation. The primary economic risk seemed to be overheating, not slow growth. Indeed, the Federal Reserve was concerned enough to tap the brakes by raising the short term interest rate in March 1997 before the Asian crisis hit that summer. We would probably have felt called on to raise rates again later in 1997, but by then it seemed likely that slower growth in Asia would cut US net exports, and restrain our economy enough to avoid inflation and any pressures. Good productivity performance, falling commodity prices, combined with low inflation expectations and the high value of the dollar, all made it less risky to wait and reduced the necessity of the Federal Reserve taking preemptive action against inflation by raising rates again. The stock market's remarkable rise both reflected and perpetuated the general good feeling about the U.S. economy. Even the Asian crisis raised the price of U.S. stocks, as investors took their money out of Asian markets and bought U.S. securities instead. To be sure, U.S. equity values were outrunning reasonable expectations of profits, especially if, as many forecasters expected, the economy slowed down. But increased wealth of consumers stimulated consumption and the low cost of equity stimulated investments, so chances of future profits were enhanced. Some worried that high equity values were a bubble that would inevitably burst, but this concern was mitigated by: (1) lack of strong evidence that stock prices were part of a wider speculative phenomenon that included real estate and other assets, as in some previous boom periods; (2) the apparent new maturity of small investors, who talked and acted as though they were in the equity market for the long haul. All in all, it was a sunny day at the fair. All of this good news generated an occasionally silly debate about whether the U.S. was in "new era" in which all the old rules had been suddenly repealed, or whether there was a "new paradigm," which usually seemed to mean "no paradigm," or "the sky's the limit." The more sensible version of the discussion went something like this. There are lots of reasons why the economy might be both more productive and less inflation prone than it used to be: more global competition deregulation of airlines, trucking, telecommunications; decline of barriers among financial services the computer and telecommunication revolution (finally) making cost savings possible, not just in manufacturing, but in services more flexibility and incentives built into wages, less unionization, out-sourcing of specialized services, use of temporary and part-time employees high levels of investment, including human investment -- on-the-job and other skill training. In economists' terms, there was hope that productivity might have moved onto a higher growth trend. Faster productivity growth would mean a higher standard of living for Americans in the future. It would mean that growth could be faster without setting off inflation (perhaps closer to 3 percent a year than 2 percent) and that unemployment could be lower without inflationary consequences. That would be very good news. It was too soon to be sure that the apparent productivity trend increase would hold up or that less inflation was becoming the norm. It was certainly true that some elements of the unusual combination of favorable inflation factors were likely to reverse. Health cost increases might accelerate again; the dollar might weaken and cause import prices to rise; oil and commodity prices might go up again. Still, the U.S. economy seemed to be performing remarkably well. Then ill-wind from Asia turned to a gale, sweeping through currency and asset markets all around the world and affecting our own financial markets as well. The stock market dropped 5 percent in one day in August, then bounced wildly around. A general "flight to quality" drove long-term interest rates down on Treasuries, but rates on riskier financial instruments went up. The market mood changed to pessimism and risk aversion. In Japan, the Asian crisis had a much greater impact and came at a much worse time. Japan is closely involved with other Asian countries and suffered both financial reversals and loss of markets for Japanese goods. They were already struggling with slow growth, a banking system in need of overhaul and a political party structure in need of rejuvenation. The Asian crisis precipitated deep recession in Japan. The world economic turmoil could not have come at a moment when the Japanese were less able to deal with it. Meanwhile, across the Atlantic, the initial storm warnings from Asia, were also first dismissed by many Europeans as far away and not their problem -- distant thunder on another shore. European economies are less heavily involved with Asia than we are and, besides, the ill-wind was blowing them some good in the form of lower oil and other commodity prices. The major countries on the continent were working hard on the details of monetary union and organizing a multi-national central bank; they were struggling earnestly to get deficits and inflation down. The basically simple idea of having a common currency and a common central bank proved very difficult to achieve technically and politically, but they had done it. Growth rates were finally picking up and even high French and Germany unemployment rates were beginning to recede. Europeans were optimistic that the common currency, and the increased competition and deepening capital markets it was likely to engender, would energize their economies even more and lead to higher growth. This unpleasant weather on the horizon seemed at first a minor distraction. But the lightening bolt in August of Russian devaluation was more difficult to ignore; it was right there on their borders. In the last few months, we have learned so much about the downside of an increasingly interdependent world that it is important to remind ourselves that the upside is enormous. Increasing volumes of trade and cross-border investment have raised the standard of living in many emerging countries at an astonishing rate. Trade and foreign investment have moved the countries of Southeast Asia in less than a generation from traditional agriculture to modern industrial societies with far less poverty, much more skilled work forces and rising standards of living. At the same time, we and other industrial countries have benefitted from growing markets for our exports, higher profits on our capital and lower prices for the wide variety of goods we import. When things are going well in an interlinked world, one country's prosperity reinforces another's. The rapid growth of emerging market countries, especially in Asia, in the last couple of decades, led to greatly increased trade among them as well as with industrial countries. The self-reinforcing growth seemed so positive that investors began to view investing in emerging markets as not much more risky than investing in their own more familiar industrial country markets. Capital flowed freely to finance projects in emerging market countries with lenders demanding only slightly higher interest rates than they would have required to lend at home. But the downside of interdependence is that when something goes wrong, the impact also spreads quickly from one country to another, through trade channels, prices and asset markets. Asian countries in trouble quickly cut their imports from each other and from the industrial world. The reduced Asian demand for food, oil and raw materials was felt by farmers in the U.S. and Canada, Australia and New Zealand; by producers of oil in Mexico and Venezuela, Nigeria and Russia and the Middle East; by copper producers in Chile and exporters of industrial raw materials in Africa and elsewhere. Companies in Rochester and Buffalo found their sales falling. As the contagion spread, investments in many emerging market countries began to look less promising. Investors became generally more cautious and began looking for safe places to put their money -- like buying U.S. government bonds -- even at low rates of return. As they saw U.S. companies affected, they became less eager to finance them as well. We've learned a lot in the last few months about the power of contagious loss of confidence in an interlinked world. The meltdown in Russia was the clearest case. Russia is not an important economic and trading power in itself. Losses to major money center banks, here and in Europe, though magnified by unexpected interrelations with hedge funds and other operations, were not in themselves destabilizing. But what apparently mattered was the surprise, both of the suddenness and unpleasantness of the Russian default and of the fact that the Western "powers" were so powerless. No one thought the U.S. and its allies would take the political risk of letting Russia fall apart. In the end, there was nothing they could do to stop it. The Russian collapse led investors to pull back just about everywhere. Some who had borrowed to invest in Russia had to sell assets in other markets to cover losses. Others simply said to themselves, "If it can happen in Russia, it can happen anywhere; I had better get my money to a safe place." The result was plummeting markets in Latin America, South Africa, Asia and elsewhere, more difficulties for the countries struggling to recover. It is now clear that the Asian crisis that started in Thailand in the summer of 1997 -- and seemed like a remote event of no great significance to most Americans -- has set off a chain reaction reaching around the world. Much of Asia is in deep recession, the Russian economy has collapsed with negative repercussions for many of its neighbors, growth is slowing in Latin America. Risk aversion of investors has made it difficult for any country, company or venture perceived as at all risky to get capital or to borrow, even at high rates. Countries like Brazil, Mexico and Argentina, considered quite strong a few months ago, are under mounting pressure. Brazil has had to raise interest rates, use much of its foreign exchange reserves to keep its currency from depreciating; the high interest rates, in turn, have greatly exacerbated Brazil's budget deficit, and the deteriorating outlook has led to fears that investors will pull their capital out and bankers refuse to roll over debts. Economic collapse in Brazil, which is Latin America's largest economy, could precipitate serious trouble in other Latin American countries and then reverberate back around the globe to deepen the trouble of Asia, including Hong Kong, China and Japan. Another round of deepening deterioration would surely put intense downward pressure on the U.S. economy by cutting our exports, depressing equity markets and weakening investor and consumer confidence. As Chairman Alan Greenspan has said, we cannot expect to be an "oasis of prosperity" in a deteriorating world economy. Even if we could stay prosperous alone, we should not want to take the risk that deteriorating economies in the rest of the world would augment unrest, terrorism and international conflict that could engulf the United States. What's to be done? In the near term there are clearly two priorities: Stop the contagion so that emerging market countries can begin to get back on their feet. Keep the world's largest economy from slowing down too much -- for our own sake and the world's. There is no easy, simple answer to stopping contagion, if indeed there is any answer. What would be the elements of a plan? First, countries most in danger of being the next to fall have to be willing to face up to their vulnerability quickly. (There is no point in moaning, "It's not our fault, we didn't do anything wrong; we just got caught in the world backwash." That's partly true, but not helpful.) They have to be willing to call in their creditors to negotiate rollovers, ask the IMF for conditional loans, offer significant and credible internal reforms in return. Nowhere is this easy. Second, private creditors have to see their long-run interest in hanging in, even on concessional terms, rather than joining a stampede for the exits. Third, the international financial institutions and the industrial countries have to find more funding to tide these countries over the crises if they give evidence of willingness to accept strict conditions. Congress' passage of the IMF quota increase and the New Arrangements to Borrow remove a major uncertainty about the effectiveness of collective action and should do a lot to restore confidence that the chain reaction of economic deterioration can be stopped. Keeping our own economy growing would be important even if the rest of the world were not depending on us so much. Slower growth and rising U.S. unemployment would mean fewer opportunities for Americans to earn income and move to higher skilled and better paid jobs, less chance for families to move out of poverty and from welfare to work. Slow growth or recession in U.S. would also have serious consequences for the rest of the world, reducing our ability to buy and invest abroad and exacerbating economic downturn everywhere. At present, the chance of recession in the U.S. does not seem high. Recent growth has been strong and balanced with few indications of strains and speculative excesses that typically go with boom/bust cycles. Most forecasters expect the U.S. economy to slow; the hope is that it will not slow too much. The Federal Reserve, recognizing that the balance of risks has shifted from overheating to cooling off, has cut short term interest rates twice. Other industrial countries may follow our lead (Canada already has); although the major continental European countries feel easing is less appropriate for them as they consummate their monetary union. It is clearly important for the Japanese to get their economy moving again -- to stop being part of the problem and be part of the solution -- as Americans and Europeans have been pointing out, none too politely, for months. The Japanese were not shy, when they were riding high in the ï¿½70s and ï¿½80s, to offer advice to the Western industrialized countries about modernizing our manufacturing and management practices, working harder, getting budget deficits down. So there may be a payback element to the U.S. and European shrillness about how important it is for the Japanese to use aggressive fiscal stimulus to get their economy going again and to restore confidence by drastic and immediate restructuring of their banking system. Neither is going well. A series of stimulus announcements, mostly focussed on increasing government spending for public works has not yet succeeded in stemming the economic slide. A next step might be a significant tax cut, but with Japanese consumers and investors both feeling anxious about the future, there is no guarantee that even a large tax cut would result in much near term spending. Japanese banking system restructuring is going slowly, although it does seem to be moving toward resolution. We are fine ones to talk, since we let our much smaller savings and loan crisis fester for a long time before facing up to it. With hindsight, the Japanese could have restructured their banks much more easily three or four years ago. The worst time to restructure failing banks is when macroeconomic conditions are reducing the value of their assets even further. Drastic action now may make the recession worse in the short run, but it may also be the only hope for restoring confidence and financial health in the future. Let's suppose this crisis turns around: the contagion is stopped, Asian and other emerging market countries begin to grow again; Japan pulls out of recession and begins to contribute with its recovery to recovery of its neighbors; North America and Europe sustain healthy economies. Then the big question is: how to avoid such a costly episode happening again. The real costs are not monetary; they are disrupted human lives and hopes. Millions of people in emerging market countries are suddenly without jobs, food, basic necessities, children are not going to school, young people are not learning skills, and are facing uncertain futures. We won't be able to avoid crises altogether. But in the new era of huge capital flows and instant communication, the amplitude and severity and cross border reach of crises are magnified. Can we at least make crises less frequent and mitigate the damage? What we should not try to do is retreat to isolation and self-sufficient economies that don't trade or invest in each other. The simple reason is: we'd all be a lot poorer. That solution is like saying: We don't like power failures, so let's all stop using electricity or make sure that everyone has a generator in the backyard, so we don't have to depend on the power company. What we can strive for is more cautious better informed investing and lending, better early warning systems and ways of heading off deepening trouble once it begins. Better information would help: All countries giving complete information on their foreign exchange reserves in as close to real time as possible. Better information on budgets and government finances, e.g., what real deficits are. Companies and banks revealing more clearly what their assets, liabilities and profits are. More effective, better supervised financial systems are essential: Prudential regulation of banks More carefully supervised securities markets. Accounting standards, enforced. One idea is that a country's financial systems could be graded by its peers in other countries; somewhat in the manner that universities or hospitals are accredited in the United States and the results published. The concern should not be just with borrowing countries and their institutions, as though making emerging market countries' financial structures more like the structures in industrial countries would solve all the problems. For every borrower there is a lender. Industrial countries, creditor countries, have to be more sure their banks are managing their risks appropriately, and are prepared to deal with situations when a lot of things go wrong at once. Finally, we must strengthen international financial institutions so they are better able to assess the health of member countries, give timely warnings of trouble ahead, and provide short term assistance to countries that need to make repairs. All of this will take sustained effort to learn from past and build a stronger international financial community for future. The process ought to create some interesting, rewarding jobs and challenges for those with an interest in how the economic world works and how to make it better.
The Federal Reserve Board today published the last revised list of over-the-counter (OTC) stocks that meet the margin criteria in Regulation T (OTC List). Also published today is a revised list of foreign equity securities that meet the margin criteria in Regulation T (Foreign List). The Lists are effective November 9, 1998, and supersede the previous Lists published effective August 10, 1998. The changes that have been made to the revised OTC List, which now contains 4,745 OTC stocks, are as follows: 93 stocks have been included for the first time, 75 under National Market System (NMS) designation; 73 stocks previously on the List have been removed for substantially failing to meet the requirements for continued listing; 114 stocks have been removed for reasons such as listing on a national securities exchange or involvement in an acquisition. The OTC List will expire on January 1, 1999. After January 1, 1999, all stocks trading in the Nasdaq Stock Market will be marginable at brokers and dealers. The Foreign List is composed of certain foreign equity securities that have been found to meet the criteria in section 220.11 of Regulation T. Effective April 1, 1998, foreign stocks that have a "ready market" for purposes of the Securities and Exchange Commission's (SEC) net capital rule are also eligible for margin treatment at broker-dealers. The SEC effectively treats all stocks included on the Financial Times/Standard & Poor's Actuaries World Indices as having a "ready market" for capital purposes. The revised Foreign List now contains 91 stocks displayed in country order. There were three deletions and no additions. It is unlawful for any person to cause any representation to be made that inclusion of a stock on the OTC List or the Foreign List indicates that the Board or the SEC has in any way passed upon the merits of any such stock or transaction therein. Any references to the Board in connection with these Lists or any stocks thereon in any advertisement or similar communications is unlawful.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application of U.S. Bancorp, Minneapolis, Minnesota, to acquire Northwest Bancshares, Inc., and its wholly owned subsidiary bank, Northwest National Bank, both of Vancouver, Washington. The Board's approval is conditioned on the divestiture of one branch in the Portland, Oregon, banking market. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. U.S. Bancorp Minneapolis, Minnesota Order Approving the Acquisition of a Bank Holding Company U.S. Bancorp ("Applicant"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 3 of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1842) to acquire Northwest Bancshares, Inc. ("Northwest"), and its wholly owned subsidiary bank, Northwest National Bank ("NNB"), both of Vancouver, Washington. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (63 Federal Register 27,286 (1998)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the proposal and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 3 of the BHC Act. Applicant, with total consolidated assets of approximately $70.9 billion, is the 17th largest commercial banking organization in the United States, controlling approximately 1.4 percent of total banking assets of insured commercial banks in the United States ("total banking assets"). Applicant operates subsidiary banks in 17 states and engages in a broad range of permissible nonbanking activities. Applicant also is the second largest commercial banking organization in the state of Washington, controlling approximately $6.4 billion in deposits, representing approximately 17.6 percent of total deposits in commercial banking organizations in the state ("state deposits"). Northwest is the tenth largest commercial banking organization in Washington, controlling deposits of approximately $321 million in deposits, representing less than 1 percent of state deposits. On consummation of the proposal, and accounting for the proposed divestiture, Applicant would continue to be the second largest commercial banking organization in Washington, controlling approximately $6.7 billion in deposits in the state of Washington, representing approximately 18.5 percent of state deposits. Interstate Analysis Section 3(d) of the BHC Act allows the Board to approve an application by a bank holding company to acquire control of a bank located in a state other than the home state of such bank holding company if certain conditions are met. For purposes of the BHC Act, the home state of Applicant is Minnesota, and Applicant proposes to acquire a bank in Washington. All of the conditions for an interstate acquisition enumerated in section 3(d) are met in this case. In view of the facts of record, the Board is permitted to approve this proposal under section 3(d) of the BHC Act. Competitive Considerations The BHC Act prohibits the Board from approving an application under section 3 of the BHC Act if the proposal would result in a monopoly or would be in furtherance of any attempt to monopolize the business of banking. The BHC Act also prohibits the Board from approving a proposed combination that would substantially lessen competition or tend to create a monopoly in any relevant banking market, unless the Board finds that the anticompetitive effects of the proposal are clearly outweighed in the public interest by the probable effect of the proposal in meeting the convenience and needs of the community to be served. Applicant and Northwest compete directly in the Portland, Oregon, banking market ("Portland banking market"). Applicant is the largest depository institution in the Portland banking market, controlling deposits of $6.6 billion, representing 46 percent of the total deposits in commercial banks in the market ("market deposits"). Northwest is the eighth largest depository institution in the market, controlling $321 million of deposits, representing 2.2 percent of total market deposits. To mitigate the potential anticompetitive effects of the proposal, Applicant has committed to divest one branch, which accounts for approximately $35 million in deposits and represents approximately 10.9 percent of the total deposits controlled by Northwest in the Portland banking market. Applicant has committed to make this divestiture to an organization that is competitively suitable to the Board. After accounting for the proposed divestiture, consummation of the proposal would be consistent with the market index thresholds applied under the Department of Justice Merger Guidelines ("DOJ Guidelines"). In this case, after accounting for the proposed divestiture, the HHI would increase by not more than 186 points to not more than 2761. At least 27 competitors would remain in the market after consummation of the proposal. These competitors include several large national and regional banking organizations that have significant market shares and extensive branch networks in the market. Portland is the largest banking market in Oregon and the 27th largest Metropolitan Statistical Area ("MSA") in the country. The population of the Portland MSA increased 17.3 percent from 1990 to 1997, more than any of the other MSAs in Oregon. That portion of the Portland MSA located in Washington State, in which Northwest is located, increased by more than 30 percent over the same period, more than any MSA in Washington. In addition, among the 11 MSAs in Washington and Oregon, Portland ranks second in terms of percentage of households with incomes more than $55,000, and second in median household income. Since 1994, ten new competitors have entered the market; nine commercial banks have entered the market de novo, and one commercial bank entered the market by acquiring branches that were divested by Applicant in a previous acquisition. The Department of Justice conducted a detailed review of the proposal and advised the Board that, with the proposed divestiture, consummation of the proposal would not be likely to have a significantly adverse effect on competition in any relevant market. The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency ("OCC") and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation also have not objected to consummation of the proposal. The Board believes that this is a very close case and that the mitigating factors in this case only slightly outweigh the potential for significantly adverse competitive effects in this market. Applicant is the largest competitor in this market, with more than a 45-percent market share before the proposed acquisition. This market share is more than three times the market share of the second largest banking organization in the market. Although the increase in market share represented by this acquisition would be relatively small, this transaction would remove a vigorous competitor in a strategic location in the market. Moreover, apart from Applicant and two other competitors, this market is comprised of many relatively small banking organizations, and the Board is concerned that a strict reliance on an HHI analysis would permit a significant number of these institutions to be acquired by the largest banking organizations in the market without recognizing the potentially adverse effects that these acquisitions could have on competition in the market. In approving this case, the Board has placed significant reliance on the divestiture proposal, which was a major factor in the determination by the Department of Justice that the transaction would not likely violate the federal antitrust laws. The Board also has considered the mitigating factors noted above, and the fact that Applicant has increased its market share recently as a result largely of effective competition in the market rather than through one or more acquisitions. Based on all the facts of record, and for the reasons discussed above, the Board has determined that competitive factors are consistent with approval of the proposal. The Board will view any further acquisitions in this market very critically and believes that the effects of any proposed acquisition by Applicant in this market would require compelling evidence that the transaction would not be likely to result in anticompetitive effects. Other Factors Under the BHC Act The BHC Act also requires the Board, in acting on an application, to consider the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the companies and banks involved in a proposal, the convenience and needs of the community to be served, and certain other supervisory factors. A. Financial, Managerial, and Other Supervisory Factors The Board has carefully considered the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of Applicant and Northwest, and their respective subsidiary banks, and other supervisory factors in light of all the facts of record. As part of this consideration, the Board has reviewed relevant reports of examination and other supervisory information prepared by the Reserve Banks and other federal agencies. The Board notes that the bank holding companies and their subsidiary banks are currently well capitalized and are expected to remain so after consummation of the proposal. The Board also has considered other aspects of the financial condition and resources of the two organizations, the structure of the proposed transaction, and the managerial resources of each of the entities and the combined organization. Based on these and other facts of record, the Board concludes that considerations relating to the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of Applicant, Northwest, and their respective subsidiaries are consistent with approval of the proposal, as are the other supervisory factors that the Board must consider under section 3 of the BHC Act. B. Convenience and Needs Considerations The Board has carefully considered the effect of the proposed acquisition on the convenience and needs of the community to be served in light of all the facts of record. Based on all the facts of record, including the performance records of the subsidiary banks of Applicant and Northwest under the Community Reinvestment Act ("CRA") (12 U.S.C. § 2901 et seq. ), the Board concludes that convenience and needs considerations are consistent with approval of the proposal. Conclusion Based on the foregoing, and in light of all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the application should be, and hereby is, approved. Approval of the application is specifically conditioned on compliance by Applicant with all the commitments made in connection with the proposal and with the conditions stated or referred to in this order, including Applicant's divestiture commitment. For purposes of this transaction, the commitments and conditions referred to in this order shall be deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision, and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The acquisition shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day following the effective date of this order, and the proposal shall not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective October 26, 1998. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Footnotes Asset, ranking, and deposit data are as of June 30, 1997. A bank holding company's home state is that state in which the operations of the bank holding company's banking subsidiaries were principally conducted on July 1, 1996, or the date on which the company became a bank holding company, whichever is later. 12 U.S.C. § 1841(o)(4)(C). 12 U.S.C. §§ 1842(d)(1)(A) & (B) and 1842(d)(2)(A) & (B). Applicant is adequately capitalized and adequately managed, as defined by applicable law. On consummation of the proposal, Applicant and its affiliates would control less than 10 percent of the total amount of deposits of insured depository institutions in the United States, and less than 30 percent of the total amount of deposits in Washington. In addition, Northwest's subsidiary bank, NNB, has been in existence and has operated continuously for at least five years. All other requirements of section 3(d) of the BHC Act also would be met on consummation of the proposal. 12 U.S.C. § 1842(c)(1)(B). The Portland banking market is defined as the Portland Ranally Metro Area ("RMA") and the remainder of Clark County in Washington, and the city of Mount Angel in Marion County, Oregon, and the cities of Saint Helens, Scappoose, and Vernonia in Columbia County, Oregon. Market share data are based on calculations that include the deposits of thrift institutions at 50 percent. The Board previously has indicated that thrift institutions have become, or have the potential to become, significant competitors of commercial banks. See, e.g., Midwest Financial Group, 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 386 (1989); National City Corporation, 70 Federal Reserve Bulletin 743 (1984). Thus, the Board has regularly included thrift deposits in the calculation of market share on a 50-percent weighted basis. See, e.g., First Hawaiian Inc., 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 52 (1991). Northwest operates solely in the portion of the Portland banking market that is located in Washington State. Applicant has committed to execute a sales agreement for the proposed divestiture with a purchaser determined by the Board to be competitively suitable prior to consummation of the proposal, and to complete the divestiture within 180 days of consummation. Applicant also has committed that, in the event it is unsuccessful in completing the divestiture within 180 days of consummation, it will transfer the unsold branch to an independent trustee that is acceptable to the Board and will instruct the trustee to sell the branch promptly to one or more alternative purchasers acceptable to the Board. See BankAmerica Corporation, 78 Federal Reserve Bulletin 338 (1992); United New Mexico Financial Corporation, 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 484 (1991). Under DOJ Guidelines, 49 Federal Register 26,823 (1984), a market in which the post-merger HHI is more than 1800 is considered highly concentrated. The Department of Justice has informed the Board that a bank merger or acquisition generally will not be challenged (in the absence of other factors indicating anticompetitive effects) unless the post-merger HHI is at least 1800 and the merger increases the HHI by more than 200 points. The Justice Department has stated that the higher than normal HHI thresholds for screening bank mergers for anticompetitive effects implicitly recognize the competitive effect of limited-purpose lenders and other nondepository financial institutions. See U.S. Bancorp, 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 177 (1996). The Department of Justice focused its analysis on the effect of the proposal on small business lending in Clarke County, Washington. As explained above, the Board has analyzed the effect of the transaction on competition in the market for the cluster of banking products and services in the Portland banking market. The Board also notes that pricing and profitability data for the Portland market are inconclusive on whether current conditions have resulted in significant adverse anticompetitive effects or performance. All of Applicant's subsidiary banks have received "outstanding" or "satisfactory" ratings for their appropriate federal supervisors at the most recent examinations of their CRA performance. Applicant's lead bank, U.S. Bank National Association, Minneapolis, Minnesota, received a "satisfactory" performance rating from its appropriate federal supervisor, the OCC. In addition, NNB received a "satisfactory" performance rating from the OCC. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Meyer, Ferguson, and Gramlich.
For immediate release The Basle Committee on Banking Supervision (Basle Committee) today issued an interpretation of the Basle framework for capital adequacy (Basle Accord) regarding instruments eligible for inclusion in Tier 1 capital. The Committee noted that the interpretation will be subject to review as part of a broader effort already underway to reassess the present framework for evaluating banks' capital adequacy. The governors of the central banks of the G-10 countries endorsed the Basle Accord, which applies to internationally active banks, in 1988. The interpretation reaffirms that the common shareholders' equity is the key element of capital and should be the predominant form of a bank's Tier 1 capital under the Basle Accord. The interpretation emphasizes the important role public disclosure plays in ensuring that the integrity of capital is maintained. In this regard, the Committee notes the need for banks to publicly disclose each component of Tier 1 capital and its main features. Such disclosure is consistent with a report entitled "Enhancing Bank Transparency," which the Basle Committee released in September 1998. The interpretation states that the Committee has determined that minority interest in equity accounts of consolidated subsidiaries that take the form of special purpose vehicles may be included in Tier 1 provided they meet certain minimum criteria. These criteria include permanence, deferrability of distributions on a noncumulative basis, and ability to absorb losses within the bank on a going concern basis. Further, the Committee has determined that moderate step-ups after a minimum of ten years are an acceptable feature in a Tier 1 instrument. Issuances of instruments with such a feature, however, are limited to 15 percent of Tier 1 capital in order to avoid undue reliance on innovative noncommon instruments in Tier 1. The Federal Reserve will make a determination as to how to implement the Basle interpretation with regard to U.S. banks after consulting with other federal financial institutions regulatory agencies. With regard to bank holding companies, the Federal Reserve notes that by its terms, the Basle Accord applies to internationally-active banks but states that ownership structures should not be allowed to weaken capital positions of banks. Since the inception of the Basle Accord, U.S. bank holding companies, entities which are legally separate from banks, have been subject to a risk-based capital regime that is identical to the Basle Accord, with the exception that holding companies are allowed to include cumulative preferred stock in Tier 1 on a limited basis. Consistent with the principles that common equity should be the predominant component of Tier 1 capital and that ownership structures should not weaken bank capital positions, state member banks and bank holding companies generally have been expected to maintain risk-based capital ratios above Basle minimums, without reliance on preferred stock. State member banks and bank holding companies disclose the components of their capital positions in sufficient detail to allow analysts and supervisors to calculate capital ratios on many different bases, including the Basle capital standard. The Federal Reserve has no plans to change these policies and practices. The Basle Committee's press release and its report on "Enhancing Bank Transparency", can be obtained from the Internet ( ) or from the Basle Committee Secretariat at the Bank for International Settlements.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice and application of Charter One Financial, Inc., and its wholly owned subsidiary, Charter-Michigan Bancorp, Inc., both of Cleveland, Ohio (collectively "Charter One"), to become bank holding companies by acquiring ALBANK Financial Corporation ("ALBANK") and its subsidiary bank, ALBANK Commercial, both of Albany, New York, to acquire the nonbanking subsidiaries of ALBANK, and to retain some of Charter One's nonbanking subsidiaries. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Charter One Financial, Inc. Cleveland, Ohio Order Approving the Formation of Bank Holding Companies By order of the Board of Governors, effective October 28, 1998. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Appendix Commitments For Retaining Shares of Gateway Charter One Financial, Inc. ("COFI") and CMB have committed, jointly and severally, that they will not, directly or indirectly: Take any action to cause Gateway or any of its subsidiaries to become a subsidiary of COFI or CMB; Acquire or retain shares of Gateway that would cause the combined interests of COFI, CMB, their affiliates, officers, and directors to equal or exceed 10 percent of the outstanding voting shares of Gateway; Exercise or attempt to exercise a controlling influence over the management or policies of Gateway or any of its subsidiaries. Seek or accept representation by more than one director on the board of directors of Gateway or any of its subsidiaries; Serve, or have or seek to have any representative of COFI or CMB serve, as an officer, agent, or employee of Gateway or any of its subsidiaries; Propose more than one director in opposition to any nominee or slate of nominees proposed by management or the board of directors of Gateway; Solicit or participate in soliciting proxies with respect to any matter presented to the shareholders of Gateway; Attempt to influence Gateway's or any of its subsidiaries': dividend policies; loan, credit, or investment decisions; pricing of services; personnel decisions; operations activities, including the location of any offices or branches or their hours of operation, etc.; or any similar activities or decisions of Gateway or any of its subsidiaries; Enter into any other banking or nonbanking transactions with Gateway, except that COFI or CMB may establish and maintain deposit accounts with Gateway, provided that the aggregate balance of all such deposit accounts does not exceed $500,000, and provided that the accounts are maintained on substantially the same terms as those prevailing for comparable accounts of persons unaffiliated with COFI or CMB; and Dispose or threaten to dispose of shares of Gateway in any manner as a condition of specific action or nonaction by Gateway or any of its subsidiaries. Footnotes CMB controls Charter One Bank, F.S.B. ("Charter One Savings"), Cleveland, Ohio. Pursuant to the merger agreement between Charter One and ALBANK, ALBANK would be merged with and into CMB. ALBANK also has granted Charter One an option to acquire up to 9.9 percent of ALBANK's outstanding common stock. The option would expire on consummation of the merger. The Board has relied on similar commitments in other cases to determine that an investing bank holding company would not be able to exercise a controlling influence over another bank holding company or bank for purposes of the BHC Act. A complete list of these commitments is set forth in the Asset, deposit, and ranking data are as of June 30, 1997. 12 U.S.C. § 1842(c)(1). ALBANK Commercial received its charter from the State of New York on October 8, 1997, and has not yet been examined for CRA performance. 12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(4)(ii). Charter One has committed that it will conform all the insurance, annuities, real estate, and other nonconforming activities conducted by Charter One and its subsidiaries to the requirements of section 4 of the BHC Act within two years after consummation of the proposal. Charter One must also conform the savings bank life insurance activities conducted by ALBANK to the requirements of section 4 of the BHC Act within two years after consummation of the proposal. ALBANK already is required to conform its other activities to the requirements of section 4 of the BHC Act within two years of the date on which ALBANK became a bank holding company, and Charter One must conform these activities of ALBANK to the requirements of the BHC Act within that same period. See 12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(1), (b)(2)(i), (b)(2)(vi), (3), (4)(ii), (7)(i), (11)(i), (12) and (14). 12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8). Charter One Savings and ALBANK Savings do not compete in any relevant geographic market in providing savings association services. See, e.g., Banc One Corporation, 84 Federal Reserve Bulletin 553 (1998); First Union Corporation, 84 Federal Reserve Bulletin 489 (1998). Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Meyer, Ferguson, and Gramlich. Absent and not voting: Governor Kelley.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice and application of Firstar Corporation, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, to merge with Star Banc Corporation, Cincinnati, Ohio ("SBC"), and thereby acquire SBC's subsidiary bank, Star Bank, N.A., also of Cincinnati, Ohio, and SBC's nonbanking subsidiaries. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Firstar Corporation Milwaukee, Wisconsin Order Approving the Merger of Bank Holding Companies By order of the Board of Governors, effective October 28, 1998. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Appendix Nonbanking Activities of SBC Extending credit and servicing loans in accordance with section 225.28(b)(1) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(1)), through Star Banc Finance, Inc., Cincinnati, Ohio. Engaging in leasing personal or real property in accordance with section 225.28(b)(3) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(3)), through DJJ Leasing Limited, Cincinnati, Ohio. Engaging in credit insurance activities in accordance with section 225.28(b)(11)(i) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(11)(i)), through The Miami Valley Insurance Company, Cincinnati, Ohio. Providing data processing services in accordance with section 225.28(b)(14) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(14)), through Money Station, Inc., Cincinnati, Ohio.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application and notice of SunTrust Banks, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia, to acquire Crestar Financial Corporation, Richmond, Virginia, and thereby acquire Crestar Bank, Richmond, Virginia, and the nonbanking subsidiaries of Crestar Financial Corporation. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. SunTrust Banks, Inc. Atlanta, Georgia Order Approving the Acquisition of a Bank Holding Company By order of the Board of Governors, effective October 28, 1998. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Appendix Crestar Financial Corporation's Nonbanking Subsidiaries Crestar Securities Corporation, Richmond, Virginia ("Crestar Securities"), and thereby engage in extending credit and servicing loans, providing leasing services, providing financial and investment advisory services, providing securities brokerage, riskless principal, and private placement services, underwriting and dealing in bank-eligible securities, entering into futures, forwards, and options contracts for hedging purposes, and buying and selling bullion and related activities for the account of customers pursuant to sections 225.28(b)(1), (3), (6), (7), and (8) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(1), (3), (6), (7), and (8)); and underwriting and dealing in, to a limited extent, certain municipal revenue bonds, 1-4 family mortgage-related securities, consumer receivable-related securities, and commercial paper, as previously approved by the Board in Crestar Financial Corporation, 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin 512 (1997). Crestar Insurance Agency, Inc., Richmond, Virginia, and thereby engage in insurance agency activities, with Crestar Securities, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(11)(iv) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(11)(iv)), as discussed more fully in the Order. Crestar Community Development Corporation, Richmond, Virginia, and thereby engage in community development activities, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(12) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(12)). Honor Technologies, Inc., Maitland, Florida, and thereby engage in data processing and management consulting activities through the operation of an ATM and point-of-sale network, pursuant to sections 225.28(b)(9) and (14) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(9) and (14)).
Remarks by Governor Edward W. Kelley, Jr. At the Annual Economic Symposium at Houston Baptist University October 29, 1998 Countdown to Y2K: An Economic Assessment I am pleased to be back with you today to participate in this annual economic symposium hosted by the Houston Baptist University and the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas. These are challenging times for economic policymakers, and there are many issues currently facing our nation's central bank. One of them is the Year 2000 computer problem, and that is our subject for today. Much has been written on this topic, and I am sure that everyone here is familiar with the basic issue--specifically, that information generated by computers may be inaccurate, or that computers and other electronic systems may malfunction because they cannot correctly process Year 2000 dates. I will dwell no further on the nature of the problem itself, but rather attempt to focus on the likely economic impact of this problem. The economic stakes are very large, and the spectrum of possible outcomes very broad, ranging from minimal to extremely serious. For the truth of the matter is that this episode is unique: We really have had no previous experience with a challenge of this sort to give us reliable guideposts. Although the lack of a precedent may be unnerving, that certainly does not free us from the obligation to attempt to analyze how the millennium bug is affecting and will affect the economy. This economic puzzle has many complex pieces-some of them quite inscrutable before the event-and my task this morning is to assemble for you the tidbits of information that we do have into a coherent picture of where the Y2K problem appears likely to take us. Let me turn first to the reasons why the Year 2000 problem is so difficult to manage. Then I shall discuss the actions that are being taken by government and businesses to deal with the millennium bug and the effects these measures are having on economic activity at the present time. Finally, I shall turn--not without some trepidation, I might add--to the spectrum of plausible outcomes for the Year 2000, as I see it. As you shall shortly hear, I believe the Y2K pessimists have not fully recognized the attention that is being given to this problem and the significant progress that has already been made. Given what we know today, I am cautiously optimistic that the millennium bug will not cause major economic disruptions when it bites. The Difficulty of Managing the Y2K Problem Why has it been so difficult for people to come to terms with the Year 2000 problem? At the most basic level of any organization--be it public or private, large or small--the Y2K problem was all too easy to ignore. It is a hidden threat, cloaked in the arcane language of computer programs and in embedded microchips. As such, it was difficult at first for senior management in the corporate world and the public sector to recognize the serious nature of the problem. This was compounded by the fact that the costs and benefits of the situation for an individual operation are not easily quantified nor are they attractive. But after an initial period of denial, the majority of U.S. business leaders now have recognized the problem and are taking action to correct it. Nonetheless, given the pervasiveness of the problems involved, I suspect that even the most thoroughly prepared organizations are worried that something important might be missed. Indeed, many organizations are developing elaborate workarounds and other contingency plans as insurance against Y2K disruptions. Thus, uncertainty about the ultimate effectiveness of Y2K remediation programs already is affecting corporate investment and production plans and obviously will be with us until at least January 2000. The second feature of the millennium bug that makes it so difficult to analyze is the interrelated character of many computer systems. An individual company may be satisfied that it has done all it can to fix its own systems, but it still may feel very vulnerable to the actions taken by its suppliers and customers. In an environment where just-in-time inventory systems and electronic data interchanges (EDI) have linked economic activities very closely together, one firm's failure has the potential to ripple through significant segments of the chain of production, services, and distribution. Thus, greater coordination of Y2K remediation activities would have benefits for everyone. But it is clearly impossible to coordinate the Y2K activities of millions of individual establishments. To help fill this void, numerous organizations have emerged as clearinghouses of information, and I have high hopes for efforts such as "National Y2K Action Week," which was just sponsored by the Small Business Administration (for the President's Council on the Year 2000), together with a number of private groups. Other institutions are functioning as vehicles for system testing. Witness this past summer's inception of Federal Reserve payment system testing with its depository institution customers, and similar work by the Securities Industry Association. Bank supervisors, including the Federal Reserve, are holding their banks accountable for the effectiveness of their Y2K efforts, and I can assure you that there will be consequences for banks that do not fulfill their obligations. But many organizations are on their own to test their critical systems with their key suppliers and customers. Because this situation is both complex and fragmented, it is a very difficult task to quantify the aggregate costs of Y2K remediation. Similarly and perhaps more importantly, we also have no national scorecard on how effective our economy is being in our remediation efforts. Under these circumstances, it is not hard to understand why the millennium bug is viewed as such an unpredictable phenomenon, and why it has attracted so much gloom and doom commentary. What is Being Done? So, what is being done? The short answer is a lot is being done. Let me review with you our understanding of the status of efforts by the private sector, government entities, and the world community to deal with the Year 2000 problem. As far as the private sector is concerned, efforts to deal with the millennium bug have been intensifying. In my testimony before Congress in April, I suggested that the private sector might spend approximately $50 billion over the next two years to tackle the Y2K problem. This figure was based on a reading of the available corporate filings with the SEC as well as our own guestimates for firms that either are private, did not discuss Y2K expenditures in their 10-K reports, or stated that their Y2K programs were not having a "material" influence on their bottom line. We have updated our research using the latest quarterly reports, and we were pleased to find a larger percentage of firms discussing the costs of their Year 2000 strategies, and I am confident these funds are being used effectively. While our estimate of the "$50 billion bug" seems still to be reasonable, I fully expect to see this figure move upward over time. I also perceive that the tools available to companies to address Y2K issues have increased substantially. Over the past six months, most major computer hardware and software companies have released documentation of the Y2K readiness of their products on their web sites. Similarly, most of the major computer publications now have elaborate "how to" guides on their web pages that will aid consumers and small businesses in their efforts to make their systems Year 2000 compliant. Commercial software producers also have been busy, and new software products are becoming available to aid programmers in repairing code. I hope and believe people are availing themselves of these new resources. To paraphrase an old adage, "we have brought the Y2K horse to water, and he appears to be drinking!" As far as financial institutions are concerned, I am encouraged by the progress that has been made over the past year, and there is every reason to be confident that our financial system will be ready. Based on a review of all depository institutions completed by federal banking regulatory agencies, the vast majority are making satisfactory progress in their Year 2000 planning and readiness efforts. About four percent were rated "needs improvement" and fewer than one percent were rated "unsatisfactory." In these cases, the agencies have initiated intensive supervisory follow up, including restrictions on expansionary activities by Year 2000 deficient organizations. While we can be confident institutions are addressing the problem, it is important to recognize that regulators cannot be responsible for ensuring or guaranteeing the Year 2000 readiness and viability of the banking organizations that we supervise. Rather, the boards of directors and senior management of banks and other financial institutions must be responsible for ensuring the institutions they manage are able to provide high quality and continuous service in January 2000. The Federal Reserve System has itself made significant progress on Y2K issues, meeting all of the goals that we have set for ourselves. In addition to completing an initial review of the Y2K readiness of all banks subject to our supervisory authority, we have renovated our own mission-critical applications, nearly completed work on all others, and are close to completion of our internal testing. As mentioned, we have opened our mission-critical systems to customers for testing with us and have progressed significantly in our contingency planning efforts. This has required much hard work on the part of many people, but it is paying off in visible ways. As in the private sector, activity to fix computer systems maintained by the federal government is intensifying. Progress has been made in many areas, but the President's Council on the Year 2000 agrees that much work still needs to be done. Reviews of federal Y2K programs have highlighted needed areas of improvement, and the Congress has budgeted about $5-1/2 billion for Y2K fixes. Legislation also has been enacted that would facilitate the sharing of Y2K information among businesses and clarify the legal liability of reporting Y2K readiness information. All of these are positive developments. With the notable exception of the recent dress rehearsal in Lubbock, I must admit that far less is known about the effectiveness of the Y2K preparations by state and local governments. Attention often is focussed on high-profile systems such as the nation's air traffic control computers or the electric power grid, but there are many smaller, yet quite critical, electronic systems maintained by states and municipalities that also are very vulnerable. For example, innumerable vitally important computer-controlled utility systems are operated by local government units. And, as any Washington commuter will tell you, one or two malfunctioning traffic signals can cause serious congestion, confusion, and delay, and the complete breakdown of traffic management systems likely would cause near total gridlock. To try to get a handle on Y2K remediation activity at the state level, we surveyed the web pages of all fifty states and the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico. As best we can tell, the states that reported Y2K programs are budgeting $1 to $2 billion for this purpose. However, five states had no reference to Y2K preparedness and 23 states did not cite the cost estimates for their programs. Thus, based on this and other anecdotal evidence I have seen, I suspect that much work still needs to be done in this area as well. On the international level, there is both good news and bad. The governments of various industrialized nations have stepped up their own internal Y2K awareness and remediation programs over the past six months, and international cooperation is intensifying through efforts such as the Joint Year 2000 Council, chaired by my colleague Federal Reserve Governor Roger Ferguson. Most large multinational corporations report they are well along in their preparations worldwide. However, the conversion to the Euro and world financial troubles obviously are deflecting all too much attention away from Year 2000 issues, and I worry that time will simply run out for some countries--particularly in the developing world. As a result, risks exit for some level of disruption to international trade and capital flows. How are Year 2000 Preparations Affecting the Economy? Corporate efforts to deal with the Y2K problem are affecting economic activity in a variety of ways. On the positive side, an important element in some Y2K programs is the accelerated replacement of aging computer systems with modern, state-of-the-art hardware and software. Such capital expenditures should raise the level of productivity in those enterprises, and, in general, the need to address the Y2K problem has increased the awareness on the part of senior executives of the complexity and importance of managing corporate information technology resources. The increased replacement demand also has contributed to the spectacular recent growth in this country's computer hardware and software industries. But, ultimately, we are largely shifting the timing of these investment expenditures: Today's added growth is likely "borrowed" from spending at some time in the future. And, while accelerating some systems investments, many institutions will "freeze" their systems in the middle of 1999--effectively forgoing the installation of major new hardware and software systems as we approach the millennium. This certainly will also influence spending on technology--shifting some of it out of 1999 and into 2000. While a shift in the timing of investment spending may help to solve the Year 2000 problem for some firms, it certainly will not be sufficient. Most organizations do not have the option of simply scrapping their existing computer systems and replacing them with shiny new "turn-key" hardware and software. To one degree or another, we all rely on elaborate proprietary software systems that have been developed over many years, and these programs must be debugged by a skilled programmer. This obviously is a very labor-intensive and time-consuming process, and organizations have had to boost their IT staffs to carry out this work. The good news is that many got an early start on this problem and are now well along on their repair and testing programs. The bad news is that there is no corresponding increase in the firm's marketable output, and this lowers the overall level of productivity in the enterprise, boosts its costs, and reduces its profitability. One area in which uncertainty about Y2K readiness is likely to have noticeable effects on economic activity in 1999 is in the management of inventories. As the millennium approaches, I expect businesses will want to hold larger inventories of goods as insurance against Y2K-related supply disruptions. Such a shift from "just-in-time" inventory management to a "just-in-case" posture is likely to prompt an increase in orders and production during 1999. These stocks subsequently would be run off in the first half of 2000. We at the Fed, for example, will do precisely that in our management of the production of new currency. While Year 2000 preparation efforts may give a temporary boost to economic activity in some sectors, the net effect on the aggregate economy probably is negative. Other than the obviously very valuable ability to maintain its operations across the millennium, few quantifiable benefits accrue to the firm---and overall productivity gains are reduced by the extra hours devoted to reprogramming and testing. Conservative estimates suggest that the net effect of Y2K remediation efforts might shave a tenth or two a year off the growth of our nation's overall labor productivity, and a more substantial effect is possible if some of the larger estimates of Y2K costs turn out to be accurate. The effects on real gross domestic product are likely to be somewhat smaller than this but could still total a tenth of a percentage point or so a year over the next two years. What is the Spectrum of Plausible Outcomes for Economic Activity in 2000? As we have discussed, a great deal of work either is planned or is under way to deal with the Year 2000 problem. But what if something slips through the cracks, and we experience the failure of "mission critical" systems? How will a computer failure in one area of the economy affect the ability of others to continue to operate smoothly? How severe could be the consequences of Y2K problems emanating from abroad? The number of possible scenarios of this type is endless, and today no one can say with confidence how severe any Y2K disruptions could be or how a failure in one sector would influence activity in others. That said, let me now turn to a discussion of the spectrum of plausible outcomes for economic activity in the Year 2000. What will happen as the millennium rolls over? A few economists already are suggesting that Y2K-related disruptions will induce a deep recession in 2000. That probably is a stretch, but I do not think we will escape unaffected. I anticipate that there will be isolated production problems and disruptions to commerce, and perhaps some public services, that will reduce the rate of GDP growth early in 2000. Certainly a mild inventory cycle seems very likely to develop. But, just like the shocks to our nation's physical infrastructure that occur periodically, I would expect the Y2K shock to our information and electronic control infrastructure is most likely to be short-lived and fully reversed. We have many examples of how economic activity has been affected by disruptions to the physical infrastructure of this country. Although the Y2K problem clearly is unique, some of these disruptions to our physical infrastructure may be useful in organizing our thinking about the consequences of short-lived interruptions in our information infrastructure. In early 1996, a major winter storm paralyzed large portions of the country. Commerce ground to a halt for up to a week in some areas but activity bounced back rapidly once the roads were cleared again. Although individual firms and households were adversely affected by these disruptions, in the aggregate, the economy quickly recovered most of the output lost due to the storm. In this instance, the shock to our physical infrastructure was transitory in nature, and, critically, the recovery process was under way before any adverse "feedback" effects were produced. Last year's strike by workers at the United Parcel Service is a second example. UPS is a major player in the package delivery industry in this country, and the strike disrupted the shipping patterns of many businesses. Some sales were lost, but in most instances alternative shipping services were found for high-priority packages. Some businesses were hurt by the strike, but its effect on economic activity was small in the aggregate. Obviously an important element in any forecast for the Year 2000 is the degree to which the failure of the computer system at one institution causes ripple effects on the systems of others. If the disruptions that occur are not isolated events, as I have assumed, but spread across key sectors of the economy by interacting with each other, then an outright decline in real GDP in the first quarter of 2000 could be a plausible outcome. The more dire of the Y2K scenarios would involve, among other things, a perpetuation and intensification of these feedback effects. In such an event, production disruptions could turn out to be a national or international phenomenon and could spread from one industry to another. Under these circumstances, the decline in economic activity would prove to be longer lasting, and a recession-typically defined as a decline in real gross domestic product in two consecutive quarters-could ensue. But let me quickly stress that I do not think this recession scenario has a very high probability. It is possible, but a lot of things have to go wrong for it to occur, and much is being done to prevent its occurrence. What can Monetary Policy Do About the Millenium Bug? What can monetary policy do to offset any Y2K disruptions? The truthful answer is "not much." Just as we were not able to plow the streets in 1996 or deliver packages in 1997, the central bank will be unable to reprogram the nation's computers for the year 2000. The Y2K problem is primarily an issue affecting the aggregate "supply" side of the economy, whereas the Federal Reserve's monetary policy works mainly on aggregate "demand." We all understand how creating more money and lowering the level of short-term interest rates gives a boost to interest-sensitive sectors (such as homebuilding), but these tools are unlikely to be very effective in generating more Y2K remediation efforts or accelerating the recovery process if someone experiences some type of Year 2000 disruption. We will, of course, be ready if people want to hold more cash on New Year's Eve 1999, and we will be prepared to lend whatever sums may be needed to financial institutions through the discount window under appropriate circumstances or to provide needed reserves to the banking system. And, if a serious Y2K disruption should have significant feedback effects on aggregate demand-as I outlined in the recession scenario-there obviously would be a role for the Federal Reserve to play in countering the downturn. But there is nothing monetary policy can do to offset the direct effects of a Y2K disruption. Conclusion In summary, as I stated at the outset of my remarks, I am cautiously optimistic that the United States will weather the Year 2000 storm without major disruptions to economic activity. Some of the more frightening scenarios are not without a certain plausibility, if this challenge were being ignored. But it is not being ignored-as this symposium today clearly illustrates. An enormous amount of work is being done in anticipation of the rollover of the millennium. As the world's largest economy, the heaviest burden of preparation falls on the U.S. But it is truly a worldwide issue, and to the extent some are not adequately prepared and experience breakdowns of unforeseeable dimension, we shall all be affected accordingly. We at the Federal Reserve intend to do our utmost, and we hope and trust others will do likewise.