For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the scheduling of an additional day, July 10, and a time change for the public meeting in San Francisco on the proposal by NationsBank Corporation, Charlotte, North Carolina, to acquire BankAmerica Corporation, San Francisco, California. The Board on June 19 announced a public meeting on the proposal for July 9. Today, the Presiding Officer extended the meeting to a second day, July 10, to accommodate timely requests to testify at the public meeting. In addition, the meetings on both days will begin at 8:00 a.m. PDT, instead of 9:00 a.m. PDT, at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, 101 Market Street, San Francisco, California. Additional information about the public meeting was contained in the issued by the Board on June 19.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced adoption of a final rule that revises Regulation H. This rule removes outdated material, updates and reorganizes the remaining material, and incorporates provisions designed to reduce burden on state member banks. The Board also is rescinding Regulation P, which is no longer necessary since its provisions have been incorporated into Regulation H. Regulation P requires each bank to adopt appropriate security procedures. The final rules are effective October 1, 1998. The Board's notices are attached. | |
Remarks by Governor Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. Distinguished Speaker Series, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta July 9, 1998 Exercising Caution and Vigilance in Monetary Policy Introduction These are fascinating times for monetary policy. As we progress through the eighth year of the current economic expansion, economic growth has continued at a robust pace with unemployment reaching a 28-year low, while inflation has remained remarkably subdued. To be sure, not all recent developments have been altogether positive, especially considering the current situation in Asia. Nonetheless, the performance of the American economy in recent years has exceeded expectations in a rather extraordinary fashion. But recent developments have challenged our understanding of the workings of the macroeconomy. Although the recent surprises of both low unemployment and well-behaved inflation have been quite favorable, they have been surprises nonetheless and not easily reconcilable with each other based on old relationships and our earlier assessment of the economy's potential. These developments have increased the uncertainty about the economic outlook and about the appropriate response of monetary policy in general to new developments. I want to take this opportunity to discuss some implications of this increased uncertainty for the conduct of monetary policy. Before starting, let me remind you that these views are personal and do not necessarily reflect the views of other members of the FOMC or the Board of Governors. Objectives and Strategy for Monetary Policy To evaluate the proper strategy for monetary policy, we must first understand the Federal Reserve's policy objectives and then recognize the parameters within which policy operates in attaining these objectives. The long-run goal of monetary policy is straightforward. The Federal Reserve Act mandates that we promote price stability and maximum employment. Sometimes this dual objective is misunderstood, with the misconception that these inflation and employment goals cannot be attained simultaneously--that there is a tradeoff in the long run between one and the other. It is worthwhile repeating what I am sure all of you already understand well: the long-run goals of price stability and maximum employment are not mutually exclusive. Not so long ago, mainstream macroeconomists thought that employment and growth were by and large independent of inflation in the long run. But the evidence accumulating in the 1990s seems to suggest that low inflation contributes to real economic performance in ways not fully appreciated before. If anything, our approach to price stability, by reducing uncertainty and making long-run savings and investment decisions easier, seems to have enhanced the growth of productivity, real GDP, and employment. This indirect benefit, of course, reenforces the price stability goal. It is the rate of inflation that monetary policy determines in the long run, and this means that price stability in a straightforward way is elevated to the status of the primary long-run goal of monetary policy. Where a tradeoff can appear, and this I think is the source of occasional confusion, is over shorter periods. In the shorter run, inflation may rise and fall depending on where the economy is operating relative to its potential. When the economy has become overextended, with output exceeding the economy's potential, employment beyond sustainable norms, and production surpassing normal capacity limits, then prices have tended to increase at an ever faster rate. Likewise, when aggregate demand has fallen short of the economy's potential, inflation has tended to fall. And this is where the short-run setting of monetary policy comes into play. By moving short-term interest rates, monetary policy can affect other financial conditions and end up exerting a substantial influence on aggregate demand. Decisions by businesses about investment and by households about housing and consumption are altered by changes in interest rates and other credit conditions. Monetary policy also can indirectly impinge upon other components of aggregate demand. As a result, in the shorter run, monetary policy can play an important role in stabilizing the economy from undesired fluctuations in economic activity and inflation. The strategy for monetary policy geared towards these shorter-run concerns can be briefly described. It is to restrict monetary conditions when the economy seems on the way to becoming overheated and inflation is threatening and ease monetary conditions when signs of weakness in demand appear on the horizon. But it is important that we pursue these short-run goals keeping in mind our primary long-run goal of price stability. Of course, other forces besides the state of the economy relative to its potential can influence inflation in the short run. Even prior to the anomalous experience of recent years, which I will discuss later in detail, supply shocks, such as a sudden hike in oil prices, have dramatically affected inflation. Such forces can also cause short-term fluctuations in the economy that are, at least in part, beyond the control of monetary policy. However, active stabilization policy may still have a role to play as a buffer, helping the economy to absorb such disturbances in the short run, while counteracting any persistent deviations from price stability. But monetary policy operates with a long lag, with a policy change exhibiting material effects on the economy (excluding the immediate impact on financial markets) only several quarters after its implementation. By some estimates it may be almost a year before the brunt of the effect of an interest rate change is felt on aggregate demand, although the influence appears sooner in some sectors of the economy than in others. And it may generally take longer still for a policy change to alter the course of inflation. Consequently, active stabilization policy is most successful when it is preemptive, responding to early warning signals or forecasts of unfavorable developments on the inflation and employment fronts. In this regard, by identifying past regularities in relationships among economic variables and understanding their conceptual underpinnings, we can use the most recent economic data to update forecasts of where the economy is headed. Based on these forecasts we can then take steps to adjust the stance of monetary policy as necessary, in accordance with our objectives. Uncertainties: Old and New To be useful for monetary policy, forecasts of the future health of the economy need to be reasonably reliable. Good forecasts rest on theories about empirical regularities that can be confidently relied upon to provide guidance. Regrettably, accepted theories are found lacking at times, empirical models break down, and forecasts based on them prove unusually inaccurate. If monetary policy were naively to follow guidelines based on past regularities that are increasingly failing to reflect new realities, it would unintentionally introduce undesirable gyrations in the economy. Thus, heightened uncertainties regarding the workings of the economy pose an additional source of stress in policy design. To ascertain the appropriate framework for policy analysis we must first be aware of some key sources of uncertainty. In recent years, traditional views of the economy perhaps have been most challenged by the phenomenon of declining inflation despite increasing tightness in labor markets as evidenced by reductions in the unemployment rate to its lowest level in almost three decades. Many believe that there is an unemployment rate, the nonaccelerating-inflation rate of unemployment (the "NAIRU"), that would be consistent with a stable inflation rate, once other short-run influences on inflation dissipate. To these economists, inflationary pressures tend to increase when unemployment remains below the NAIRU and tend to decrease when unemployment stays above the NAIRU. For many years proponents of this view considered 6 percent a reasonable estimate of the NAIRU. Since 1995, however, the unemployment rate has been below this level, and substantially below of late, while inflation has continued to progress toward our price-stability objective. In response, over the past few years, many observers have revised their estimates of the NAIRU down by half a percentage point or more. Yet considerable uncertainty remains about the confidence with which the new estimates can be relied upon for evaluating inflationary pressures. The NAIRU never was measured with precision; statistical inference has always provided a distribution of likely values around a point estimate. And several factors, for instance the demographic composition of the labor force, have long been known to introduce systematic variation in its value over time. Nonetheless, the uncertainties about how structural forces may be changing the NAIRU seem unusually large at present and cannot be ignored. And for some the present uncertainties have called into further question the basic usefulness of the concept, or at least of a point estimate held with any confidence. A related uncertainty concerns the underlying trend growth of labor productivity. Until fairly recently, this trend had seemed to have been about constant since the mid 1970s. But there are many that believe that a pickup may have occurred in the last few years, and a faster productivity trend would help to explain the unexpectedly favorable economic growth-unemployment-inflation nexus in recent years. Unfortunately, much as with the NAIRU, our understanding of the forces that drive the productivity trend is less than perfect. Certainly, the investment boom of the current expansion has raised the amount of capital for each worker and contributed to an increase in labor productivity, and it may be that advancing technology is making the capital stock and workforce more productive. However, some of the recent pickup in productivity is the normal response to the faster output growth of late, so the degree to which there is a new higher trend remains an open question. Another difficulty in assessing the current amount of slack in the economy, and a third uncertainty, concerns the divergent patterns in alternative measures of excess demand. Capacity utilization in manufacturing and the rate of unemployment have historically moved together over the cycle. Unexpectedly, they have diverged in the current expansion, in part as the surge in investment has kept capacity utilization in the manufacturing sector near its historic average while labor markets have become tighter and tighter. Recent developments in Southeast Asia also have contributed to uncertainty about the current monetary policy environment. One place where the effect of the crisis is being felt is in the prices of primary commodities. Since such commodities are traded on world markets, lower demand from Asia is reflected in lower prices world-wide, which benefit U.S. producers that use commodities as inputs. This development serves as a short-run boost, a positive supply shock, to the U.S. economy, one that also helps contain inflationary pressures, as does the more general decline in import prices as the U.S. dollar appreciates. But the Asian crisis can be expected to continue to have an adverse impact on trade-sensitive industries. Some evidence of a deterioration of our trade balance with the region's economies has already appeared. With little historical guidance to draw from, however, considerable uncertainty prevails regarding the extent to which the present Asian situation may contribute to slower U.S. growth as well as the timing of such a slowdown. For instance, despite expectations that the crisis would have contributed to a slowdown in economic activity earlier this year, the economy's growth in the first quarter of this year exceeded even the remarkable performance of 1997. However, more recent data reflecting developments in the second quarter, including survey information, do give some evidence of a slowing in the overall economy, especially the manufacturing sector, perhaps due to Asian financial turmoil. As you might suspect, we will continue to watch incoming data quite closely as the year progresses to get a better handle on this situation. To be sure, uncertainties such as these have loomed large at times in the past, and we can learn much from those experiences. The uncertainties faced by policymakers during the 1970s about the economy's potential provide an enlightening perspective on the present situation. Following a period of rapid productivity gains during the 1950s and 1960s, the economy's performance during the 1970s appeared out of line with previous experience. Starting in 1973, in particular, inflation rose more than expected, at times considerably so, while economic growth tended to disappoint expectations for a number of years. At first, it appeared reasonable to assume that the observed productivity slowdown was temporary. Reflecting this assumption, for instance, the Council of Economic Advisors gave a 4 percent estimate of potential output growth in the 1974 Economic Report of the President, as would have been consistent with the earlier trends. Increased uncertainty regarding this estimate was evident in the 1975 and 1976 Reports, but not until 1977 was the point estimate of potential output growth revised downward, to 3.6 percent. As the economy's performance continued to disappoint, further downward revisions followed, to 3 percent in 1979 and to 2.5 percent to close the decade in 1980. Only several years after the fact was a trend break in productivity recognized as likely to have occurred in 1973. And even today our understanding of the forces contributing to the slowdown is not entirely satisfactory. As inflation accelerated as the 1970s continued, critics blamed the Federal Reserve's operating procedures for placing too little weight on money growth and too much on interest rates in the conduct of policy. In response, the Federal Reserve in late 1979 put added emphasis on monetary growth targets. But the FOMC abandoned the strict regime of targeting M1 through reserve quantities in 1982 once evidence accumulated that the character of M1 demand had been altered by the spread of interest-bearing NOW accounts. Later, the break in the behavior of M2 velocity during the early 1990s from its earlier historical pattern undercut the indicator properties of that aggregate as well. In 1993, the FOMC de-emphasized the role of the broader aggregates in policymaking. Despite recent tentative signs that the relationship between M2 velocity and the cost of holding M2 assets may be returning to its earlier historical norms, uncertainty persists regarding the continued stability of this relationship. In terms of the performance of inflation and unemployment, the experience of the past few years has not been unlike a mirror image of the 1970s. While the consequences are a lot more pleasant, unexpectedly low inflation and unemployment do raise some complicated issues for monetary policy. Strategy in Uncertain Times: Caution and Vigilance This account of the sources of uncertainty that we face in designing the proper course of monetary policy should not leave the impression that our task is so daunting that the policy waters are unnavigable. But such an account does serve a valuable purpose in reminding us that in designing policy we should recognize our ignorance as well as trust our knowledge. For instance, we need to recognize the difficulties of inferring the true structure of the economy by interpreting incoming data. How do we know whether unexpected developments are just temporary moves away from stable longer-run relationships or are manifestations of changes in the underlying economic structure? In many cases this judgment is difficult to make with much confidence until considerably after the fact. In the meantime, we must bear in mind that the statistical relationships we work with are only loose approximations of underlying reality, which is constantly evolving, at least to some extent, in response to changes in technology, consumer preferences, and government policies. Our vision is always obstructed by some haze. But sometimes the picture is clearer than at other times. Because of these difficulties in assessing the situation, a balanced judgment is required in evaluating whether historical regularities are indeed changing significantly and are not just subject to temporary aberrations. I believe that one should guard against holding to old truths that may no longer be valid, but one should also be cautious about declaring that permanent changes have occurred, for there are too many examples of proclaimed "new eras" that did not in fact come to pass. Erroneously dismissing the continued validity of old truths could result in bad policy just as easily as failing to correctly recognize new realities when change occurs. What should be done when uncertainties seem particularly acute? When we suspect that our understanding of the macroeconomic environment has deteriorated appreciably, as evidenced by strings of surprises difficult to reconcile with our earlier beliefs, I think that the appropriate response is to rely less upon the future predicted by the increasingly unreliable old gauges and more upon inferences from the more recent past, weighing incoming data more heavily relative to more distant data in trying to discern the new environment. Even for those of us who take this more pragmatic approach, there are challenges. Recent data, on which our understanding of the new reality is based, are subject to revision as more reliable or more complete sources become available. Moreover, there are often several indices for measuring underlying economic circumstances, requiring one to consider various measures simultaneously. In the current context, the considerable uncertainty regarding our previous estimates of the capacity of the economy and its sustainable rate of growth in my judgment suggest the need to downplay forecasts of inflation based on those earlier assessments. By necessity, I believe heightened reliance needs to be placed on more recent observations of inflation and costs for inferring future inflationary pressures. We are not precluded from acting preemptively if new information were to tip the balance of risks in the outlook toward higher inflation, but are naturally a little more cautious in acting on forecasts as long as substantial uncertainty persists. As a consequence, the lead times for preemptive action are likely to be shorter. And, in my judgment, we may have to rely more on measures other than apparent excess demand to get reliable indications of pending changes in inflationary pressures. For instance, unit labor costs may have to be watched especially closely, and the rate of unemployment perhaps less closely than we are used to. But a pattern of unsustainable growth characterized by a continuously declining unemployment rate still may increasingly suggest greater inflation risk. Even if the limits of the economy's growth potential have moved, there are still limits that need to be respected. The increased uncertainty also implies that continued strong economic growth with low inflation is not outside the realm of possibility, and by adopting a cautious policy posture we may learn more clearly if that possibility is likely or remote. It should be clear that the creation of new jobs, by itself, is a welcomed development. There are benefits to all from the skill building that occurs on the job. It is important, however, that these jobs be the result of sustainable growth, and not the result of excesses and imbalances. However, caution can be excessive, running the risk that inflation may in fact reappear and require a more wrenching readjustment than if it had been anticipated. Uncertainty should not induce paralysis. We need to be willing to move, even if cautiously, knowing that we may have to reverse our action if subsequent developments differ from our expectations. Moreover, we must be willing to act forcefully if information suggesting a threat to our goal of price stability becomes available. Inflation is an insidious tax on all of our citizens, perhaps impacting low- and moderate-income citizens more than others because there are fewer ways available to them to protect their income and their assets against an erosion of purchasing power. If evidence of an incipient rise in inflation were to appear, decisive action would provide a counterweight to minimize the building of a temporary inflationary aberration into inflation expectations, which could be disruptive. And this is why caution and vigilance go hand in hand under these circumstances of increased uncertainty. Moreover, it is at uncertain times such as these that the wisdom underlying the institutional structure of the FOMC becomes most apparent. A committee with broad representation can bring a variety of perspectives and analyses to bear on difficult economic problems. In addition, the real-time reports the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks bring from their districts are especially valuable in the decision-making process at times like these because they afford a contemporaneous sense of what is going on in the economy. Such diversity of information sources becomes particularly useful when our earlier assessment of the economy's potential has been drawn into question by surprises, even pleasant ones. Conclusion A string of favorable surprises yielding strong growth, high employment and low inflation is by far the most pleasant environment under which to come to the realization that our understanding of the workings of our complex economy is not infallible. A sound economy with subdued inflation makes dealing with the greater uncertainty much easier indeed! The Federal Reserve has an important trust to help safeguard the health of the United States economy. What we should do in the face of some uncertainty is to act cautiously while remaining vigilant, to take measured steps when necessary, and to adjust to the occasional unforeseen change. In this way we will raise the odds of achieving our goals of stable prices and maximum employment, not only providing benefits to Americans, but also a stable anchor for a volatile world economy.
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan The implications of technological changes At the Charlotte Chamber of Commerce, Charlotte, North Carolina July 10, 1998 It is a pleasure to be in Charlotte today. Before I ever visited your fair city or state, indeed, before I had traveled very far from the environs of Yankee Stadium, I developed a special affinity for Charlotte. In the evenings when I was a boy, I often tuned in the clear radio channel stations around the country--those assigned a unique wavelength--and WBT Charlotte was one that I recall listening to quite often when the atmospherics were just right. By that time radio was not exactly on the cutting edge of technology, but it was not very far from it either. In those days, no one thought of Charlotte as an important national banking center, but as we moved from the vacuum tube of radio to the transistor and silicon chip of current technology, both technological change and the resulting erosion of restrictive laws have permitted creative management to establish financial centers in this country wherever convenient. The implications of today's relentless technological changes are my subject matter this afternoon. The United States is currently confronting what can best be described as another industrial revolution. The rapid acceleration of computer and telecommunications technologies is a major reason for the appreciable increase in our productivity in this expansion, and is likely to continue to be a significant force in expanding standards of living into the twenty-first century. Technological change is but one part of a broader set of forces: an ever increasing conceptualization of our Gross Domestic Product--the substitution, in effect, of ideas for physical matter in the creation of economic value. The roots of increasing conceptualization of output lie deep in human history, but the pace of such substitution probably picked up in the early stages of the first industrial revolution, when science and machines created new leverage for human energy. Nonetheless, even as recently as the middle of this century, the symbols of American economic strength were our outputs of such products as steel, motor vehicles, and heavy machinery--items for which sizable proportions of production costs reflected the value of raw materials and the sheer manual labor required to manipulate them. Since then, trends toward conceptualization have focused today's views of economic advancement increasingly on downsized, smaller, less "concrete" evidence of output, requiring more technologically sophisticated labor input. The radio on which I listened to WBT was activated by large vacuum tubes; today we have elegantly designed pocket-sized units using transistors to perform the same function--but with the higher quality of sound and greater reliability that consumers now expect. Thin fiber-optic cable has replaced huge tonnages of copper wire. Advances in architecture and engineering, as well as the development of lighter but stronger materials, now give us the same working space, but in buildings with significantly less concrete, glass, and steel tonnage than was required in an earlier era. The process of conceptualization in output seems to have accelerated in recent decades with the advent of inventions such as the semiconductor, the microprocessor, the computer, and the satellite. The cutting edge of the new technologies is evidenced by the huge expansion in the dollar value of international trade, but significantly not so in tonnage. Pounds per inflation-adjusted dollar of American exports, for example, have been falling several percent per year during the past two decades. In the 1980s and early 1990s, many of us were puzzled that the growth of output as customarily measured did not evidence a pickup. Of course, output may have been measured incorrectly. But is it also possible that some of the frenetic pace of change was mere wheel spinning--changing production inputs without increasing output--rather than real advances in productivity. A number of commentators, particularly Professor Paul David of Stanford University, suggested a decade ago that much of the wheel spinning, if that is what it was, reflected the extended time it typically takes to translate a major new technology into increased productivity and higher standards of living. Indeed, it was conjectured that the big increases in productivity resulting from the introduction of computers and communications equipment lay in the future. If true, he pointed out, this would not be historically unusual. Past innovations, such as the advent of electricity or the invention of the gasoline-powered motor, required considerable infrastructure before their full potential could be realized. Electricity, when it substituted for steam power late last century, was initially applied to production processes suited to steam. Gravity was used to move goods vertically in the steam environment, and that could not immediately change with the advent of electric power. It was only when horizontal factories, newly designed for optimal use of electric power, began to dominate our industrial system many years after electricity's initial introduction, that productivity clearly accelerated. Similarly, it was only when modern highways and gasoline service stations became extensive that the lower cost of motor vehicle transportation became evident. While the evidence of a pickup in long-term productivity growth is still sparse, recent accelerations in output per work hour have lent some credence to Professor David's speculations. The same forces that have been reshaping the real economy have also been transforming the financial services industry. Once again, perhaps the most profound development has been the rapid growth of computer and telecommunications technology. The advent of such technology has lowered the cost and broadened the scope of financial services. These developments have made it increasingly possible for borrowers and lenders to transact directly and for a wide variety of financial products to be tailored for very specific purposes. As a result, competitive pressures in the financial services industry are probably greater than ever before. Technological innovation has accelerated another major trend--financial globalization--that has been reshaping our financial system, not to mention the real economy, for at least three decades. Both developments have expanded cross-border asset holdings, trading, and credit flows. In response, both securities firms and U.S. and foreign banks have increased their cross-border operations. Once again, a critical result has been greatly increased competition both at home and abroad. Still another development reshaping financial markets--deregulation--has been as much a reaction to technological change and globalization as an independent factor. The sharply enhanced market signals emanating from the vast set of technology-driven new products have undermined much regulation which rested on the ability to maintain market segregation. Moreover, the continuing evolution of markets suggests that it will be increasingly difficult to support some of the remaining rules and regulations established for a different economic environment. While the ultimate public policy goals of economic growth and stability will remain unchanged, market forces will continue to make it ever more difficult to sustain outdated restrictions, as we have recently seen with respect to interstate banking and branching. But change often comes slowly, and is viewed as threatening by many. Indeed, it is frequently difficult to reform the rules of the game, as it were, because change requires easing rules and opening options for some while increasing competition for others, redrawing lines that create new limits, and applying some pre-existing regulatory structures to new institutions. However, in my judgment, our financial system has clearly reached the stage where pressures from the market will force dramatic changes regardless of existing statutory and regulatory limits. The ability of financial managers to innovate and find loopholes seems endless. Recognizing this reality, the congressional leadership appears to have made the decision to attempt to fashion a new set of rules that are both comprehensive and perceived as equitable to all participants. For the Federal Reserve, the basic focus of such a redesign has been the implications of expanded powers, that we fully support, on the special benefits now provided to banks by the federal safety net. In order to help assure stability in the banking system, our society has chosen to provide banks with deposit insurance, access to the discount window, and payment system guarantees. These privileges, while succeeding in enhancing the stability of the system, have also provided a subsidy to banks in the form of a lower cost of funds. Access to the sovereign credit of the United States has meant that bank creditors feel less need to be concerned about the risk-taking of their bank. This requires that the government oversee the risk exposure of banks through supervision and regulation, that is, for government to substitute itself for the market discipline faced by those financial businesses that do not have access to the federal safety net. In the Federal Reserve Board's judgment, the dismantling of Depression Era separations of financial activities must consider the necessity of containing the safety net subsidy within the existing banking system. The more the safety net is expanded to cover new financial activities the greater the potential that risk-taking will not be subject to market discipline, that bank-like supervision would need to be applied over a wider range, and that financial innovation--the hallmark of the U.S. financial system--will thus be constrained. In May, as you know, the House of Representatives passed financial modernization legislation, H.R. 10, that permits banks, securities, and insurance firms to affiliate. Recognizing the problems of the safety net I have just discussed, the House adopted the holding company structure, and not the universal bank structure proposed by the Treasury, as the appropriate means to allow the new securities and insurance affiliations. That decision is fundamental to the way in which the financial services industry will develop in the 21st century. The Treasury supports giving national banks the authority to conduct, through subsidiaries of banks, the same powers that are contemplated for the holding company in H.R. 10. Under this approach, equity investments by a bank in its subsidiary can be financed at the same subsidized cost of capital available to the bank itself. The subsidy results from the bank's access to the safety net. As a consequence, the bank's operating subsidiary (or "op sub") would have a subsidized advantage in competing with nonbanking financial institutions endeavoring to offer the same services. In contrast, when these services are financed through an essentially unsubsidized affiliate of a holding company, as mandated by H.R. 10, that competitive advantage is largely neutralized. Although the Board strongly favors the new powers embodied in H.R. 10, we believe they should be financed by the marketplace, not subsidized with the sovereign credit of the United States. Importantly, large losses in the bank op sub can also imperil the bank and the deposit insurance reserves. Uninsured holding company affiliates provide much greater protection for the banks, the insurance funds, and ultimately the taxpayer. In addition, should banking organizations be offered a choice between placing new powers in an op sub or a holding company affiliate, they will, if profit is their goal, invariably choose the op sub and its subsidized funding. As a consequence, the holding company structure would atrophy in favor of the universal bank. This is not a problem in itself. But the Federal Reserve's current ability to confront a financial crisis expeditiously rests on our role as holding company supervisor--a regulatory regime that would be quite difficult to replace. Potential significant loss of adequate Federal Reserve hands-on supervisory capability has become an especially important issue in light of the increase of banking megamergers. The House-passed bill creates real difficulties for some observers since it would not permit commercial affiliations with banks. Technological change has already eroded the distinction between some financial and nonfinancial products. This erosion will only accelerate in the years ahead. Nonetheless, we at the Fed agree with the House decision simply because it is exceptionally difficult to predict with any degree of certainty the implications of combining banking and commerce. Since the decision to do so would surely be irreversible, we would prefer, therefore, that the rather far-reaching financial reform embodied in H.R. 10 be digested before we proceed toward combining banking and commerce. There is no time or market urgency that requires haste. Moreover, the Asian crisis has highlighted some of the risks that can arise if relationships between banks and commercial firms are too close. It is not so much that U.S. entities would evolve structures like those in Indonesia, Thailand, or Korea. Rather, it is the experience that the interaction of complex structures can make it extremely difficult for management to monitor, analyze, and oversee financial exposures. I do wish to note, however, that while H.R. 10 would permit financial affiliation over a wide range, and while current and proposed mergers would create nationwide banks and financial service companies, not all institutions would prosper as, nor desire to be, financial supermarkets. Many specialized providers of financial services are successful today, and will be so in the future, because of their advantages in specific financial services. Moreover, especially at commercial banks, the demand for traditional services by smaller businesses and by households should continue to flourish. And the information revolution, while it has deprived banks of some of the traditional lending business with their best customers, has also benefitted banks by making it less costly for them to assess the credit and other risks of customers they would previously have shunned. Thus, it seems most likely that banks of all types will continue to engage in a substantial amount of traditional banking, delivered, of course, by ever improving technology. Community banks, in particular, are likely to provide loans and payments services via traditional banking. Indeed, smaller banks have repeatedly demonstrated their ability to survive and prosper in the face of major technological and structural changes by providing traditional banking services to their customers. The evidence is clear that well-managed smaller banks can, and will, exist side by side with larger banks and other financial services providers, often maintaining or increasing local market share. Technological change has facilitated this process by providing smaller banks with low- cost access to new products and services. In short, the record shows that well-managed smaller banks have little to fear from technology, deregulation, or consolidation. Most projections of the future United States banking structure call for a substantial reduction in the number of American banks. But these same projections also predict that thousands of banks will survive the consolidation trend, reflecting both their individual efficiencies and competitive skills, on the one hand, and the preferences of the marketplace on the other. Such conclusions of the Federal Reserve Board's staff and others reinforce my own view that the franchise value of the U.S. community bank--based on its intimate and personalized knowledge of local markets and customers, its organizational flexibility, and, most of all, its management skills--will remain high, assuring that community banks continue to play a significant role in the U.S. financial system. Technology can never fully displace the value of personal contact, the hallmark of community banking. In closing, let me simply reiterate that the pace of technological change, of globalization of markets, and of the pressures for deregulation can only increase. These changes are affecting both financial and nonfinancial institutions around the world. In most American industries, the responses to these market forces do not require either the Congress or an agency of government to grant permission for the necessary adjustments. However, many of our regulated financial institutions find themselves unable to respond in the most efficient and effective way because of outdated statutory limitations. If these are not revised, my reading of history suggests that the affected entities will find ways to survive, but using methods that do not provide the highest quality and lowest cost services to the American public. Only Congress can establish the ground rules to assure that competitive responses provide maximum net benefits to consumers and a fair and level playing field for all participants.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice of Commerce Bancorp, Inc., Cherry Hill, New Jersey, to engage de novo through its wholly owned subsidiary, Commerce Capital Markets, Inc., Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, in underwriting and dealing to a limited extent in all types of debt and equity securities (other than ownership interests in open-end investment companies). Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Commerce Bancorp, Inc. Cherry Hill, New Jersey Order Approving a Notice to Engage in Underwriting and Dealing in All Types of Debt and Equity Securities on a Limited Basis Commerce Bancorp, Inc. ("Commerce"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8)) and section 225.24 of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.23) to expand the activities of its section 20 subsidiary, Commerce Capital Markets, Inc., Philadelphia, Pennsylvania ("Company"), to include underwriting and dealing in, to a limited extent, all types of debt and equity securities (other than ownership interests in open-end investment companies). Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (63 Federal Register 28,386 (1998)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the notice and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Commerce, with total consolidated assets of approximately $4 billion, operates subsidiary banks in New Jersey and Pennsylvania. Company currently engages in limited underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities, as permitted under section 20 of the Glass-Steagall Act (12 U.S.C. § 377). Company currently is, and will continue to be, a broker-dealer registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. § 78a et seq. ) and is a member of the National Association of Securities Dealers, Inc. ("NASD"). Company, therefore, is subject to the record-keeping and reporting obligations, fiduciary standards, and other requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the SEC, and the NASD. The Board previously has determined -- subject to the framework of prudential limitations established in previous decisions to address the potential for conflicts of interests, unsound banking practices, or other adverse effects -- that underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities are so closely related to banking as to be proper incidents thereto within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. The Board also has determined that conduct of bank-ineligible securities underwriting and dealing is consistent with section 20 of the Glass-Steagall Act (12 U.S.C. § 377), provided that the company engaged in the activity derives no more than 25 percent of its gross revenues from underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities. Commerce has committed that Company will conduct its underwriting and dealing activities using the methods and procedures and subject to the prudential limitations established by the Board in the Section 20 Orders and other previous cases. Commerce also has committed that Company will conduct its bank-ineligible securities underwriting and dealing activities subject to the Board's revenue restrictions. As a condition of this order, Commerce is required to conduct its bank-ineligible securities activities subject to the revenue limitations and Operating Standards established for section 20 subsidiaries ("Operating Standards"). In order to approve the proposal, the Board also must determine that the proposed activities are a proper incident to banking, that is, that the proposed transaction "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public . . . that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices." As part of its evaluation of these factors, the Board considers the financial and managerial resources of the notificant, its subsidiaries, and any company to be acquired, and the effect the transaction would have on such resources. The Board has reviewed the capitalization of Commerce and Company in accordance with the standards set forth in the Section 20 Orders and finds the capitalization of each to be consistent with approval. With respect to Company, this determination is based on all the facts of record, including projections of the volume of Company's underwriting and dealing activities in bank-ineligible securities. The Board also has reviewed the managerial resources of Commerce and Company in light of relevant reports of examination and all the facts of record. On the basis of all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that financial and managerial considerations are consistent with approval of this notice. As noted above, Commerce has committed that Company will conduct its bank-ineligible securities underwriting and dealing activities in accordance with the prudential framework established by the Board's Section 20 Orders. Under the framework and conditions established in this order and the Section 20 Orders, the Board concludes that consummation of this proposal is not likely to result in any significantly adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices. The Board also expects that the proposed expansion of the underwriting and dealing services of Company would provide added convenience to Commerce's customers, lead to improved methods of meeting customers' financing needs, and increase the level of competition among existing providers of these services. Accordingly, the Board has determined that performance of the proposed activities by Commerce can reasonably be expected to produce public benefits that outweigh possible adverse effects under the proper incident to banking standard of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. On the basis of the record, the Board has determined that the notice should be, and hereby is, approved, subject to all the terms and conditions discussed in this order and in the Section 20 Orders, as modified by the Modification Orders. The Board's approval of this proposal extends only to activities conducted within the limitations of those orders and this order, including the Board's reservation of authority to establish additional limitations to ensure that Company's activities are consistent with safety and soundness, avoidance of conflicts of interests, and other relevant considerations under the BHC Act. Underwriting and dealing in any manner other than as approved in this order and the Section 20 Orders (as modified by the Modification Orders) is not authorized for Company. The Board's approval of this proposal to underwrite and deal in all types of debt and equity securities also is conditioned on a determination that Commerce and Company have established policies and procedures to ensure compliance with the Operating Standards and the other requirements of this order and the Section 20 Orders, including computer, audit, and accounting systems, internal risk management controls, and the necessary operational and managerial infrastructure for underwriting and dealing in all types of debt and equity securities ("infrastructure review"). After notification that this condition has been satisfied, Company may commence the proposed underwriting and dealing activities, subject to the other conditions of this order, the Section 20 Orders, and the Modification Orders. The Board's determination is subject to all the terms and conditions set forth in Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.25(c) (12 C.F.R. 225.7 and 225.25(c)), and to the Board's authority to require modification or termination of the activities of a bank holding company or any of its subsidiaries that the Board finds necessary to assure compliance with, or to prevent evasion of, the provisions and purposes of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders issued thereunder. The Board's decision is specifically conditioned on compliance with all the commitments made in connection with this notice, including the commitments discussed in this order and the conditions set forth in the Board's regulations and orders noted above. The commitments and conditions shall be deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. This proposal shall not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective July 13, 1998. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Footnotes Asset data are as of December 31, 1997. As used in this order, "bank-ineligible securities" refers to all types of debt and equity securities that a member bank may not underwrite or deal in directly under section 16 of the Glass-Steagall Act. See 12 U.S.C. § 335. Company has authority to underwrite and deal in, to a limited extent, certain municipal revenue bonds, 1-4 family mortgage-related securities, commercial paper, and consumer-receivable-related securities. See Commerce Bancorp, Inc., 84 Federal Reserve Bulletin 358 (1998). Company also is authorized to engage in a variety of other nonbanking activities. See id. See J.P. Morgan & Co. Incorporated, et al., 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 192 (1989), aff'd sub nom. Securities Industries Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 900 F.2d 360 (D.C. Cir. 1990); Citicorp, et al., 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 473 (1987), aff'd sub nom. Securities Industry Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 839 F.2d 47 (2d Cir.), cert. denied, 486 U.S. 1059 (1988); as modified by Review of Restrictions on Director, Officer and Employee Interlocks, Cross-Marketing Activities, and the Purchase and Sale of Financial Assets Between a Section 20 Subsidiary and an Affiliated Bank or Thrift, 61 Federal Register 57,679 (1996); Amendments to Restrictions in the Board's Section 20 Orders, 62 Federal Register 45,295 (1997); and Clarification to the Board's Section 20 Orders, 63 Federal Register 14,803 (1998) (collectively, "Section 20 Orders"). Compliance with the revenue limitation shall be calculated in accordance with the method stated in the Section 20 Orders, as modified by the Order Approving Modifications to the Section 20 Orders, 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 751 (1989), and 10 Percent Revenue Limit on Bank-Ineligible Activities of Subsidiaries of Bank Holding Companies Engaged in Underwriting and Dealing in Securities, 61 Federal Register 48,953 (1996) (collectively, "Modification Orders"). 12 C.F.R. 225.200. Company may provide services that are necessary incidents to the proposed underwriting and dealing activities. Unless Company receives specific approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act to conduct the activities independently, any revenues from the incidental activities must be treated as ineligible revenues subject to the Board's revenue limitation. See 12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8). See 12 C.F.R. 225.26(b). Voting for this action: Governors Kelley, Meyer, Ferguson, and Gramlich. Absent and not voting: Chairman Greenspan and Vice Chair Rivlin.
Testimony of Governor Laurence H. Meyer Comment on a draft banking regulatory relief bill Before the Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit of the Committee on Banking and Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives July 16, 1998 The Board of Governors appreciates this opportunity to comment on the discussion draft regulatory relief bill. The Board welcomes this legislation and supports its purpose of revising outdated banking statutes that are imposing costs without providing commensurate benefits to the safety and soundness of depository institutions, enhancing consumer protection, or expanding credit availability. As the members of this Subcommittee are aware, unnecessary regulatory burdens hinder the ability of banking organizations to compete effectively in the broader financial services marketplace and, ultimately, adversely affect the availability and prices of banking services and credit products to consumers. In my testimony today, I would like to highlight those provisions of this legislation that the Board supports and believes are particularly significant in reducing burden and promoting efficient regulation. For example, the Board strongly endorses the measures in this bill that would immediately allow banks to pay interest on demand deposits and the Federal Reserve System to pay interest on the required and excess reserve balances held by depository institutions at the Federal Reserve Banks. The Board also strongly supports the protections embodied in Title V of this bill, the Bank Examination Report Privilege Act, which promote effective bank supervision by enhancing the cooperative exchange of information between supervised financial institutions and their regulators. (Attached to this statement is an containing an expanded discussion of the provisions governing interest on reserves and interest on demand deposits.) Although there is much in the draft bill that the Board favors, there are a few provisions with which the Board has concerns. I would like to point out some of these provisions, but I do not wish these objections to detract from the central message of my testimony--that the nation's banking system needs reform of the type embodied in this legislation. Past Efforts to Alleviate Burden By way of background, it is important to note that the legislation being considered by the Subcommittee today builds on the accomplishments of two prior reform measures that many members of this Subcommittee worked hard to enact. The Community Development and Regulatory Improvement Act of 1994 ("1994 Act") and the Economic Growth and Paperwork Reduction Act of 1996 ("1996 Act") were useful measures that achieved meaningful reductions in regulatory burden. In the 1994 Act, Congress alleviated the paperwork burden for banking organizations seeking to gain federal approval to form new holding companies and to engage in certain nonbanking transactions, enhanced the efficiency of the regulatory process by eliminating unnecessary applications and filing requirements, and streamlined the examination and audit procedures of the federal banking agencies. Two years later, Congress passed the 1996 Act, which permitted well-capitalized and well-managed institutions to commence previously approved nonbanking activities without filing an application. In the 1996 Act, Congress also passed important reforms to consumer protection statutes that alleviated the burdens imposed by these statutory provisions on financial institutions without undercutting the goals of the consumer protection laws. The Board supported these prior reform efforts, which--coupled with the Board's independent initiatives to make our regulations simpler, less burdensome, and more transparent--have had a bottom-line, practical effect: fewer applications need to be filed with the Board, and banking organizations have saved substantial regulatory, legal, compliance, and other costs. In short, these statutory and regulatory changes have enhanced the competitiveness of banking organizations and have benefitted the customers of these financial institutions. Nonetheless, as the authors of this bill have recognized, more can and should be done. The Provisions of this Bill The draft bill contains important additional reform provisions that would further eliminate obsolete and unnecessary regulations. The Board applauds many of the measures contained in this bill, which we believe would eliminate restrictions that no longer serve a useful purpose and would thereby enhance the ability of U.S. banking institutions to operate efficiently and effectively in increasingly competitive financial markets. Interest on Demand Deposits and Reserve Balances The Board strongly endorses section 101 of the draft bill, which would permit the Federal Reserve to pay interest on required and excess reserve balances that depository institutions maintain at Federal Reserve Banks. Because required reserve balances do not currently earn interest, banks and other depository institutions employ costly procedures to reduce such balances to a minimum. The cost of designing and maintaining the systems that facilitate these reserve avoidance techniques represent a significant waste of resources for the economy. In addition, because some small banks do not have the volume of deposits needed to justify these costs, the current system of reserve avoidance techniques tends to place smaller institutions at a competitive disadvantage. The reserve avoidance measures utilized by depository institutions currently also could complicate the implementation of monetary policy. Declines in required reserve balances through avoidance schemes could lead to increased volatility in the federal funds rate. The draft bill's authorization of interest payments on excess reserves would be a useful addition to the tools that the Federal Reserve possesses to deal with such contingencies. If increased volatility in the federal funds rate did become a persistent feature of the money market, it would affect other overnight interest rates, raising funding risks for large banks, securities dealers, and other money market participants. Suppliers of funds to the overnight markets, including many small banks and thrifts, also would face greater uncertainty about the returns they would earn. Accordingly, allowing the Board to pay interest on required reserve balances would not only eliminate economic inefficiencies, but also alleviate risks that could affect monetary policy and the smooth functioning of the money markets. The Board also strongly supports section 102 of the bill, which would permit payment of interest on demand deposits held by businesses. The current prohibition of interest on the demand accounts of businesses is an anachronism that no longer serves any public policy purpose. This prohibition was enacted in the 1930s, at a time when Congress was concerned that large money center banks might bid deposits away from country banks to make loans to stock market speculators. Regardless of whether this rationale for the prohibition was ever valid, it is certainly not applicable today: funds flow freely around the country and among banks of all sizes. The absence of interest on demand deposits is no bar to the movement of money from depositories with surpluses--whatever their size or location--to the markets where funds can be profitably employed. Moreover, although the prohibition has no current policy purpose, it imposes a significant burden both on banks and on those holding demand deposits, especially small banks and small businesses. Smaller banks complain that they are unable to compete for the deposits of businesses precisely because of their inability to offer interest on demand deposit accounts. Small banks, unlike their larger counterparts, lack the systems to offer compensating balance schemes and sweep accounts that allow these banks to offer businesses credit for, or interest on, excess demand balances. Small businesses, which often earn no interest on their demand deposits because they do not have account balances large enough to justify the fees charged for sweep programs, stand to gain the most from eliminating the prohibition of interest on demand deposits. For these reasons, the Board strongly supports the immediate repeal of the prohibition of interest on demand deposits, as accomplished in section 102 the bill. Section 102 also presents an alternative that would ultimately allow payment of interest on demand deposits and, during a transition period, would authorize a fully reservable, 24-transaction money market deposit account ("MMDA"). Although some transition period in the implementation of direct payments on demand deposits would not be objectionable, a relatively short period would be appropriate, rather than the six-year delay proposed in the alternative. The 24-transaction MMDA under the alternative would be fully reservable, and therefore would not contribute to further declines in required reserve balances and the complications that might entail for the implementation of monetary policy. With a relatively short transition period, the alternative would be acceptable to the Board in preference to the status quo. The draft bill's alternative language also includes a provision granting the Federal Reserve increased flexibility in setting reserve requirements. At present, we have no intention of either increasing or decreasing reserve requirement ratios within the limits that we are already allowed by law. However, it is impossible to know in advance the contingencies that the Federal Reserve may have to address, and the added flexibility in setting reserve requirement ratios might be a useful tool at some time in the future. Bank Examination Report Privilege The Board endorses Title V of the bill, the Bank Examination Report Privilege Act ("BERPA"). BERPA would take three steps to promote effective supervision of banking organizations by helping to preserve candor in communications between such institutions and their examiners. First, BERPA would clarify that a supervised institution may voluntarily disclose information that is protected by the institution's own privileges, such as the attorney-client privilege, to a federal banking agency without waiving those privileges as to third parties. Some courts have ruled that disclosure of information to examiners waives an institution's privileges in private civil litigation and, as a result, some institutions have attempted to withhold information from their supervisors. By ensuring that privileges are not waived when data are given to examiners, BERPA would overcome the present reluctance of many institutions to disclose information for fear of losing common-law privileges. Second, BERPA would establish uniform procedures that govern how a third party may seek to obtain confidential supervisory information from a banking agency. BERPA would require third parties to request such information directly from the federal banking agencies, under regulations and procedures adopted by the agencies. Third parties may turn to the courts only after exhausting their administrative remedies. Finally, BERPA would define what constitutes confidential supervisory information and would strengthen the protection afforded to such information. By protecting disclosures by depository institutions to their examiners and by safeguarding supervisory information, BERPA would prevent unwarranted disclosures that would have a chilling effect on the examinations process. Taken together, these measures would enhance the ability of the federal banking agencies to assess and to protect the safety and soundness of depository institutions. Elimination of Duplicative Approval Requirements Section 310 of the draft bill would provide an opportunity to eliminate needlessly duplicative filing and approval requirements for bank holding companies seeking to acquire a depository institution and merge it with an existing subsidiary. Currently, a bank holding company must obtain two sets of identical approvals prior to engaging in such a transaction. The bank holding company first must file an application and obtain prior approval under the Bank Holding Company Act to acquire the depository institution, and then the holding company must file another application and obtain a second approval under the Bank Merger Act to merge the acquired institution, which is by now already a subsidiary of the holding company, with one of its other subsidiaries. The dual approval requirement is needlessly redundant. Under the Bank Holding Company Act, the Board is required to consider the financial, managerial and competitive effects of the entire merger transaction, including any part of the transaction that involves the purchase of nonbanking assets. By contrast, under the Bank Merger Act, the appropriate federal banking agency reviews only that portion of the transaction that concerns the surviving bank. Accordingly, the Bank Merger Act review is subsumed in the larger Bank Holding Company Act review process. In addition, the statutory factors that the appropriate federal banking agencies are required to consider under the Bank Holding Company and the Bank Merger Acts are identical and, frequently, the agencies undertake the two statutory reviews simultaneously. For these reasons, the Bank Merger Act review rarely, if ever, raises any issues that have not been fully vetted in the Bank Holding Company Act applications process. Section 310 would provide the option for eliminating the duplicative review process by permitting bank holding companies that have already obtained approval to acquire an institution under the Bank Holding Company Act then to merge that institution with an existing subsidiary without obtaining a second approval under the Bank Merger Act. To assure than any special issues that may be raised by a specific bank merger may be reviewed by the relevant bank supervisor, section 310 would, nevertheless, require that the federal banking agency responsible for supervising the bank resulting from the merger receive advance notice of the proposed merger. Importantly, section 310 also would allow that agency to require a full application under the Bank Merger Act if that agency determines that special concerns or circumstances warrant such review of a transaction. Other Burden Reduction Provisions There are other parts of this draft bill, as well, that would relieve regulatory burden without giving rise to safety and soundness, supervisory, consumer protection, or other policy concerns. For example, section 312 would eliminate the outdated and largely redundant requirement in section 11(m) of the Federal Reserve Act, which currently sets a rigid ceiling on the percentage of bank capital and surplus that may be represented by loans collateralized by securities. Current supervisory policy, as well as national and state bank lending limits, address concerns regarding concentrations of credit more comprehensively than section 11(m), but do so without the unnecessary constraining effects of this section of the Federal Reserve Act. Section 313 would eliminate section 3(f) of the Bank Holding Company Act, which applies certain restrictions that govern the nonbanking activities of bank holding companies to the activities conducted directly by savings banks under state law. Since the enactment of section 3(f), the courts have found that the insurance and other nonbanking prohibitions of the Bank Holding Company Act do not apply to the direct activities of banks. Eliminating section 3(f) would put savings banks that are subsidiaries of bank holding companies on equal competitive footing with their state bank counterparts, allowing savings banks and their subsidiaries to engage in those activities that are permissible for state banks under state law. In another area, the alternative consumer credit disclosure mechanisms permitted by sections 401 and 402 will be less burdensome to creditors and just as helpful to consumers as the disclosure requirements embodied in current law. Congress has already eliminated the requirement that creditors disclose a historical table for closed-end variable rate loans. Taking similar action with respect to open-end variable rate home-secured loans, and permitting creditors to make alternative disclosures to meet their obligations with regard to credit advertising under the Truth in Lending Act, would reduce regulatory burdens without sacrificing consumer protections. Areas of Concern Although the Board supports most of the provisions in the draft bill, there are a few sections of the legislation that cause us concern as they are drafted. These provisions, as currently drafted, may give certain entities unfair competitive advantages, may result in changes to the law that the Subcommittee did not intend, may harm the safety and soundness of depository institutions, or are unnecessary. Nonbank Banks Two provisions of the draft bill would eliminate limitations that have been applied to nonbank banks. Section 221 would allow nonbank banks to offer business credit cards, even where these business loans are funded by insured demand deposits. Section 222 would liberalize the divestiture requirements that apply when companies violate the nonbank bank operating limitations. Eliminating these restrictions on nonbank banks, at first glance, may have intuitive appeal. However, there are important reasons why the Board is concerned about these provisions. Nonbank banks--which, despite their popular name, are federally insured, national or state-chartered banks--came into existence by exploiting a loophole in the law. By means of this loophole, industrial, commercial, and other companies were able to acquire insured banks and to mix banking and commerce in a manner that was then, and remains today, statutorily prohibited for banking organizations. In 1987, in the Competitive Equality Banking Act ("CEBA"), Congress closed the nonbank-bank loophole. At that time, Congress chose not to require the 57 companies operating nonbank banks to divest these institutions. Instead, Congress permitted the companies owning these banks to retain their ownership so long as they complied with a carefully crafted set of limitations on the activities of nonbank banks and their parents. In a unique statutory explanation of legislative purpose, Congress stated in CEBA that these limitations were necessary to prevent the owners of nonbank banks from competing unfairly with bank holding companies and independent banks. Fewer than 25 nonbank banks currently claim the grandfather rights accorded in CEBA. The Board is concerned that removal of the limitations and restrictions that apply to nonbank banks would enhance advantages that this relative handful of organizations already possess over other owners of banks and would give rise to the potential adverse effects about which Congress has in the past expressed concern. In addition, removal of limitations would permit the increased combination of banking and commerce for a select group of commercial companies, a mixture that the House recently considered and decided not to permit in the context of a broader effort to modernize our financial laws. Financing Corporation Payments The Board also has some concerns about section 103 of the draft bill, which authorizes the use of "excess net income" of a deposit insurance fund to pay interest on Financing Corporation ("FICO") bonds and to reduce FICO interest assessments of the fund's members. The proposal would divert resources from the "deposit insurance purposes" of the funds to other, non-insurance purposes--a diversion that would create a troubling precedent that could be difficult to resist in the future. More fundamentally, it is not clear if the provision would ensure that the deposit insurance funds have an adequate level of reserves. There is no "correct" level of reserves and no level that can be deemed "excess." There are always unforeseen problems--most recently, Asian instabilities and potential "year 2000" problems. Nor can we simply assume the indefinite continuation of the current economic expansion. As a result, the Board believes that it would be more prudent not to divert "excess" reserves but, instead, to allow bank insurance fund reserves to grow to provide greater protection against future unforeseen problems in the banking system. Extensions of Credit to Executive Officers Section 311 of the draft bill would allow a member bank to extend credit to the bank's executive officers (1) in the form of a home equity credit line of up to $100,000, so long as the credit line is secured by the officer's primary residence, and (2) in an unlimited amount, so long as the loan is over- collateralized by readily marketable assets. The Board believes the provision regarding the home equity line should be clarified to indicate that the amount of the credit line may not exceed the value of the real estate held as collateral. In addition, the Board believes that the provision allowing unlimited extensions of credit secured by readily marketable assets goes too far: Loans to executive officers and to other insiders should be carefully circumscribed and subject to quantitative limits. The Board and the FDIC, which we understand recommended these provisions, are working together to suggest a clarification of this section of the bill and to address these issues. Call Report Simplification Finally, the Subcommittee specifically requested comment on section 302 of the draft bill, which restates section 307 of the Riegle Community Development and Regulatory Improvement Act ("Riegle Act"). The Board and the other banking agencies, working through the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council, have made substantial progress in implementing the mandate of section 307 of the Riegle Act. Thus far, the federal banking agencies have eliminated approximately 80 Call Report data items; placed revised Call Report instructions and forms on the Internet; adopted Generally Accepted Accounting Principles ("GAAP") as the reporting basis for all Call Reports; produced a draft core report; condensed four sets of Call Report instructions into one; provided an index for Call Report instructions; implemented an electronic filing requirement for all institutions submitting Call Reports; placed much of the Call Report data on the Internet; and reported to Congress on recommendations to enhance efficiency for filers and users. The agencies are currently surveying depository institutions to identify additional Call Report items that could be eliminated, while retaining items that are essential for safety and soundness and other public policy purposes. The significant progress that has been made by the agencies to date and the agencies' on-going efforts suggest that this section of the draft bill is not necessary. Closing Thoughts The Board applauds the efforts of the Subcommittee to continue to eliminate unnecessary government-imposed burdens. The Subcommittee has fashioned legislation that, in the main, builds upon past successes in regulatory reform and relieves regulatory burdens on banking organizations. In some areas, however, the draft bill may not achieve meaningful reform but instead would lead to competitive inequities or raise safety and soundness and other concerns. The Board has long endorsed regulatory relief and financial modernization strategies that ensure regulatory equity for all participants in the financial services industry, that minimize the chances that federal safety net subsidies will be expanded into new activities and beyond the confines of insured depository institutions, that guarantee adequate federal supervision of financial organizations, and that ensure the continued safety and soundness of .financial organizations. The Board would be pleased to work with the Subcommittee and its able staff to reach these goals in this and future legislative efforts.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today published with the Department of Housing and Urban Development a report on legislative recommendations to the Congress on how to simplify and improve consumer disclosures under the Truth in Lending Act (TILA) and the Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act (RESPA). The report focuses on four broad policy issues concerning closed-end home-secured loans. The Board and HUD recommend: revising TILA's APR to better reflect the overall cost of credit by defining the finance charge to include costs the consumer is required to pay to obtain the loan, requiring firmer settlement cost disclosures under RESPA through either guaranteed closing costs or estimated costs within a tolerance, revising and streamlining the timing requirements under TILA and RESPA to provide consumers with cost information earlier in the mortgage process, and adding substantive protections to protect consumers against abusive lending practices. To obtain a copy of the joint report, contact the Board's Publication Services, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, D.C. 20551, at (202) 452-3244. The report also will be available through the Federal Reserve Banks. It will be available on the Board's World Wide Web site, at http://www.bog.frb.fed.us/.
Remarks by Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. Before the International Banking Conference, Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council, Arlington, Virginia July 20, 1998 Themes in International Bank Supervision The scope of my introductory remarks for your conference today is broad and touches on a number of topics, some of which will be more fully developed by other speakers later in this seminar. Risks and Benefits of a Global Banking System Let me start by addressing the question of what value and what risks might arise from having a more global banking system such as the one developing currently. Academic and popular literature is full of articles arguing both sides of the case. Conceptually, global banking, by which I mean both direct entry and cross-border inter-bank lending, may influence macro-stability in both positive and harmful ways. Those who see potential harm argue that trans-national banks stimulate capital flight, particularly in developing markets, and in stressful times may be a source of capital outflows and currency crises. Second, some analysts argue that foreign banks may lack commitment to their host country and will flee, or withdraw credit, when faced with problems in local markets or in their home market. A third concern is that the participation of foreign banks may be associated with broader efforts at deregulation and may overwhelm domestic banking supervisors, creating a riskier environment. Those on the other side of the debate argue that participation in global banking is a source of stability and improved banking practice. Proponents of this view claim that foreign banks may directly bring new and better basic banking skills, more sophisticated management techniques, and products better suited to managing and spreading risk. Through the benefits of competition, these commentators argue, local banking skills and services will be improved. In addition, some observers see indirect benefits from the participation of foreign banks. They argue that global banks, as either direct entrants or as inter-bank lenders, may accelerate the development of ancillary institutions, such as rating agencies, accounting and auditing firms, and credit bureaus, which acquire and process information. Similarly, banks that participate in many national markets may improve information disclosure about the banks themselves as the foreign banks compete to gain market share by demonstrating their comparatively sound financial condition. Finally, the proponents of this view argue that participation by cross-border banks may stimulate improvements in the supervisory and regulatory framework. I believe that those who argue for the benefits of having a country open to global banking may have the better of the argument. We know, however, that whether foreign banks are a source of stability or fragility depends very much on the market, banking and supervisory environments that they find in the host country. There are conditions that must accompany, or better still, precede a country's decision to participate in today's global banking market. If the participation of foreign banking competitors, either directly or through inter-bank lending, comes with improvements in the underlying bank credit underwriting culture, the capability of bank supervisors, and the degree of transparency, then the benefits of foreign bank participation will eventually emerge. On the other hand, if foreign banks participate in a country in which neither the market transparency, nor domestic banks, nor bank supervisors are prepared to change, I believe that the participation of foreign banks, by itself, will not necessarily be beneficial and could prove to be negative. Therefore, entry of foreign banks, either directly or as participants in the inter-bank lending market, without movement to better information, better supervision and better banking, provides access to credit, but not necessarily an increase in macro-stability. To argue the benefits of global banking in the abstract, removed from these required conditions, therefore seems to miss the true focus. Lessons from the Asian Crises Let me now turn to the broad-based lessons that the Asian crisis teaches us. One of the most important contributing factors to the current financial crisis in many of the emerging Asian nations was the weakness of their banking systems, as well as weakness of bank supervision within those countries. It seems clear now that, Asian banks, as well as their government supervisors, violated some of the fundamental principles of banking and banking supervision. Banks' managers had not developed adequate processes for underwriting loans and monitoring their continued performance, or of establishing sufficient and timely reserves to buffer expected loan losses. Some of these problems stemmed from lending directed by governments, which led to expectations that the government would support such loans, if needed. But, the primary cause of these credit problems stemmed from banks' failure to deploy effective tools of credit risk analysis. The absence of credit risk analysis led to financial structures that were inherently fragile. Banking supervisors in these countries proved ill equipped to compensate for the fragility. Poor allocation of credit undermined the prospects for sustained economic growth. Some borrowers could not service their loans. As these domestic banks' loan portfolios deteriorated and their financial condition eroded, their creditors, domestic and foreign, looked at them more critically, and began to withdraw their funding. In short, the deteriorating condition of borrowers hurt the banking system, which increased economic harm to the rest of these countries' economies. Two other features of these countries' financial systems have compounded the problems caused by poor lending practices and inadequate supervision. First, standards for the transparency and disclosure of private financial information were extremely lax. It was difficult for creditors, foreign or domestic, to distinguish good risks from bad, and this caused them to both grant and, later, withdraw credit from borrowers within these countries without full knowledge of borrowers' credit-worthiness. This latter reaction exacerbated the crisis for the businesses and citizens of these countries. Second, creditors to banks no doubt relied to some extent on a public safety net to back up their claims. This was true not only of small depositors, but also of foreign bank creditors. As it turned out, the presumption of public support was at least to some extent misplaced. Therefore, participation in the global banking market did not work to save these countries from fundamental information, banking and supervisory weakness. The fact that the information, credit and supervisory cultures had not yet changed, even with the participation of foreign banks and the extension of inter-bank credit, meant that ultimately these financial systems were proved fundamentally flawed. We have also learned, or relearned, other lessons because of the handling of these crises. First, prolonged delay in tackling systemic banking sector weakness invites further weakness, not strengthening. Delay in the hopes that the economy will grow banks out of their problems, is attractive, but is actually a trap. Because of the credit allocation role that banks play in many economies, delay allows problems to grow. Inefficient banks are allowed to allocate credit inefficiently, and open, insolvent banks, in effect distribute taxpayer money to bank shareholders, employees and borrowers. Second, extra attention is required to solve systemic bank weaknesses because of the inherent pitfalls associated with banks that are "too-big-to-fail." Because the threat of closing very large banks may not be credible, it may be more difficult for supervisors to pressure very large banks to improve their operations. As a consequence, supervisors need to have clear legal authority, and political support, to order banks to take a variety of steps to improve their operations. This is a lesson that we in the United States learned only recently, and supervisors here are now required to order banks to take remedial actions as capital falls below 8 percent. Reactions of the International Supervisory Community The international supervisory community has heeded these lessons and reacted to them. International recognition of the need for strong, effectively-supervised banking systems is the reason that the Basle Supervisors Committee issued its 1997 paper, "Core Principles of Effective Banking Supervision." Bill Rutledge, Senior Vice President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, will discuss this paper with you after your break this morning. I cannot overstate the importance of adopting such core principles of sound banking and banking supervision in the international banking system, and also the need to develop a workable mechanism for enforcing the implementation of these standards. The Asian crisis also underscores the importance of transparency. Adequate market discipline depends on investors having information that is sufficient in quantity, reliability, and timeliness. In recognition of this, the Basle Committee is now exploring the possibility of setting benchmarks for providing information about financial institutions that should be available to both supervisors and markets. International progress toward greater transparency is a vital initiative for the markets and sound supervision. More broadly, I believe that the time is appropriate to hasten the wide-spread adoption of international accounting and disclosure principles that raise the standard for accounting treatments in all countries. These standards should focus on three goals. First, any international accounting principles should provide the basis for depicting a clear and fair picture of the condition of the bank and of corporate creditors. Second, any principles should provide a means by which firms identify and disclose their major risks, such as funding, foreign exchange or concentrations. Finally, compliance with these principles should be sufficient to support market confidence in the basic integrity of a firm's published financial statements and other disclosures. Because of the increasing complexity of financial instruments and the speed of movement in financial markets, intrusive supervision has become less meaningful, if not virtually impossible. Thus the federal banking agencies have adopted a risk-focused approach to banking supervision that emphasizes the adequacy of banks' internal risk management systems. Events in the financial markets today occur too quickly to give anyone a comfortable learning curve in grappling with financial problems. I believe that our objective should be to make managers and institutions behave as if there were no safety net and align their natural market-driven decisions with supervisory objectives. Together with the traditional approaches of loan review and transaction monitoring, market-based supervision will best ensure the continued viability of the banking sector. We should, and are, actively searching for other methods to create incentive-compatible regulation and supervision. The Asian situation highlights the value of a reliable system for U.S. banking supervisors to assess banks' country risk, which I know has occupied some of you recently. As many of you are aware, the federal banking agencies, through the Interagency Country Risk Exposure Review Committee (ICERC), are developing an improved guide for examiners in evaluating the country-risk exposure in banks. This system will permit examiners to be more thoroughly informed on countries in which U.S. banks have exposure and allow for a better cross check against banks' country risk management systems. New risk-focused examination procedures will also be a byproduct of the current review of management practices. Finally, the Asian crisis and the speed with which it occurred demonstrate the need for effective international communication and coordination. You confront this need in your daily work in supervising global financial conglomerates. These large diversified companies, which are becoming more prevalent in domestic and global markets, blend banking, securities, and other financial activities in a single diversified company operating across national borders and traditional industry lines. This presents a significant supervisory and examination challenge because most of the legal systems of the countries in which these firms operate are structured along national or smaller geographic regions. Many of these countries, including the United States, continue to employ different supervisory approaches, implemented by different regulators, for each traditional sector of the financial services industry. The crossing of national and industry lines can result in numerous financial services supervisors having responsibility for theoretically distinct pieces of these financial conglomerates, but no supervisor having clear authority to coordinate supervision of the entire jigsaw puzzle of each conglomerate. This is a critical deficiency because these conglomerates are working to coordinate and integrate their business operations and supporting systems to the greatest extent feasible. This is why the Joint Forum on Financial Conglomerates in February issued its consultative documents, "Supervision of Financial Conglomerates". This international coordinating group is a joint initiative of the Basle Committee on Banking Supervision, the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO), and the International Association of Insurance Supervisors (IAIS). The Joint Forum's consultative documents make concrete recommendations for steps that supervisors in each of the securities, insurance, and banking sectors can take to enhance supervision of the group-wide risk exposures of these global and inter-industry conglomerates. One key recommendation is for the international supervisory community to agree on one or more coordinators to facilitate international and inter-industry cooperation. The specifics need to be clarified, but you should all be aware of this international initiative, while also recognizing that more work remains to be done in this country to deal with the complex issues that arise from the international and inter-industry activities of these firms. Domestic Supervision of Foreign Banking Organizations Moving now from Asia to domestic issues, the International Banking Act (IBA) is perhaps the most notable of the laws governing the activities of foreign banking organizations (FBOs) here in the United States. The IBA requires, among other things, that, in order to approve a branch application, the Board must determine that a foreign bank is subject to comprehensive supervision or regulation on a consolidated basis by its home country supervisor. This requirement, as you are undoubtedly aware, is commonly known by the initials CCS. I believe that the Federal Reserve should continue to be rigorous in applying the CCS standard. The Board should also take great care in allowing entry into the United States by foreign banks from a country where CCS is not yet in place. In these countries, appropriate conditions could be imposed on the operations of the U.S. branch to help compensate for the lack of full CCS. Finally, let me raise an issue that symbolizes our global interdependence: the major challenge of being ready to turn the calendar page on December 31, 1999. As you are all well aware, the Federal Reserve, as well as the other banking agencies, have a keen interest in the Year 2000 readiness of all banks in the United States and overseas. While all banks must address Year 2000 readiness issues within their organizations, the issue appears to pose special problems for foreign banks operating branches and agencies in the United States. To address the Year 2000 problem for these banks, and international banking generally, the Federal Reserve is taking an active role in a number of international initiatives, most notably including the Joint Year 2000 Council, which is jointly sponsored by the major international bodies for cooperation between financial market regulators. The Joint Year 2000 Council has made a good start at its task. I am sure that it will continue to raise the visibility of this issue, help all countries recognize the magnitude of the Year 2000 challenge, and provide guidance to and assistance for supervisors and financial market participants in understanding the steps they need to take to meet the challenge. I refer you in particular to the Council's current paper on guidance to supervisors, which gives concrete steps on assessing preparations by financial institutions. Going forward I know that the Council intends to provide guidance on developing testing programs and contingency plans. One focus of our concern with protecting the banking system in the United States is that many U.S. offices of foreign banks may be particularly exposed if their parents are not ready for the Year 2000. Therefore, we have asked the U.S. branches and agencies to confirm that they will be able to continue to conduct business using the usual standards for readiness that we apply to domestic banks. We are also examining foreign banking branches and agencies, as we have with domestic banks under our supervisory authority. The initial round of examination of U.S. branches and agencies has been completed, and individual foreign banks are being made aware of the results. There are, of course, a number of competing initiatives that further stretch the limited information systems resources available to achieve preparedness. In Europe and other parts of the world, the introduction of the Euro, and the coordination of systems within the Euro-countries, is requiring extensive planning and programming. In Japan, the "Big Bang" will likely take top management focus from Year 2000 systems issues. Particularly in light of these competing demands for system resources internationally, foreign and U.S. banks need to recognize the magnitude and importance of the Year 2000 conversion effort. Banks need to take action now to devote sufficient resources to this critical mission. Senior management of banks and FBOs is responsible for dealing with Year 2000 issues. It is not a technical issue alone; it is also a strategic business issue. Conclusion I believe that the emergence of modern international banking is probably likely to be beneficial. While international banking holds the potential for macro-stability, the history of financial crises, including the current ones in Asia, also shows how weakness in banking systems and banking supervision may contribute to macro-instability. The prescription to avoid, or at least minimize the impact of, future crises includes a combination of solid banking skills, well-conceived banking oversight at the national level, greater transparency, risk-focused and incentive-compatible banking supervision, and coordination among international banking supervisors. While creating this long-term environment, we must also respond to the more immediate challenge of protecting our domestic financial system from poorly supervised foreign entities and from the risks inherent in technology as we go into the new millenium.
For immediate release The Joint Year 2000 Council today announced the appointment of Federal Reserve Board Governor Roger W. Ferguson, Jr., as Chairman of the Council effective immediately. The Council is comprised of senior representatives of the Basle Committee on Banking Supervision, the Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems, the International Association of Insurance Supervisors, and the International Organization of Securities Commissions. The Council was formed in April of this year to address issues associated with the Year 2000 computer challenge within the global financial supervisory community. The of Governor Ferguson's appointment by the Secretariat for the Joint Year 2000 Council is attached. Information on the Council's activities is available on the Bank for International Settlements web site at .
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced a public meeting for August 13, 1998, in Chicago on the proposal by Banc One Corporation, Columbus, Ohio, to merge with First Chicago NBD Corporation, Chicago, Illinois. The purpose of the meeting is to collect information relating to the factors the Board is required to consider under the Bank Holding Company Act. These factors are the effects of the proposal on the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the companies and banks involved in the proposal, competition in the relevant markets, and the convenience and needs of the communities to be served. Convenience and needs considerations include consideration of the records of performance of Banc One and First Chicago under the Community Reinvestment Act. The meeting will be held at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, 230 South LaSalle Street, Chicago, Illinois, and will begin at 9:00 a.m. CDT. Persons wishing to testify at the meeting must submit a written request no later than 5:00 p.m. CDT, Friday, July 31, 1998, containing a brief statement of the nature of the expected testimony and the estimated time required for the presentation (together with their address, telephone number, and facsimile number if available), to Alicia Williams, Vice President and Community Affairs Officer, Consumer and Community Affairs Division, Federal .Reserve Bank of Chicago, 230 LaSalle Street, Chicago, Illinois 60604 (facsimile: 312/913-2626). Persons interested only in attending the meeting do not need to submit a written request to attend. On the basis of the requests to testify, the presiding officer of the public meeting will establish a schedule of appearances and prescribe all necessary procedures to ensure that the meeting proceeds in a fair and orderly manner. An agenda for the meeting, which will include the scheduled time for each person's testimony, will be provided to participants at a later date. Attached is a copy of the Notice of Public Meeting, which sets forth the procedures to be followed at the meeting. The Federal Reserve Board also announced that the period for public comment on the proposal has been extended through August 13, 1998. Banc One Corporation Columbus, Ohio First Chicago NBD Corporation Chicago, Illinois Notice of Public Meeting Chicago, Illinois Background and Public Meeting Notice Banc One Corporation, Columbus, Ohio ("Banc One"), has requested the Board's approval under the Bank Holding Company Act (12 U.S.C. #&167; 1841 et seq.) ("BHC Act") and related statutes to merge with First Chicago NBD Corporation, Chicago, Illinois ("First Chicago"). The Board hereby orders that a public meeting on the Banc One/First Chicago proposal be held in Chicago, Illinois, on August 13, 1998. The public meeting will be held at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, 230 South LaSalle Street, Chicago, Illinois, and will begin at 9:00 a.m. CDT. Purpose and Procedures The purpose of the public meeting is to collect information relating to factors the Board is required to consider under the BHC Act. These factors are the effects of the proposal on the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the companies and banks involved in the proposal, competition in the relevant markets, and the convenience and needs of the communities to be served. Convenience and needs considerations include a review of the records of performance of Banc One and First Chicago under the Community Reinvestment Act, which requires the Board to take into account in its consideration of a bank acquisition or merger proposal each institution's record of meeting the credit needs of its entire community, including low- and moderate-income neighborhoods, consistent with the safe and sound operation of the institution. 12 U.S.C. #&167; 2903. The transaction also involves the proposed acquisition of a number of nonbanking companies engaged in activities permissible for bank holding companies. The Board also must determine whether conducting the proposed nonbanking activities can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interest, or unsound banking practices. Testimony at the public meeting will be presented to a panel consisting of a Presiding Officer, or her designee, and other panel members appointed by the Presiding Officer. The Presiding Officer at the meeting will be Dolores S. Smith, Director of the Board's Division of Consumer and Community Affairs. In conducting the public meeting, the Presiding Officer will have the authority and discretion to ensure that the meeting proceeds in a fair and orderly manner. In contrast to a formal administrative hearing, the rules for taking evidence in an administrative proceeding do not apply to this public meeting. Panel members may question witnesses, but no cross-examination of witnesses will be permitted. The public meeting will be transcribed and information regarding procedures for obtaining a copy of the transcript will be announced at the public meeting. All persons wishing to testify at the public meeting must submit a written request to Alicia Williams, Vice President and Community Affairs Officer, Consumer and Community Affairs Division, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, 230 South LaSalle Street, Chicago, Illinois 60604 (facsimile: 312/913-2626) not later than 5:00 p.m. CDT, Friday, July 31, 1998. The request must include the following information: (i) a brief statement of the nature of the expected testimony and the estimated time required for the presentation; (ii) address and telephone number (and facsimile number, if available) of the person testifying; and (iii) identification of any special needs, such as from persons desiring translation services, persons with a physical disability who may need assistance, or persons requiring visual aids for their presentation. To the extent available, translators will be provided to persons wishing to present their views in a language other than English if this information is included in the request to testify. Persons interested only in attending the meeting do not need to submit a written request to attend. On the basis of the requests received, the Presiding Officer will prepare a schedule for persons wishing to testify and establish the order of presentation. To ensure an opportunity for all interested commenters to present their views, the Presiding Officer may limit the time for presentation. Persons not listed on the schedule may be permitted to speak at the public meeting if time permits at the conclusion of the schedule of witnesses, at the discretion of the Presiding Officer. Copies of testimony may, but need not, be filed with the Presiding Officer before a person's presentation. By order of the Board of Governors, effective July 22, 1998. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Secretary of the Board
The Federal Reserve Board today published a revised list of over-the-counter (OTC) market stocks that meet the margin criteria in Regulation T (OTC List). Also published today is a complete edition of the list of foreign equity securities that meet the margin criteria in Regulation T (Foreign List). The Lists are effective August 10, 1998, and supersede the previous Lists published effective May 11, 1998. The changes that have been made to the revised OTC List, which now contains 4,836 OTC stocks, are as follows: 180 stocks have been included for the first time, 148 under National Market System (NMS) designation; 76 stocks previously on the List have been removed for substantially failing to meet the requirements for continued listing; 122 stocks have been removed for reasons such as listing on a national securities exchange or involvement in an acquisition. Lenders subject to Regulation T and borrowers subject to Regulation X who are required under Section 224.3(a) to conform credit they obtain to Regulation T must use the OTC List until publication of the last OTC List, anticipated for November 1998. An amendment to Regulation T that will make all stocks trading in the Nasdaq Stock Market marginable at brokers and dealers without the need for the Board to publish an OTC List will be effective January 1, 1999, therefore the November 1998 OTC List will expire on January 1, 1999. Also listed below is a complete edition of the Foreign List. Pursuant to amendments recently adopted by the Board that became effective for all broker-dealers on July 1, 1998, the Foreign List is composed of those foreign equity securities that have been found to meet the criteria in section 220.11 of Regulation T. Additional foreign equity securities qualify as foreign margin securities if they are deemed by the Securities and Exchange Commission to have a "ready market" for purposes of SEC Rule 15c3-1. This includes all foreign stocks listed on the Financial Times/Standard & Poor's Actuaries World Indices. Although the Board has included these stocks on its Foreign List since 1996, the recent amendments allow broker-dealers to extend credit on such stocks without regard to the Foreign List. The complete edition of the Foreign List now contains 94 securities displayed in country order. It is unlawful for any person to cause any representation to be made that inclusion of a stock on the OTC List or the Foreign List indicates that the Board or the Securities and Exchange Commission has in any way passed upon the merits of any such stock or transaction therein. Any references to the Board in connection with these Lists or any stocks thereon in any advertisement or similar communications is unlawful.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today made final an interim rule amending Regulation DD, Truth in Savings, regarding the disclosure of the annual percentage yield (APY). The rule permits institutions to disclose an APY equal to the contract interest rate for certain time accounts; the rule applies only to time accounts with maturities greater than one year that do not compound but that require interest distributions at least annually. The Board's notice is attached. |
For immediate release Chairman Alan Greenspan of the Federal Reserve Board today issued the following statement: William McChesney Martin served with notable distinction from 1951 to 1970 as the eighth Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board. He set a masterful example of leadership during his tenure, playing a key role in fostering an extraordinary period of growth and prosperity for the U.S. economy. Crucially, Chairman Martin moved the Federal Reserve from being an adjunct of the Treasury Department to the independent status we know today. His tenure as Chairman is unmatched in longevity, and his remarkable contributions to the entire Federal Reserve System were memorialized in the naming of a Federal Reserve Board building for him in 1974. I extend my deepest sympathy to his wife and family in their loss.
Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan The Commodity Exchange Act and OTC derivatives Before the Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry, U.S. Senate July 30, 1998 I am pleased to be here today to present the Federal Reserve Board's views on the regulation of over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives. This hearing was prompted by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission's issuance of a concept release on regulation of OTC derivatives and subsequent calls for a standstill of attempts by the CFTC to impose new regulations on these markets. The Board generally agrees with the Treasury Department's views on the concept release and efforts to address the heightened uncertainty that resulted. In my testimony this morning I shall step back from these issues of immediate concern and address the fundamental underlying issue, that is, whether it is appropriate to apply the Commodity Exchange Act (CEA) to over-the-counter derivatives (and, indeed, to financial derivatives generally) in order to achieve the CEA's objectives--deterring market manipulation and protecting investors. The CEA and Its Objectives The Commodity Exchange Act of 1936 and its predecessor the Grain Futures Act of 1922 were a response to the perceived problems of manipulation of grain markets that were particularly evident in the latter part of the nineteenth and early part of the twentieth centuries. For example, endeavors to corner markets in wheat, while rarely successful, often led to temporary, but sharp, increases in prices that engendered very large losses to those short sellers of futures contracts who had no alternative but to buy and deliver grain under their contractual obligations. Because quantities of grain following a harvest are generally known and limited, it is possible, at least in principle, to corner a grain market. It is not possible to corner a market for financial futures where the underlying asset or its equivalent is in essentially unlimited supply. Financial derivative contracts are fundamentally different from agricultural futures owing to the nature of the underlying asset from which the derivative contract is "derived." Supplies of foreign exchange, government securities, and certain other financial instruments are being continuously replenished, and large inventories held throughout the world are immediately available to be offered in markets if traders endeavor to create an artificial shortage. Thus, unlike commodities whose supply is limited to a particular growing season and finite carryover, the markets for financial instruments and their derivatives are deep and, as a consequence, are extremely difficult to manipulate. The type of regulation that is applied to crop futures appears wholly out of place and inappropriate for financial futures, whether traded on organized exchanges or over-the-counter, and accordingly, the Federal Reserve Board sees no need for it. The early legislation on the trading of commodity futures was primarily designed to discourage forms of speculation that were seen as exacerbating price volatility and hurting farmers. In addition, it included provisions designed primarily to protect small investors in commodity futures, whose participation had been increasing and was viewed as beneficial. The Commodity Futures Trading Commission Act of 1974 did not make any fundamental changes in the objectives of derivatives regulation. However, it expanded the scope of the CEA quite significantly. In addition to creating the CFTC as an independent agency and giving the CFTC exclusive jurisdiction over commodity futures and options, the 1974 Act expanded the CEA's definition of a "commodity" beyond a specific list of agricultural commodities to include "all other goods and articles, except onions,...and all services, rights, and interests in which contracts for future delivery are presently or in the future dealt in." Given this broadened definition of a commodity and an equally broad interpretation of what constitutes a futures contract, a wide range of off-exchange transactions would have been brought potentially within the scope of the CEA. The Treasury Department was particularly concerned about the prospect that the foreign exchange markets might be found to fall within the Act's scope. Aside from the difficulty of manipulating these markets, Treasury argued that participants in OTC markets, primarily banks and other financial institutions, and large corporations, did not need the consumer protections of the Commodity Exchange Act. Consequently, Treasury proposed and Congress included a provision in the 1974 Act, the "Treasury Amendment," which excluded off-exchange derivative transactions in foreign currency (as well as government securities, and certain other financial instruments) from the newly expanded CEA. What the Treasury did not envision, and the Treasury Amendment did not protect, was the subsequent development and spectacular growth of a much wider range of OTC derivative contracts--swaps on interest rates, exchange rates, and prices of commodities and securities. Potential Application of the CEA to OTC Derivatives The vast majority of privately negotiated OTC contracts are settled in cash rather than through delivery. Cash settlement typically is based on a rate or price in a highly liquid market with a very large or virtually unlimited deliverable supply, for example, LIBOR or the spot dollar-yen exchange rate. To be sure, there are a limited number of OTC derivative contracts that apply to nonfinancial underlying assets. There is a significant business in oil-based derivatives, for example. But unlike farm crops, especially near the end of a crop season, private counterparties in oil contracts have virtually no ability to restrict the worldwide supply of this commodity. (Even OPEC has been less than successful over the years.) Nor can private counterparties restrict supplies of gold, another commodity whose derivatives are often traded over-the-counter, where central banks stand ready to lease gold in increasing quantities should the price rise. To be sure, a few, albeit growing, types of OTC contracts such as equity swaps and some credit derivatives have a limited deliverable supply. However, unlike crop futures, where failure to deliver has additional significant penalties, costs of failure to deliver in OTC derivatives are almost always limited to actual damages. There is no reason to believe either equity swaps or credit derivatives can influence the price of the underlying assets any more than conventional securities trading does. Thus, manipulators attempting to corner a market, even if successful, would have great difficulty in inducing sellers in privately negotiated transactions to pay significantly higher prices to offset their contracts or to purchase the underlying assets. Finally, the prices established in privately negotiated transactions are not widely disseminated or used directly or indiscriminately as the basis for pricing other transactions. Counterparties in the OTC markets can easily recognize the risks to which they would be exposed by failing to make their own independent valuations of their transactions, whose economic and credit terms may differ in significant respects. Moreover, they usually have access to other, often more reliable or more relevant sources of information. Hence, any price distortions in particular transactions could not affect other buyers or sellers of the underlying asset. Professional counterparties to privately negotiated contracts also have demonstrated their ability to protect themselves from losses from fraud and counterparty insolvencies. They have managed credit risks quite effectively through careful evaluation of counterparties, the setting of internal credit limits, and judicious use of netting and collateral agreements. In particular, they have insisted that dealers have financial strength sufficient to warrant a credit rating of A or higher. This, in turn, provides substantial protection against losses from fraud. Dealers are established institutions with substantial assets and significant investments in their reputations. When they have been seen to engage in deceptive practices, the professional counterparties that have been victimized have been able to obtain redress under laws applicable to contracts generally. Moreover, the threat of legal damage awards provides dealers with strong incentives to avoid misconduct. A far more powerful incentive, however, is the fear of loss of the dealer's good reputation, without which it cannot compete effectively, regardless of its financial strength or financial engineering capabilities. In these respects, derivatives dealers bear no resemblance to the "bucket shops" whose activities apparently motivate the exchange trading requirement. I do not mean to suggest that counterparties will not in the future suffer significant losses on their OTC derivatives transactions. Since 1994 the effectiveness of their risk management skills has not been tested by widespread major declines in underlying asset prices. I have no doubt derivatives losses will mushroom at the next significant downturn as will losses on holdings of other risk assets, both on and off exchange. Nonetheless, I see no reason to question the underlying stability of the OTC markets, or the overall effectiveness of private market discipline, or the prudential supervision of the derivatives activities of banks and other regulated participants. The huge increase in the volume of OTC transactions reflects the judgments of counterparties that these instruments provide extensive protection against undue asset concentration risk. They are clearly perceived to add significant value to our financial structure, both here in the United States and internationally. Accordingly the Federal Reserve Board sees no reason why these markets should be encumbered with a regulatory structure devised for a wholly different type of market process, where supplies of underlying assets are driven by the vagaries of weather and seasons. Inappropriate regulation distorts the efficiency of our market system and as a consequence impedes growth and improvement in standards of living. Application of the CEA to Centralized Markets for Derivatives Recently, some participants in the OTC markets have shown interest in utilizing centralized mechanisms for clearing or executing OTC derivatives transactions. For example, the London Clearing House plans to introduce clearing of interest rate swaps and forward rate agreements in the second half of 1999, and the Electronic Broking Service, a brokerage system for foreign exchange contracts, reportedly is planning to begin brokering forward rate agreements. The latter service may not be offered in the United States, however, because of the threat of application of the CEA. Even some who argue that privately negotiated and bilaterally settled derivatives transactions should be excluded from the CEA, nonetheless believe that such transactions should be subject to the CEA if they are centrally executed or cleared, for fear that such facilities can foster price manipulation. Leaving aside our concern about the regulatory regime of financial futures generally, the Federal Reserve Board is particularly concerned that the vast majority of the instruments currently traded in the OTC markets not be subject to the CEA, even if they become sufficiently standardized to be centrally executed or cleared. To be sure, OTC contracts between counterparties would then have many similarities to exchange-traded contracts. But, they would still retain distinct characteristics that would leave them economically far short of standardization. For example, participants in trade execution systems may seek to retain counterparty credit limits, and participants in clearing systems likely will resist constraints on their ability to customize the economic terms of contracts. To force full standardization would reduce the economic value of a bilateral contract to both parties, and to the marketplace as a whole. In the 1992 Act, Congress encouraged the CFTC to exempt all OTC derivatives transactions between professional counterparties from the CEA, unless both the credit terms and the economic terms are fully standardized. Even with centralized execution or clearing, the most relevant attributes of these markets would not resemble those of the agricultural futures markets and hence would not be susceptible to manipulation. Harmonizing Regulation of the OTC Markets and Futures Exchanges Beyond question, the centralized execution and clearing of what to date have been privately negotiated and bilaterally cleared transactions would narrow the existing differences between exchange-traded and OTC derivatives transactions. However, that is not a reason to extend the CEA to cover OTC transactions. As we have argued, doing so is unnecessary to achieve the public policy objectives of the CEA. Moreover, as the economic differences between OTC and exchange-traded contracts are narrowing, it is becoming more apparent that OTC market participants share this conclusion; their decision to trade outside the regulated environment implies they do not see the benefits of the CEA as outweighing its costs. Instead, the Federal Reserve believes that the fact that OTC markets function so effectively without the benefits of the CEA provides a strong argument for development of a less burdensome regulatory regime for financial derivatives traded on futures exchanges. To reiterate, the existing regulatory framework for futures trading was designed in the 1920s and 1930s for the trading of grain futures by the general public. Like OTC derivatives, exchange-traded financial derivatives generally are not as susceptible to manipulation and are traded predominantly by professional counterparties. Indeed, Congress has rejected the notion of a "one-size-fits-all" approach to regulation of exchange trading. The exemptive authority that Congress gave the CFTC in 1992 permitted it to create a less restrictive regulatory regime for professional trading of financial futures. However, the pilot program proposed by the CFTC evidently has not met the competitive and business requirements of the futures exchanges--no contracts are currently trading under the program. Last year, the Agriculture Committees of the House and the Senate both attempted to craft legislation that would spur development of such a new regulatory framework but were unable to achieve consensus on the best approach. If progress toward a more appropriate regime is not forthcoming soon, Congress should seriously consider passage of legislation that would mandate progress. Conclusion In conclusion, the Board continues to believe that, aside from safety and soundness regulation of derivatives dealers under the banking or securities laws, regulation of derivatives transactions that are privately negotiated by professionals is unnecessary. Moreover, the Board questions whether the CEA as currently implemented is an appropriate framework for professional trading of financial futures on exchanges. The key elements of the CEA were put in place in the 1920s and 1930s to regulate the trading of agricultural futures by the general public. The vast majority of financial futures traded simply are not as susceptible to manipulation as agricultural and other commodity futures where supplies are more limited. And participants in financial futures markets are predominantly professionals that simply do not require the customer protections that may be needed by the general public. Regulation that serves no useful purpose hinders the efficiency of markets to enlarge standards of living. In choosing a particular regulatory regime it is important to remember that no system will fully eliminate inappropriate or illegal activities. Banking examiners, for example, find it difficult to unearth fraud and embezzlement in their early stages. Securities regulators have difficulty ferreting out malfeasance. Even trading on exchanges does not in itself eliminate all endeavors at manipulation, as the Hunt brothers' 1979-80 fiasco in silver demonstrated. The primary source of regulatory effectiveness has always been private traders being knowledgeable of their counterparties. Government regulation can only act as a backup. It should be careful to create net benefits to markets.