Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan At the Annual Meeting of the American Economic Association and the American Finance Association, Chicago, Illinois January 3, 1998 Problems of Price Measurement For most of the past twenty years, the challenges confronting monetary policymakers centered on addressing the question of how inflation could be brought down with as little economic disruption as possible. Given the progress that has been made in reducing inflation, and the very solid economic performance that this low-inflation environment has helped to promote, a new set of issues is now emerging on the policy agenda. Of mounting importance is a deeper understanding of the economic characteristics of sustained price stability. We central bankers need also to better judge how to assess our performance in achieving and maintaining that objective in light of the uncertainties surrounding the accuracy of our measured price indexes. In today's advanced economies, allocative decisions are primarily made by markets. Prices of goods and services set in those markets are central guides to the efficient allocation of resources in a market economy, along with interest rates and equity values. Prices are the signals through which tastes and technology affect the decisions of consumers and producers, directing resources toward their highest valued use. Of course, this signaling process, which involves individual prices, would work with or without government statistical agencies that measure aggregate price levels, and in this sense, price measurement probably is not fundamental for the overall efficiency of the market economy. Indeed, vibrant market economies existed long before government agencies were established to measure prices. Nonetheless, in a modern monetary economy, accurate measurement of aggregate price levels is of considerable importance, increasingly so for central banks whose mandate is to maintain financial stability. Accurate price measures are necessary for understanding economic developments, not only involving inflation, but also involving real output and productivity. If the general price level is estimated to be rising more rapidly than is in fact the case, then we are simultaneously understating growth in real GDP and productivity, and real incomes and living standards are rising faster than our published data suggest. Under these circumstances, policymakers must be cognizant of the shortcomings of our published price indexes to avoid actions based on inaccurate premises that will provoke undesired consequences. Clearly, central bankers need to be conscious of the problems of price measurement as we gauge policies designed to promote price stability and maximum sustainable economic growth. Moreover, many economic transactions, both private and public, are explicitly tied to movements in some published price index, most commonly a consumer price index; and some transactions that are not explicitly tied to a published price index may, nevertheless, take such an index into account less formally. If the price index is not accurately measuring what the participants in such transactions believe it is measuring, then economic transactions will lead to suboptimal outcomes. The remarkable progress that has been made by virtually all of the major industrial countries in achieving low rates of inflation in recent years has brought the issue of price measurement into especially sharp focus. For most purposes, biases of a few tenths in annual inflation rates do not matter when inflation is high. They do matter when, as now, inflation has become so low that policymakers need to consider at what point effective price stability has been reached. Indeed, some observers have begun to question whether deflation is now a possibility, and to assess the potential difficulties such a development might pose for the economy. Even if deflation is not considered a significant near-term risk for the economy, the increasing discussion of it could be clearer in defining the circumstance. Regrettably, the term deflation is being used to describe several different states that are not necessarily depicting similar economic conditions. One use of the term refers to an ongoing fall in the prices of existing assets. Asset prices are inherently volatile, in part because expected returns from real assets can vary for a wide variety of reasons, some of which may be only tangentially related to the state of the economy and monetary policy. Nonetheless, a drop in the prices of existing assets can feed back onto real economic activity, not only by changing incentives to consume and invest, but also by impairing the health of financial intermediaries--as we experienced in the early 1990s and many Asian countries are learning now. But historically, it has been very rapid asset price declines--in equity and real estate, especially--that have held the potential to be a virulently negative force in the economy. I emphasize rapid declines because, in most circumstances, slowly deflating asset prices probably can be absorbed without the marked economic disruptions that frequently accompany sharp corrections. The severe economic contraction of the early 1930s, and the associated persistent declines in product prices, could probably not have occurred apart from the steep asset price deflation that started in 1929. While asset price deflation can occur for a number of reasons, a persistent deflation in the prices of currently produced goods and services--just like a persistent increase in these prices--necessarily is, at its root, a monetary phenomenon. Just as changes in monetary conditions that involve a flight from money to goods cause inflation, the onset of deflation involves a flight from goods to money. Both rapid or variable inflation and deflation can lead to a state of fear and uncertainty that is associated with significant increases in risk premiums and corresponding shortfalls in economic activity. Even a moderate rate of inflation can hamper economic performance, as I have emphasized many times before; and although we do not have any recent experience, moderate rates of deflation would most probably lead to similar problems. Deflation, like inflation, would distort resource allocation and interfere with the economy's ability to reach its full potential. It would have these effects by making long-term planning difficult, obscuring the true movements of relative prices, and interacting adversely with institutions like the tax system that function on the basis on nominal values. But deflation can be detrimental for reasons that go beyond those that are also associated with inflation. Nominal interest rates are bounded at zero, hence deflation raises the possibility of potentially significant increases in real interest rates. Some also argue that resistance to nominal wage cuts will impart an upward bias to real wages as price stability approaches or outright deflation occurs, leaving the economy with a potentially higher level of unemployment in equilibrium. A deflation that took place in an environment of rapid productivity growth, however, might be largely immune from some of these special problems. For example, in the high-tech sector of our economy today, we observe falling prices together with rapid investment and high profitability. Although real interest rates may be quite high in terms of this sector's declining product prices, rapid productivity growth has ensured that real rates of return are higher still, and investment in this sector has been robust. In practice, firms' decisions depend on an evaluation of their nominal return on investment relative to their nominal cost of capital. In this sense, the choice of a specific, sometimes arbitrary, definition of real output and hence of price by government statisticians is essentially a descriptive issue, and not one that directly affects firms' investment decisions. This is an illustration of where even individual price measurement probably is not always of direct and fundamental importance for private sector behavior. If such high-tech, high-productivity-growth firms produce an increasing share of output in the decades ahead, then, one could readily imagine the economy experiencing an overall product price deflation in which the problems associated with a zero constraint on nominal interest rates or nominal wage changes would seldom be binding. Nevertheless, even if we could ensure significantly more rapid productivity growth than we have seen recently, there are valid reasons for wishing to avoid ongoing declines in the general price level. If increases in both inflation and deflation raise risk premiums and retard growth, it follows that risk premiums are lowest at price stability. Furthermore, price stability, by reducing variation in uncertainty about the future, should also reduce variations in asset values. But how are we to know when our objective of price stability has been achieved? In price measurement, a distinction must be made between the measurement of individual prices, on the one hand, and the aggregation of those prices into indexes of the overall price level on the other. The notion of what we mean by a general price level--or more relevantly, its change--is never unambiguously defined. Issues of appropriate weighting in the aggregation process will presumably always bedevil us. But it is the measurement of individual prices, not their aggregation, that pose the most difficult conceptual issues. At first glance, observing and measuring prices might not appear especially daunting. But, in fact, the problem is deceptively complex. To be sure, the dollar value of most transactions is unambiguously exact, and, at least in principle, is amenable to highly accurate estimation by our statistical agencies. But dividing that nominal value change into components representing changes in real quantity versus price requires that one define a unit of output that is to remain constant in all transactions over time. Defining such a constant-quality unit of output, of course, is the central conceptual difficulty in price measurement. Such a definition may be clear for unalloyed aluminum ingot of 99.7 percent or greater purity in wide use. Consequently, its price can be compared over time with a degree of precision adequate for virtually all producers and consumers of aluminum ingot. Similarly, the prices of a ton of cold rolled steel sheet, or of a linear yard of cotton broad woven fabric, can be reasonably compared over a period of years. But when the characteristics of products and services are changing rapidly, defining the unit of output, and thereby adjusting an item's price for improvements in quality, can be exceptionally difficult. These problems are becoming pervasive in modern economies as high tech and service prices, which are generally more difficult to measure, become ever more prominent in aggregate price measures. One does not have to look only to the most advanced technology to recognize the difficulties that are faced. To take just a few examples, automobile tires, refrigerators, winter jackets, and tennis rackets have all changed in ways that make them surprisingly hard to compare to their counterparts of twenty or thirty years ago. The continual introduction of new goods and services onto the markets creates special challenges for price measurement. In some cases, a new good may best be viewed as an improved version of an old good. But, in many cases, new products may deliver services that simply were not available before. When personal computers were first introduced, the benefits they brought households in terms of word processing services, financial calculations, organizational assistance, and the like, were truly unique. And, further in the past, think of the revolutionary changes that automobile ownership, or jet travel, brought to people's lives. In theory, economists understand how to value such innovations; in practice, it is an enormous challenge to construct such an estimate with any precision. The area of medical care, where technology is changing in ways that make techniques of only a decade ago seem archaic, provides some particularly striking illustrations of the difficulties involved in measuring quality-adjusted prices. Cures and preventive treatments have become available for previously untreatable diseases. Medical advances have led to new treatments that are more effective and that have increased the speed and comfort of recovery. In an area with such rapid technological change, what is the appropriate unit of output? Is it a procedure, a treatment, or a cure? How does one value the benefit to the patient when a condition that once required a complicated operation and a lengthy stay in the hospital now can be easily treated on an outpatient basis? Although we may not be able to discern its details, the pace of change and the shift toward output that is difficult to measure are more likely to quicken than to slow down. How, then, will we measure inflation in the future if our measurement techniques become increasingly obsolete? We must keep in mind that, difficult as the problem seems, consistently measured prices do exist in principle. Embodied in all products is some unit of output, and hence of price, that is recognizable to those who buy and sell the product if not to the outside observer. A company that pays a sum of money for computer software knows what it is buying, and at least has an idea about its value relative to software it has purchased in the past, and relative to other possible uses for that sum of money in the present. Furthermore, so long as people continue to exchange nominal interest rate debt instruments and contract for future payments in terms of dollars or other currencies, there must be a presumption about the future purchasing power of money no matter how complex individual products become. Market participants do have a sense of the aggregate price level and how they expect it to change over time, and these views must be embedded in the value of financial assets. The emergence of inflation-indexed bonds, while providing us with useful information, does not solve the problem of ascertaining an economically meaningful measure of the general price level. By necessity, the total return on indexed bonds must be tied to forecasts of specific published price indexes, which may or may not reflect the market's judgment of the future purchasing power of money. To the extent they do not, of course, the implicit real interest rate is biased in the opposite direction. Moreover, we are, as yet, unable to separate compensation for inflation risk from compensation for expected inflation. Eventually, financial markets may develop the instruments and associated analytical techniques for unearthing these implicit changes in the general price level with some precision. In those circumstances, then--at least for purposes of monetary policy--these measures could obviate the more traditional approaches to aggregate price measurement now employed. They may help us understand, for example, whether markets perceive the true change in aggregate prices to reflect fixed or variable weight indexes of the components, or whether arithmetic or logarithmic weighting of the components is more appropriate. But, for the foreseeable future, we shall have to rely on our statistical agencies to produce the price data necessary to assess economic performance and to make economic policy. In that regard, assuming further advances in economic science and provided that our statistical agencies receive adequate resources, procedures should continue to improve. To be sure, progress will not be easy, for estimating the value of quality improvements is a painstaking process. It must be done methodically, item by item. But progress can be made. In recent years, we have developed an improved ability to capture quality differences by pricing the underlying characteristics of complex products. With an increasingly wide range of product variants available to the public, product characteristics are now bundled together in an enormous variety of combinations. A "personal computer" is, in actuality, an amalgamation of computing speed, memory, networking capability, graphics capability, and so on. Computer manufacturers are moving toward build-to-order systems, in which any combination of these specifications and peripheral equipment is available to each individual buyer. Other examples abound. Advancements in computer-assisted design have reduced the costs of producing multiple varieties of small machine tools. And in services, witness the plethora of products now available from financial institutions, which have allowed a more complete disentangling and exchange of economic risks across participants around the world. Although hard data are scarce, there can be little doubt that products are tailor-made for the buyer to a larger extent than ever. Gone are the days when Henry Ford could say he would sell a car of any color "so long as it's black." In such an environment, when product characteristics are bundled together in so many different combinations, defining the unit of output means unbundling these characteristics, and pricing each of them separately. The so-called hedonic technique is designed to do precisely that. This technique associates changes in a product's price with changes in product characteristics. It therefore allows a quality comparison when new products with improved characteristics are introduced. This approach has been especially useful in the pricing of computers. But hedonics are by no means a panacea. First of all, this technique obviously will be of no use in valuing the quality of an entirely new product that has fundamentally different characteristics from its predecessors. The benefits of cellular telephones, and the value they provide in terms of making calls from any location, cannot be measured from an examination of the attributes of standard telephones. In addition, the measured characteristics may only be proxies for the overall performance that consumers ultimately value. In the case of computers, the buyer ultimately cares about the quality of services that computer will provide--word processing capabilities, database services, high-speed calculations, and so on. But, in many cases, the number of message instructions per second and the other easily measured characteristics may not be a wholly adequate proxy for the computer services that the individual buyer values. In these circumstances, the right approach, ultimately, may be to move toward directly pricing the services we obtain from our computers--that is, word processing services, database management services, and so on--rather than pricing separately the hardware and software. The issues surrounding the appropriate measurement of computer prices also illustrate some of the difficulties of valuing goods and services when there are significant interactions among users of the products. New generations of computers sometimes require software that is incompatible with previous generations, and some users who have no need for the improved computing power nevertheless may feel compelled to purchase the new technology because they need to remain compatible with the bulk of users who are at the frontier. Even if our techniques allow us to accurately measure consumers' valuation of the increased speed and power of the new generation of computer, we may miss the negative influence on some consumers of this incompatibility. Therefore, even in the case of personal computers, where we have made such great strides in measuring quality changes, I suspect that important phenomena still may not be adequately captured by our published price indexes. Despite the advances in price measurement that have been made over the years, there remains considerable room for improvement. As you know, a group of experts empaneled by the Senate Finance Committee--the Boskin commission--concluded that the consumer price index has overstated changes in the cost of living by roughly one percentage point per annum in recent years. About half of this bias owed to inadequate adjustment for quality improvement and the introduction of new goods, and about half reflected the manner in which the individual prices were aggregated. Researchers at the Federal Reserve and elsewhere have come up with similar figures. Although the estimates of bias owing to inadequate adjustment for quality improvements surely are the most uncertain aspect of this calculation, the preponderance of evidence is that, on average, such a bias in quality adjustment does exist. The Boskin commission and most others estimating bias in the CPI have taken a microstatistical approach, estimating separately the magnitude of each category of potential bias. Recent work by staff economists at the Federal Reserve Board has added corroborating evidence of price mismeasurement, using a macroeconomic approach that is essentially independent of the microstatistical exercises. Specifically, employing disaggregated data from the national income and product accounts, this research finds that the measured growth of real output and productivity in the service sector is implausibly weak, given that the return to owners of businesses in that sector apparently has been well-maintained. Indeed, the published data indicate that the level of output per hour in a number of service-producing industries has been falling for more than two decades. It is simply not credible that firms in these industries have been becoming less and less efficient for more than twenty years. Much more reasonable is the view that prices have been mismeasured, and that the true quality-adjusted prices have been rising more slowly than the published price indexes. Properly measured, output and productivity trends in these service industries are doubtless considerably stronger than suggested by the published data. Assuming, for example, no change in the productivity levels for these industries in recent years would imply a price bias consistent with the Boskin commission findings. A Commerce Department official once compared a nation's statistical system to a tailor, measuring the economy much as a tailor measures a person for a suit of clothes--with the difference that, unlike the tailor, the person we are measuring is running while we try to measure him. The only way the system can succeed, he said, is to be just as fast and twice as agile. That is the challenge that lies ahead, and it is, indeed, a large one. There are, however, reasons for optimism. The information revolution, which lies behind so much of the rapid technological change that makes prices difficult to measure, will surely play an important role in helping our statistical agencies acquire the necessary speed and agility to better capture the changes taking place in our economies. Computers, for example, might some day allow our statistical agencies to tap into a great many economic transactions on a nearly real-time basis. Utilizing data from store checkout scanners, which the BLS is now investigating, may be an important first step in that direction. But the possibilities offered by information technology for the improvement of price measurement may turn out to be much broader in scope. Just as it is difficult to predict the ways in which technology will change our consumption over time, so is it difficult to predict how economic and statistical science will make creative use of the improved technology. Such advances must be taken to ensure that our economic statistics remain adequate to support the public policy decisions that must be made. If the challenge for our statistical agencies is not to lose in their race against technology, the challenge for policymakers is to make our best judgments about the limitations of the existing statistics, as we design policies to promote the economic well-being of our nations. In confronting those challenges, both government statisticians and policymakers would benefit from additional research by you, the economics profession, into the increasingly complex conceptual and empirical issues involved with accurately measuring price and quantity.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve today issued the final report and recommendations of its Committee on the Federal Reserve in the Payments Mechanism. The Committee was appointed by Chairman Alan Greenspan in October 1996 to examine the payment services provided by the Federal Reserve to depository institutions in recognition of the rapid changes occurring in the financial services and technology sectors. The Committee came to two general conclusions which are discussed in detail in its full report: The Federal Reserve should remain a provider of both check collection and automated clearing house (ACH) services with the explicit goal of enhancing the efficiency, effectiveness and convenience of both systems, while ensuring access for all depository institutions. The Federal Reserve should play a more active role, working closely and collaboratively with providers and users of the payments system, both to enhance the efficiency of check and ACH services and to help evolve strategies for moving to the next generation of payment instruments. In reaching its conclusions the Committee undertook a fundamental review of the role of the Federal Reserve in the payments system and considered how alternative roles for the Federal Reserve might enhance or undermine the integrity, efficiency and accessibility of the payments system. The review involved a series of payments system forums held around the country to receive views of representatives from over 450 institutions, including depository institutions of all sizes, clearing houses and other third-party service providers, consumers, retailers, and academics. Discussions at these meetings focussed on five hypothetical scenarios depicting various alternative roles of the Federal Reserve, ranging from exiting the retail payments system to adopting a leadership role in the industry. The Committee is comprised of Vice Chair Alice M. Rivlin as Committee Chair, Governor Edward W. Kelley, Jr., President William J. McDonough of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and President Thomas C. Melzer of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. The Committee's final report and recommendations is attached.
For immediate release Preliminary figures indicate that operating income of the Federal Reserve Banks amounted to $26.916 billion during 1997. Net income before payment of dividends, additions to surplus, and payments to the Treasury totaled $21.793 billion. About $20.662 billion of this net income was distributed to the U.S. Treasury during 1997. Federal Reserve System income is derived primarily from interest earned on U.S. government securities that the Federal Reserve has acquired through open market operations. Income from the provision of financial services amounted to $790 million. Operating expenses of the 12 Reserve Banks and branches totaled $1.813 billion. In addition, earnings credits in the amount of $361.6 million were granted to depository institutions under the Monetary Control Act of 1980. Assessments to Reserve Banks for Board expenditures totaled $174.4 million and the cost of currency amounted to $364.5 million. Net deductions from income amounted to $2.577 billion, resulting primarily from unrealized losses on assets denominated in foreign currencies revalued to reflect current market exchange rates. Statutory dividends to member banks were $299.7 million. Under the policy established by the Board of Governors at the end of 1964, all net income after the statutory dividend to member banks and the amount necessary to equate surplus to paid-in capital is transferred to the U.S. Treasury. In October 1996 and October 1997 the Reserve Banks also transferred $106 million and $107 million, respectively, from their surplus accounts to the Treasury, as statutorily required.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of an Order of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty against G.A. Poling, Jr., the President of the Zia New Mexico Bank, Tucumcari, New Mexico. Mr. Poling, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order in connection with his participation in the Bank’s alleged violations of section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act relating to the filing of misleading Call Reports. Mr. Poling paid a $5,000 fine. A copy of the order is attached.
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan Economic development in low- and moderate-income communities At a Community Forum on Community Reinvestment and Access to Credit: California's Challenge, Los Angeles, California January 12, 1998
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today named fourteen new members to its Consumer Advisory Council for three-year terms and designated a new Chairman and Vice Chairman of the Council for 1998. The Council, which consists of thirty members, advises the Board on the exercise of its responsibilities under the Consumer Credit Protection Act and on other matters in the area of consumer financial services. The Council meets three times a year in Washington, D.C. William N. Lund, Director of the Office of Consumer Credit Regulation for the State of Maine, was designated Chairman. His term runs through December 1998. Yvonne S. Sparks was designated Vice Chairman. Ms. Sparks is Vice President, Community Investment Department, at the NationsBank Community Investment Group in St. Louis, Missouri. Her term on the Council ends in December 1999. The fourteen new members are: Walter J. Boyer Garland, Texas Mr. Boyer is President of United Central Bank, a minority-owned bank that specializes in niche markets serving the large Asian populations of Texas. Mr. Boyer is active in many community and business organizations. He currently serves as President of the Dallas Business Association. Other past and present affiliations include service as board member of the Garland Community Hospital, the Garland Advisory Police Council, and the Association of Women Entrepreneurs. Jeremy Eisler Ocean Springs, Mississippi Mr. Eisler is Director of Litigation for the South Mississippi Legal Services Corporation, where he practices in the area of consumer law. The agency, located in Biloxi, represents low-income individuals. Mr. Eisler is also the Statewide Coordinator of Litigation and Training in the area of consumer law for Legal Services programs in Mississippi, and is a frequent lecturer on consumer law. He is a member of both the Mississippi and the North Carolina Bars. Robert F. Elliott Prospect Heights, Illinois Mr. Elliott is Vice Chairman of Household International, a diversified financial services company engaged in making loans and issuing credit cards in the U. S., U. K., and Canada. He has been with Household since 1964. He was named Assistant Director of commercial lending in 1982; he was promoted to Division General Manager of Household's Canadian company in 1985 and to President of the operation in 1986. He was appointed President of Household's private label credit card business in 1987, and was named Group Executive and CEO of HFC in 1990. He was promoted to his current position in 1997. Mr. Elliott is active in business associations, and currently serves on the board of directors for the American Financial Services Association and Junior Achievement. Dwight Golann Boston, Massachusetts Mr. Golann is Professor of Law at Suffolk University Law School and is also a Visiting Scholar at Harvard Law School. A specialist in alternative dispute resolution, he is a senior mediator and trainer for JAMS/Endispute and is a Distinguished Neutral for the CPR Institute of Dispute Resolution. He chairs the dispute resolution programs for the ADR committee in the American Bar Association's Section of Litigation, and has just completed a three-year term as chair of the ABA's Consumer Financial Services Committee. He previously served as chief of the Consumer Protection Division, deputy chief of the Public Protection Bureau, and Assistant Attorney General for the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. Mr. Golann is the principal author and editor of Mediating Legal Disputes: Effective Strategies for Lawyers and Mediators. Marva H. Harris Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania Ms. Harris is Senior Vice President and Manager of Community Development for PNC Bank Corporation, Pittsburgh, providing strategic guidance for initiatives that target the community development and economic revitalization of low- and moderate-income areas in all PNC Bank markets. In 1997, Ms. Harris received the Carlow College Women of Spirit award, in recognition of leadership in business and community activities. In 1995, she was among ten women from the Pittsburgh area to receive the YWCA of Greater Pittsburgh's Tribute to Women Leadership Award in Business and Industry. She is a member of the Consumer Bankers Association's Community Reinvestment Act Committee. She is a founding board member of the Pittsburgh Partnership for Neighborhood Development and the founding president of the Community Lender Credit Program. She has served on the board of directors for the Housing Authority of the City of Pittsburgh. Karla Irvine Cincinnati, Ohio Ms. Irvine is Executive Director of Housing Opportunities Made Equal (HOME) of Greater Cincinnati, Inc., a private nonprofit corporation. HOME provides seminars and training on fair housing education issues and investigative techniques in real estate sales and rentals. Ms. Irvine is a member of the Executive Committee of the Cincinnati Branch of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored Persons. She is a board member of the Greater Cincinnati Mortgage Counseling Center, a group that provides support for low- and moderate-income, first-time homebuyers; a member of the Greater Cincinnati Housing Alliance, a group that funds neighborhood development corporations to improve their performance; and a member of Cincinnatus, a civic group. Gwenn Kyzer Allen, Texas Ms. Kyzer is Vice President for Information Services for Experï¿½an, a diversified information company that includes one of the three major credit reporting agencies in the United States. Experï¿½an is a global provider of consumer and business credit reporting, credit-scoring and other analytical tools, and target-marketing information and services. Ms. Kyzer's current responsibilities include expansion of the marketing information business and fair information practices for Experï¿½an's direct marketing business. Ms. Kyzer has more than twenty years' experience in the credit reporting and direct market industries, having previously held senior positions with TRW and with Chilton Corporation. She serves on the board of directors of the American Mail Marketing Association and of the Direct Marketing Educational Foundation; and serves on the Ethics Policy Committee of the Direct Marketing Association. John C. Lamb Sacramento, California Mr. Lamb is Senior Staff Counsel for the California Department of Consumer Affairs, where he drafts and analyzes consumer legislation and where he has conducted consumer litigation and prepared and argued "friend of the court" briefs. Mr. Lamb writes and edits the Consumer Law Sourcebook, and serves as liaison to consumer organizations. He is a member of the California State Bar's Consumer Financial Services and Consumer Advocacy Committees; and is also a member of the California District Attorneys Association's Consumer and Environmental Protection Council. Martha W. Miller Greensboro, North Carolina Ms. Miller is President of Choice Federal Credit Union, a $38.5 million institution serving more than 34,000 members, primarily manufacturing employees paid on an hourly basis. She serves on a regional advisory committee of the National Association of Federal Credit Unions, and on the board of directors of the Carolina Credit Union Services and the North Carolina Credit Union Network. Ms. Miller also serves on the advisory board of Credit Counselors of Greensboro. She is a representative to the Better Business Bureau of Central North Carolina and the Greensboro Area Chamber of Commerce. Daniel W. Morton Columbus, Ohio Mr. Morton is a Vice President and Senior Counsel of The Huntington National Bank, a subsidiary of the Huntington Bancshares, Inc., a bank holding company headquartered in Columbus, Ohio. He is responsible for providing legal advice with respect to retail deposit and consumer credit products, electronic banking, insurance, and other regulatory matters. He also works with the bank's Community Centered Banking group, which seeks alternative ways to bring banking products to low- and moderate-income persons. Mr. Morton serves on the Legal and Public Policy Committee of the Smart Card Forum, the Legal/Public Policy Working Group of The Bankers Roundtable, the Consumer Financial Services Committee of the Business Law Section of the American Bar Association, and various committees of the Consumer Bankers Association. Charlotte Newton Springfield, Virginia Ms. Newton is Vice President of Consumer Affairs for MasterCard International. She serves as vice chair of the National Consumers League and is co-chair of the Corporate Relations Committee recently established by the National Association of Consumer Agency Administrators. Ms. Newton serves on the National Commission on Family and Consumer Sciences National Standards as an advisor on the development of curriculum review standards for teaching consumer science. She has previously served as president of the Virginia Citizens Consumer Council and as the executive director of the National Association of Consumer Agency Administrators. As a founder of the National Coalition of Consumer Education, she served on the board of directors during the organization's early years. David L. Ramp Minneapolis, Minnesota Mr. Ramp is an attorney who represents low-income clients for the Legal Aid Society of Minneapolis, specializing in consumer and housing cases. He is the 1997 recipient of the Vern Countryman Consumer Law Award; the award recognizes and honors the accomplishments of attorneys serving the public interest who, through the practice of consumer law, have contributed significantly to the rights and welfare of low-income consumers. Mr. Ramp is a member of the Minnesota State Bar and Hennepin County Bar and serves on the bankruptcy panel of the Legal Advice Clinic. Robert G. Schwemm Lexington, Kentucky Mr. Schwemm is Professor of Law at the University of Kentucky, where he teaches courses in civil procedure, constitutional law, and civil rights. He specializes in fair housing and fair lending laws, and is the author of Housing Discrimination: Law and Litigation. Mr. Schwemm serves as an advisor to the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, the U.S. Department of Justice, and various other public and private agencies concerned with fair housing enforcement. David J. Shirk Eugene, Oregon Mr. Shirk is Senior Vice President of Frontier Investment Company, a full-service mortgage company; and is the founder of RegWise, a regulatory compliance consulting firm. He is a Certified Mortgage Consultant, and in 1995 was named Mortgage Broker of the Year by the National Association of Mortgage Brokers. He served as chair of the Association's National Mortgage Reform task force in 1996-97; he now serves on the Mortgage Reform Working Group, a roundtable of industry and consumer organizations that is developing recommendations for the reform of the Truth in Lending Act and Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act. He is a past president of the Oregon Association of Mortgage Brokers. Mr. Shirk recently published a manual titled High Cost Mortgages, How to Comply with Regulation Z Section 32: An Originator's Guide to Compliance. Council members whose terms continue through 1998 and 1999 are: Richard S. Amador President and Chief Executive Officer CHARO Community Development Corporation Los Angeles, California Philip Price, Jr. Executive Director The Philadelphia Plan Philadelphia, Pennsylvania Wayne-Kent A. Bradshaw President and Chief Executive Officer Family Savings Bank, FSB Los Angeles, California Marilyn Ross Executive Director Holy Name Housing Corporation Omaha, Nebraska Heriberto Flores President and Chief Executive Officer Brightwood Development Corporation Springfield, Massachusetts Margot Saunders Managing Attorney National Consumer Law Center Washington, D.C. Francine C. Justa Executive Director Neighborhood Housing Services of New York New York, New York Gail Small Executive Director Native Action Lame Deer, Montana Janet C. Koehler Senior Manager of Electronic Commerce AT&T Universal Card Services Jacksonville, Florida Gregory D. Squires Professor Department of Sociology University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee Milwaukee, Wisconsin Errol T. Louis Central Brooklyn Federal Credit Union Brooklyn, New York George P. Surgeon Chief Financial Officer and Executive Vice President Shorebank Corporation Chicago, Illinois Carol Parry Executive Vice President Chase Manhattan Bank New York, New York Theodore J. Wysocki, Jr. Executive Director CANDO Chicago, Illinois Richard S. Amador President and Chief Executive Officer CHARO Community Development Corporation Los Angeles, California Philip Price, Jr. Executive Director The Philadelphia Plan Philadelphia, Pennsylvania Wayne-Kent A. Bradshaw President and Chief Executive Officer Family Savings Bank, FSB Los Angeles, California Marilyn Ross Executive Director Holy Name Housing Corporation Omaha, Nebraska Heriberto Flores President and Chief Executive Officer Brightwood Development Corporation Springfield, Massachusetts Margot Saunders Managing Attorney National Consumer Law Center Washington, D.C. Francine C. Justa Executive Director Neighborhood Housing Services of New York New York, New York Gail Small Executive Director Native Action Lame Deer, Montana Janet C. Koehler Senior Manager of Electronic Commerce AT&T Universal Card Services Jacksonville, Florida Gregory D. Squires Professor Department of Sociology University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee Milwaukee, Wisconsin Errol T. Louis Central Brooklyn Federal Credit Union Brooklyn, New York George P. Surgeon Chief Financial Officer and Executive Vice President Shorebank Corporation Chicago, Illinois Carol Parry Executive Vice President Chase Manhattan Bank New York, New York Theodore J. Wysocki, Jr. Executive Director CANDO Chicago, Illinois
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice of Fleet Financial Group, Inc., Boston, Massachusetts, to acquire all the voting shares of The Quick & Reilly Group, Inc., Palm Beach, Florida, and its nonbanking subsidiaries, and thereby engage in a variety of nonbanking activities, including underwriting and dealing in, to a limited extent, certain types of bank-ineligible securities. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Fleet Financial Group, Inc. Boston, Massachusetts Order Approving a Notice to Engage in Nonbanking Activities Fleet Financial Group, Inc., Boston, Massachusetts ("Fleet"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1843(c)(8)) and section 225.24 of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.24) to acquire all the voting shares of The Quick & Reilly Group, Inc., Palm Beach, Florida ("Q&R Group"), and the wholly owned subsidiaries of Q&R Group. In connection with this transaction, Fleet proposes to engage in the following activities: Underwriting and dealing in, to a limited extent, all types of debt and equity securities (other than ownership interests in open-end investment companies) that a member bank may not underwrite or deal in ("bank-ineligible securities"); Providing administrative services to open-end investment companies; Providing credit and credit related services, pursuant to sections 225.28(b)(1) and (2) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(1) and (2)); Providing financial and investment advisory services, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(6) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(6)); Providing securities brokerage, riskless principal, private placement, and other agency transactional services, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(7) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(7)); Underwriting and dealing in government obligations and money market instruments and buying and selling bullion and related activities, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(8) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(8)); and Providing data processing services, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(14) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(14)), and activities incidental thereto. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (62 Federal Register 65,429 (1997)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the notice and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Fleet, with total consolidated assets of approximately $83.6 billion, is the 12th largest banking organization in the United States. Fleet operates banking subsidiaries in six states and engages through subsidiaries in a broad range of permissible nonbanking activities. Q&R Group, with consolidated assets of $4.5 billion, engages directly and through its affiliates in securities brokerage and other related activities, including market-maker activities. In particular, JJC Specialist serves as a specialist on the New York Stock Exchange, and Nash Weiss serves as a market-maker on the National Association of Securities Dealers Automated Quotations System. Fleet currently engages through Fleet Securities, Inc., in limited underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities, as permitted under section 20 of the Glass-Steagall Act (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 377). Fleet proposes to merge Fleet Securities, Inc., and Fleet Clearing Corporation, a subsidiary of Fleet, with the following subsidiaries of Q&R Group: JJC Specialist, Nash Weiss, and U.S. Clearing Corp. The combined organization ("Company"), which will be named Fleet Securities, Inc., will be a broker-dealer registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. ï¿½ 78a et seq. ) and a member of the National Association of Securities Dealers, Inc. ("NASD"). Company, therefore, will be subject to the record-keeping and reporting obligations, fiduciary standards, and other requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the SEC, and the NASD. Underwriting and Dealing Activities The Board has determined that, subject to the framework of prudential limitations to address the potential for conflicts of interests, unsound banking practices, or other adverse effects, underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities is so closely related to banking as to be a proper incident thereto within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. The Board also has determined that the conduct of these securities underwriting and dealing activities is consistent with section 20 of the Glass-Steagall Act (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 377), provided that the company engaged in underwriting and dealing activities derives no more than 25 percent of its gross revenues from underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities over a two-year period. Fleet has committed that Company will conduct its bank-ineligible securities underwriting and dealing activities subject to the Board's 25-percent revenue limit. No other Fleet company will engage in underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities. As a condition of this order, Fleet is required to conduct its bank-ineligible securities activities subject to the revenue restriction and Operating Standards established for section 20 subsidiaries ("Operating Standards"). Other Activities Approved by Regulation or Order The Board previously has determined by regulation that credit and credit-related activities; data processing activities; financial and investment advisory services; brokerage, riskless principal, private placement, and other transactional activities; and bank-eligible underwriting and dealing activities are closely related to banking within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Fleet has committed that it will conduct each of these activities in accordance with Regulation Y and the relevant Board interpretations and orders. The Board also previously has determined by order that providing investment company administrative services is closely related to banking within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Proper Incident to Banking Standard In order to approve this proposal, the Board must determine that the proposed activities are a proper incident to banking, that is, that the performance of the activities "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public . . . that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices." As part of its review of these factors, the Board considered the financial resources of Fleet, and the effect the transaction would have on such resources. The Board also has reviewed the capitalization of Fleet and Fleet Securities, Inc., in accordance with the standards set forth in the Section 20 Orders and finds the capitalization of each to be consistent with approval of the proposal. The Board's determination about the capitalization of Fleet Securities, Inc., is based on all the facts of record, including Fleet's projections of the volume of Company's underwriting and dealing activities in bank-ineligible securities. The Board also has reviewed the managerial resources of Fleet and each of the entities involved in the proposal. The Board has reviewed these resources in light of relevant reports of examination, and on the basis of these and all the facts of record, including the commitments provided in this case, the Board has concluded that financial and managerial considerations are consistent with approval of the notice. The Board also has carefully considered the competitive effects of the proposed acquisition. To the extent that Fleet and Q&R Group offer different types of products, the proposed acquisition would result in no loss of competition. In those markets in which Fleet and Q&R Group overlap, such as the market for securities brokerage services, there are numerous existing and potential competitors. Consummation of the proposal, therefore, would have a de minimis effect on competition in the markets for these services, and the Board concludes that the proposal would not result in any significantly adverse competitive effects in any relevant market. The Board expects that the proposed transaction would increase Fleet's ability to serve the needs of its customers, and would allow the combined organization to provide both existing and new customers with a broader range of products and services through an expanded distribution channel. The Board also expects that the proposed acquisition would result in operational efficiencies, allowing the combined organization to be a more effective competitor. Under the framework and conditions established in this order and the Section 20 Orders, and based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposal can reasonably be expected to produce public benefits that outweigh any adverse effects of the proposal. Accordingly, the Board has determined that performance of the proposed activities by Fleet is a proper incident to banking for purposes of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Conclusion On the basis of the record, the Board has determined that the notice should be, and hereby is, approved, subject to all the terms and conditions discussed in this order and in the Section 20 Orders, as modified by Modification Orders. The Board's approval of this proposal extends only to activities conducted within the limitations of those orders and this order, including the Board's reservation of authority to establish additional limitations to ensure that Fleet's activities are consistent with safety and soundness, avoidance of conflicts of interests, and other relevant considerations under the BHC Act. Underwriting and dealing in any manner other than as approved in this order and the Section 20 Orders, as modified by Modification Orders, is not authorized. The Board's approval of the proposal by Fleet to engage in underwriting and dealing in all types of debt and equity securities is conditioned on a determination by the Board that Fleet and Company have established policies and procedures for debt and equity underwriting and dealing to ensure compliance with the requirements of this order, the Section 20 Orders, and Modification Orders, including computer, audit, and accounting systems, internal risk management controls, and the necessary operational and managerial infrastructure. Fleet has requested a delay in conducting the infrastructure review until after Fleet has acquired Q&R Group in order to provide additional time for developing enhanced policies and procedures for the proposed bank-ineligible securities activities, most of which are not currently conducted by Q&R Group. As part of the request, Fleet has committed not to engage in any bank-ineligible securities underwriting or dealing activity, not already conducted by Q&R Group or Fleet, until the Board determines that a satisfactory infrastructure is in place. Accordingly, the Board has determined that Fleet may continue the current activities of Q&R Group while the infrastructure review is being conducted, subject to the condition that, if the initial results of the infrastructure review are not satisfactory to the Board, Fleet terminate, divest, or reduce the activities as the Board deems appropriate until a satisfactory review is achieved. The Board's determination also is subject to all the terms and conditions set forth in Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.25(c) (12 C.F.R. 225.7 and 225.25(c)), and to the Board's authority to require modification or termination of the activities of a bank holding company or any of its subsidiaries the Board finds necessary to assure compliance with, or to prevent evasion of, the provisions and purposes of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders issued thereunder. The Board's decision is specifically conditioned on compliance with the operating standards and with all the commitments made in connection with this notice, including the commitments discussed in this order and the conditions set forth in the Board regulations and orders noted above. The commitments and conditions shall be deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision, and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. This proposal shall not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective January 14, 1998. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes These subsidiaries include: Quick & Reilly, Inc., U.S. Clearing Corp., JJC Specialist Corp. ("JJC Specialist"), Nash, Weiss & Co. ("Nash Weiss"), SureTrade Corp., Quick & Reilly Limited, and Financial Systemware, Inc. As used in this order, "bank-ineligible securities" refers to all types of debt and equity securities that a bank may not underwrite or deal in directly under section 16 of the Glass-Steagall Act (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 24(7)). Asset and ranking data are as of September 30, 1997. Fleet has represented that neither JJC Specialist nor Nash Weiss has taken a market portion of more than 5 percent of any class of voting shares of any company for which they act as market-maker. Fleet Securities, Inc., has authority to underwrite and deal in, to a limited extent, certain municipal revenue bonds and commercial paper. See Fleet/Norstar Financial Group, Inc. , 74 Federal Reserve Bulletin 819 (1988). Fleet Securities, Inc., also is authorized to engage in a variety of other nonbanking activities. See J.P. Morgan & Co. Incorporated, et al. , 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 192 (1989), aff'd sub nom. Securities Industries Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 900 F.2d 360 (D.C. Cir. 1990); Citicorp, et al. , 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 473 (1987), aff'd sub nom. Securities Industry Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 839 F.2d 47 (2d Cir. 1988), cert. denied, 486 U.S. 1059 (1988); as modified by Review of Restrictions on Director, Officer and Employee Interlocks, Cross-Marketing Activities, and the Purchase and Sale of Financial Assets Between a Section 20 Subsidiary and an Affiliated Bank or Thrift, 61 Federal Register 57,679 (1996), and Amendments to Restrictions in the Board's Section 20 Orders, 62 Federal Register 45,295 (1997) (collectively, the "Section 20 Orders"). Compliance with the revenue limitation shall be calculated in accordance with the method stated in the Section 20 Orders, as modified by the Order Approving Modifications to the Section 20 Orders, 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 751 (1989), and 10 Percent Revenue Limit on Bank-Ineligible Activities of Subsidiaries of Bank Holding Companies Engaged in Underwriting and Dealing in Securities, 61 Federal Register 48,953 (1996), and Revenue Limit on Bank-Ineligible Activities of Subsidiaries of Bank Holding Companies Engaged in Underwriting and Dealing in Securities, 61 Federal Register 68,750 (1996). (collectively, "Modification Orders"). Company may provide services that are necessary incidents to the proposed underwriting and dealing activities. Unless Fleet receives specific approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act to conduct the activities independently, Company must treat any revenues from the incidental activities as bank-ineligible revenues subject to the Board's revenue limitation. See 12 C.F.R. 225.200. See sections 225.28(b)(1), (2), (6), (7), (8), and (14) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(1), (2), (6), (7), (8), and (14)). See Bankers Trust New York Corp. , 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin 780 (1997), Commerzbank AG, 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin 678 (1997), and Mellon Bank Corporation, 79 Federal Reserve Bulletin 626 (1993). The Board's approval of the proposal by Fleet to provide administrative services to investment companies is subject to Fleet's compliance with the prudential and other limitations relating to administrative services established by the Board in these orders. 12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1843(c)(8). In its review of the statutory factors in this case, the Board has considered comments filed in connection with this notice. One commenter contends that an employee at a branch office of Fleet Bank, N.A., Jersey City, New Jersey, participated in a fraudulent scheme against the commenter, and argues that this reflects negatively on Fleet's internal controls and risk management systems. The Board has reviewed commenter's contention in light of Fleet's extensive supervisory record, which includes examination reports by appropriate supervisory authorities of the bank and information provided by Fleet regarding its risk systems and internal controls. Another commenter alleges that Fleet financed the purchase of rehabilitated residential property in the Dorchester area of Boston at inflated prices, resulting in excessive debt service for minority and low- to moderate-income purchasers of these properties. The Board previously has considered these allegations in connection with a prior application by Fleet. See Fleet Financial Group, Inc. , 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 50 (1995). Fleet continues to deny any complicity with redevelopers in these transactions and maintains that all loans were made on the basis of independent appraisals. Fleet indicates that it has worked with a community-based organization to improve mortgage products available in Dorchester, and that it continues to perform in a responsible and responsive manner in the Dorchester community. In addition, without alleging or providing any facts to show that Fleet has violated any law, the latter commenter contends that the underwriting criteria for the first-time home buyer programs of Fleet National Bank, Providence, Rhode Island, may have negative effects on low- to moderate-income individuals. Fleet asserts that its flexible mortgage programs provide a major source of financing for low- to moderate-income individuals. The Board notes that the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the primary federal regulator of Fleet National Bank, and the Board have sufficient supervisory authority to address any violations of law by Fleet involving any of its home mortgage lending programs if any such violation is found. Commenters have requested a hearing or a public meeting on the proposal. Section 4 of the BHC Act and the Board's rules thereunder provide for a hearing on an application to acquire a savings association if there are disputed issues of material fact that cannot be resolved in some other manner. See 12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1843(c)(8). This case does not involve the acquisition of a savings association. Under its rules, the Board may, in its discretion, hold a public hearing or meeting on an application or notice to clarify factual issues related to the notice and to provide an opportunity for testimony, if appropriate. See 12 C.F.R. 262.3(e) and 262.25(d). The Board has carefully considered commenters' requests for a hearing in light of all the facts of record. In the Board's view, commenters have had ample opportunity to present their views, and they have submitted written comments that have been carefully considered by the Board in acting on the proposal. Commenters' requests fail to demonstrate why their written presentations do not adequately present their evidence, allegations, and views. For these reasons, and based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that a public hearing or meeting is not required or warranted to clarify the factual record in the proposal, or otherwise warranted in this case. Accordingly, the request for a hearing on the proposal is hereby denied. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan and Governors Kelley, Phillips, Meyer, Ferguson, and Gramlich. Absent and not voting: Vice Chair Rivlin.
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan The underemployment of minorities At the Wall Street Project Anniversary Conference of the Rainbow/PUSH Coalition, New York, New York January 16, 1998 I am pleased to be able to contribute to this conference's discussion of the challenges and opportunities associated with achieving diversity throughout the ranks of the American business and financial community. The decades since World War II have increasingly underscored the superiority of market capitalism. First, the head-to-head competition with the centrally planned economies of eastern Europe came to an abrupt end with the freeing of walled-off eastern Europe in 1989. The results of that experiment in social systems marked an unequivocal victory for the market capitalism of the West. This past year has exhibited a more modest replay of 1989 with the dismantling in many Asian countries of the model of so-called mercantilist capitalism, which involved a good deal of state intervention. Again, the less fettered capitalism that is most prevalent in the West demonstrated its superiority in sensitivity to consumer preferences and market forces. Yet, although the image of free market capitalism has been elevated throughout the world from its sorry state at the end of World War II, the application of it within the United States, its largest adherent, is regrettably incomplete: Too many barriers still prevent the free flow of capital and people to their most productive employment. This conference is addressing one result of those barriers, the underemployment of a significant segment of our population. I trust that from yesterday's workshops and in subsequent discussions you will be able to identify ways to utilize more fully the talents of our increasingly diverse workforce to meet the challenges of a dynamic, global, financial services industry. I would like to address two aspects of the issue of underemployment of minorities: first, the implications of ignoring the potential that already exists and, second, the need to encourage young people to seek the types of education and training that will meet the demands of work in the twenty-first century. Regrettably, when faced with choices among otherwise similarly educated or experienced job candidates, some may simply select those with whom they are more comfortable by dint of familiarity--those who come from the same schools, who belong to the same clubs, or who are recommended by their colleagues--rather than look deeper into the unfamiliar for untapped talent. A similar tendency may explain at least some of the large disparity in mortgage application acceptances between whites and minorities that was investigated by the Federal Reserve System and others in recent years. After accounting for the obvious differences in income, assets, and previous credit histories, a significant gap remained. Upon detailed examination, the data showed that those clearly qualified for a loan, or clearly not qualified, were accepted, or rejected, independent of race. The gap may have stemmed at least partly from the extent to which those reviewing loan applications, mainly whites, were prone to give more assistance to whites than to minorities in correcting application deficiencies in marginal applications. I believe it is reasonable to surmise that, if minorities had had the same advantages of application enhancement, the banks would have uncovered many additional, profitable lending opportunities. I was reminded during a recent visit with Jesse Jackson of a related episode half a century ago: the confrontation just after World War II of the decades-old racial discrimination in major league baseball. At that time, the leagues were somewhat less than "major" in that a significant segment of baseball talent was excluded. I suspect that many league owners realized that hiring black ballplayers could enhance their teams' competitive skills, an improvement that would eventually show up at the box office and on their financial bottom line. Of course, in the late 1940s, aside from those prone to prejudice, most owners were simply more comfortable with the status quo, taking the path of least resistance, that is, doing nothing. Almost as bad, were the procrastinators, who saw what needed to be done but were dilatory. Fortunately, Branch Rickey was neither. He had the courage of his convictions and was smart enough to know that, in bringing Jackie Robinson into the major leagues, he was moving ahead of his fellow owners and could thereby gain an advantage. It also was the right thing to do. I do not want to argue that minorities today are being excluded systematically from our business and financial major leagues in the same way that black ballplayers were blocked from baseball half a century ago. However, I believe that, like the major league owners, business and financial industry decisionmakers are subject to some inertia in expanding their vision to seek talent wherever it lies. Our experience with mortgage applications is one that underscores the role that free market competitive pressures can play in undermining discrimination and improving the profitability of business activity. Discrimination is patently immoral, but it is now increasingly being seen as unprofitable. Prices, interest rates, stock prices, and other signals produced by market economies to encourage the distribution of productive resources have no inherent moral content. However, to the extent that market participants discriminate--consciously or, more likely, unconsciously--the setting of wages and prices and the distribution of output are distorted. In the end, costs are higher, less real output is produced, and national wealth accumulation is slowed. If markets were fully efficient--that is, if all resources were allocated optimally and fully employed without discrimination--profit maximizers would arbitrage away such non-economic differences in the returns to human capital and other productive resources. I do not doubt that most participants in business and finance have the same aversion to the misuse of human talents that they have to the misallocation of capital resources. Thus, efforts such as those at this conference to demonstrate the potential gains from broader approaches to hiring and to the choice of business counterparties seem wholly appropriate. It is in these areas that I believe sustained progress in diversifying the marketplace of business and finance is feasible. We need also to make further progress in establishing business relationships between the financial services sector and the rapidly expanding number of minority-owned businesses. Indeed, the growth of minority-owned small businesses is truly impressive. The number of black-owned firms increased nearly 50 percent and the number of Hispanic-owned firms jumped 80 percent between 1987 and 1992--between two and three times the rate of growth of non-minority-owned firms. More recent data are not available, but I suspect that trend has continued since 1992 as the strong performance of the economy, coupled with generally ample availability of credit, has created an environment conducive to the birth and growth of innovative enterprises of all ownership types. The information that we have on the financial behavior and characteristics of minority-owned firms is still fairly sparse. However, the Federal Reserve's 1993 National Survey of Small Business Finances provides a snapshot of the small business community and the types of financial services used by these firms. Minority-owned businesses accounted for about 12 percent of the business population covered by the survey. They shared many of the characteristics of non-minority firms, but they also reported some important differences: minority firms, for example, were somewhat smaller and younger and were more concentrated in the business services industry. Black, Hispanic, and Asian-owned firms, like their non-minority counterparts, tended to rely heavily on depository institutions as a source of funds; but the percentage that borrowed at all was lower for minorities, reflecting in part their younger age, smaller average size, and relative lack of equity capital. A survey of this type cannot yield a full picture of trends in small business finance for minority firms, but as we continue to analyze these data, we hope to learn more. Nonetheless, the data suggest that a solid base of business relationships between the financial services sector and minority-owned firms already exists, a base on which we should be able to build as the number of minority businesses continues to expand and as the existing ones grow. Several other recent developments hold the promise of improving links between financial institutions and minority businesses. First, major banks and finance companies are trying mass-market approaches to small business finance, similar to approaches in the consumer area, and this effort has greatly expanded the competition for loans. In addition, new innovative intermediaries--such as community development corporations and multi-bank and investor loan pools--are seeking to develop expertise in specific segments of the small and minority business marketplace. These innovators, working with traditional lenders, are helping to develop new approaches to managing costs and evaluating the risks associated with providing financing for very small and young firms. But credit alone is not the answer. Minorities must be assisted in finding sources of equity finance. This is an essential part of the financial foundation for the dynamic young enterprises that are so central to our wealth-creating process. Unless minorities can have access to all forms of capital from which to create wealth, they will be denied the full benefits of our vibrant economy, in which all should be able to participate. Looking ahead, more generally we must find ways to prepare the more racially and culturally diverse pool of young people who will be flowing into jobs and operating businesses in the twenty-first century. The fast-paced technological change of recent years and the growth of the conceptual component of our nation's output has brought with it increased demands for workers who are equipped not simply with technical know-how but with the ability to create, analyze, and transform information and to interact effectively with others. The evidence suggests that, across a wide range of industries, including financial services, employers have been upgrading their skill mix. Importantly, these changes represent not only a shift in the occupational mix, but also, to a larger degree, an upgrading of skill requirements of individual jobs, for which the range and complexity of tasks and the scope for problem-solving and decisionmaking has expanded. Our future entrepreneurs, too, must be prepared to compete in an environment in which the largest part of the growth in output is the result of new insights. Breakthroughs in technology are continually adding to the ever-longer list of wholly conceptual elements in our economic output. The success of our future business leaders will depend greatly on their capacity to develop and apply new technology and to rearrange physical reality to achieve products and services more highly valued by consumers. To do this will demand not only greater specialized knowledge, but also an ability to deal with risk and uncertainty. Unfortunately, we have found that we never can predict with any precision which particular technology or synergies of technologies will add significantly to our knowledge and our ability to gain from that knowledge. Traditionally, broader human capital skills have been associated with higher education, and, accordingly, the demand for college-trained workers has been increasing rapidly. While the higher demand has induced more people to enroll in college, the supply of college graduates has lagged behind the growing demand. As a result, over the past fifteen years, a wide gap has opened between the earnings of college graduates and those of workers who stopped their formal schooling with a high school diploma or less. Higher proportions of both black and white high school graduates have been going on to college over the past 15 years, and minorities now constitute a higher proportion of the B.A.s, M.A.s, and professional degrees awarded each year. Nonetheless, black and Hispanic college enrollment rates still lag, and the number of college-trained minority workers, while expanding, remains relatively small. Moreover, while the proportion of blacks in professional and managerial jobs has increased, it remains lower for blacks than for whites. To begin to close these gaps will require attention on a number of fronts. A very fundamental need is to look for ways to begin the learning process as early as possible. In the long run, better basic education at the elementary and secondary school level is essential to providing a foundation that will position students to move on to higher education. The statistics on the proportion of our youth who are high school dropouts remain discouraging. Another trend that is gaining a great deal of attention is the growing propensity of private employers to provide training and education to their workers. The development of human capital is increasingly perceived by many corporations as adding to shareholder value. With this incentive, private industry, I believe, can succeed where government programs have, at best, had limited payoffs: in training and upgrading workers with deficient or outdated skills. Moreover, corporate sponsorship of in-house universities and external formal education can be a resource for furthering the development of talented minority professionals. Clearly, we still have a long way to go in overcoming the economic consequences of discrimination. Despite the progress that has occurred in educational attainment and occupational upgrading among minorities, the available information on whether there has been an improvement in the earnings differentials between minority and white workers in recent years is ambiguous. More conclusive data are available on trends in capital asset accumulation. The Federal Reserve's Surveys of Consumer Finance indicates that the median real net worth of minority families more than doubled between 1989 and 1995. That said, a sizable gap still exists between the net worth of the two groups. I have no illusions that the task of breaking down barriers that have produced the gaps in income, wealth, and employment will be simple. I applaud the efforts that Jesse Jackson has undertaken to arrange this two-day seminar. I trust these discussions will raise the level of consciousness in our community about choices involving hiring and developing business relationships with minorities and their businesses and will encourage our business and financial leaders to work harder to identify opportunities to put underutilized talent to work productively and profitably. It is good for business. It is good for our society. And--it is the right thing to do.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today its approval of the application of Caja de Ahorros de Valencia, Castellón y Alicante, Bancaja, Valencia, Spain, to establish a state-licensed agency in Miami, Florida. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Caja de Ahorros de Valencia, Castellón y Alicante, Bancaja Valencia, Spain Order Approving Establishment of an Agency Caja de Ahorros de Valencia, Castellón y Alicante, Bancaja ("Bank"), Valencia, Spain, a foreign bank within the meaning of the International Banking Act ("IBA"), has applied under section 7(d) of the IBA (12 U.S.C. § 3105(d)) to establish an agency in Miami, Florida. The Foreign Bank Supervision Enhancement Act of 1991 ("FBSEA"), which amended the IBA, provides that a foreign bank must obtain the approval of the Board to establish an agency in the United States. Notice of the application, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published in a newspaper of general circulation in Miami, Florida ( The Miami Herald, September 15, 1997). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the application and all comments received. Bank, with total consolidated assets of approximately $14.3 billion, is the fourth largest savings bank and the parent entity of the ninth largest financial group in Spain. Bank is a not-for-profit organization whose operations are controlled and governed by its general assembly and board of directors. The Government of the Community of Valencia has the power to elect 28 percent of Bank's general assembly and board of directors. Bank's depositors and the municipalities in which Bank's branches are located each has the power to elect an additional 28 percent of the general assembly and board of directors. Bank engages primarily in retail deposit-taking, public and private sector lending, foreign exchange trading activities, foreign debt conversion, and trade-related financing. Bank operates more than 650 branches in Spain. In addition, Bank owns a number of bank and nonbank subsidiaries that engage in commercial banking, financial brokerage, insurance services, travel services, valuations, real estate sales and development, and repossessions. Bank's only operations outside Spain consist of two subsidiaries in the Cayman Islands that engage in the issuance of debt securities. Bank's primary purpose for establishing the proposed agency in Florida is to expand its international customer base. The agency would provide correspondent, corporate, and private banking services. Bank does not engage directly or indirectly in any nonbanking activities in the United States, and it is a qualifying foreign banking organization within the meaning of Regulation K (12 C.F.R. 211.23(b)). The Bank of Spain, Bank's primary home supervisor, has indicated no objection to the establishment of the proposed agency. In order to approve an application by a foreign bank to establish an agency in the United States, the IBA and Regulation K require the Board to determine that the foreign bank applicant engages directly in the business of banking outside of the United States and has furnished to the Board the information it needs to assess the application adequately. The Board generally also must determine that the foreign bank is subject to comprehensive supervision or regulation on a consolidated basis by its home country supervisor (12 U.S.C. § 3105(d)(2); 12 C.F.R. 211.24). The Board also may take into account additional standards as set forth in the IBA and Regulation K (12 U.S.C. § 3105(d)(3)-(4); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)). As noted above, Bank engages directly in the business of banking outside of the United States. Bank also has provided the Board with the information necessary to assess the application through submissions that address the relevant issues. Regulation K provides that a foreign bank will be considered to be subject to comprehensive supervision or regulation on a consolidated basis if the Board determines that the bank is supervised and regulated in such a manner that its home country supervisor receives sufficient information on the foreign bank's worldwide operations, including the relationship of the foreign bank to any affiliate, to assess the overall financial condition of the foreign bank and its compliance with law and regulation (12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)(1)). With respect to the issue of supervision by home country authorities, the Board has considered the following information. Bank is supervised and regulated by the Bank of Spain. The Board previously has determined that other Spanish credit institutions are subject to comprehensive supervision on a consolidated basis by the Bank of Spain. The Board has determined that Bank is supervised on substantially the same terms and conditions as the Spanish credit institutions previously considered by the Board. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that Bank is subject to comprehensive supervision and regulation on a consolidated basis by its home country supervisor. The Board also has taken into account the additional standards set forth in section 7 of the IBA (see 12 U.S.C. § 3105(d)(3)-(4); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)(2)). As noted above, the Bank of Spain has indicated no objection to the establishment of the proposed agency. Spain's risk-based capital standards conform to European Union capital standards which are consistent with those established by the Basle Capital Accord ("Accord"). Bank's capital is in excess of the minimum levels that would be required by the Accord and is considered equivalent to capital that would be required of a U.S. banking organization. Managerial and other financial resources of Bank also are considered consistent with approval of the proposed agency, and Bank appears to have the experience and capacity to support the proposed agency. Bank has established controls and procedures for the proposed agency to ensure compliance with U.S. law, as well as controls and procedures for its operations in general. Finally, the Board has reviewed the restrictions on disclosure in relevant jurisdictions in which Bank operates and has communicated with relevant government authorities about access to information. Bank has committed to make available to the Board such information on the operations of Bank and any affiliate of Bank that the Board deems necessary to determine and enforce compliance with the IBA, the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956, as amended, and other applicable Federal law. To the extent that the provision of such information is prohibited or impeded by law, Bank has committed to cooperate with the Board to obtain any necessary consents or waivers that might be required from third parties in connection with disclosure of such information. In addition, subject to certain conditions, the Bank of Spain may share information on Bank's operations with other supervisors, including the Board. In light of these commitments and other facts of record, and subject to the condition described below, the Board concludes that Bank has provided adequate assurances of access to any necessary information the Board may request. On the basis of all the facts of record, and subject to the commitments made by Bank, as well as the terms and conditions set forth in this order, the Board has determined that Bank's application to establish a state-licensed agency should be, and hereby is, approved. Should any restrictions on access to information on the operations or activities of Bank or its affiliates subsequently interfere with the Board's ability to obtain information to determine and enforce compliance by Bank or its affiliates with applicable federal statutes, the Board may require termination of any of Bank's direct or indirect activities in the United States. Approval of this application is also specifically conditioned on Bank's compliance with the commitments made in connection with this application, and with the conditions in this order. The commitments and conditions referred to above are conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its decision, and may be enforced in proceedings under 12 U.S.C. § 1818 or 12 U.S.C. § 1847 against Bank, its offices, and its affiliates. By order of the Board of Governors, effective January 21, 1998. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes Asset data are as of June 30, 1997. The Community of Valencia is one of Spain's autonomous regions and consists of three provinces: Castellón, Alicante, and Valencia. The Government of the Community of Valencia ("GCV") does not provide financial support to Bank, nor is it required to do so by law or regulation. The remaining 16 percent of the general assembly and board of directors is elected by Bank's employees (11 percent) and the Royal Society of Friends of the Valencian People (5 percent), the non-profit civic improvement organization that founded Bank in 1878. In assessing this standard, the Board considers, among other factors, the extent to which the home country supervisors: (i) ensure that the bank has adequate procedures for monitoring and controlling its activities worldwide; (ii) obtain information on the condition of the bank and its subsidiaries and offices through regular examination reports, audit reports, or otherwise; (iii) obtain information on the dealings with and relationship between the bank and its affiliates, both foreign and domestic; (iv) receive from the bank financial reports that are consolidated on a worldwide basis, or comparable information that permits analysis of the bank's financial condition on a worldwide consolidated basis; and (v) evaluate prudential standards, such as capital adequacy and risk asset exposure, on a worldwide basis. These are indicia of comprehensive, consolidated supervision. No single factor is essential and other elements may inform the Board's determination. See Banco de Sabadell, S.A. , 79 Federal Reserve Bulletin 366 (1993); Banco Santander, S.A. , 79 Federal Reserve Bulletin 622 (1993); and Banco Exterior de España, S.A. , 81 Federal Reserve Bulletin 616 (1995). The Board's authority to approve the establishment of the proposed agency parallels the continuing authority of the Florida Department of Banking and Finance to license offices of a foreign bank. The Board's approval of the application does not supplant the authority of the State of Florida, and its agent, the Florida Department of Banking and Finance, to license the proposed agency of Bank in accordance with any terms or conditions that the Florida Department of Banking and Finance may impose. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan and Governors Kelley, Phillips, Meyer, Ferguson, and Gramlich. Absent and not voting: Vice Chair Rivlin.
The Federal Reserve Board today published a revised list of over-the-counter (OTC) market stocks that are subject to its margin regulations (OTC List). Also published today is a revised list of foreign equity securities that meet the margin criteria in Regulation T (Foreign List). The Lists are effective February 9, 1998, and supersede the previous Lists published effective November 10, 1997. The changes that have been made to the revised OTC List, which now contains 4,860 OTC stocks, are as follows: 188 stocks have been included for the first time, 153 under National Market System (NMS) designation; 61 stocks previously on the List have been removed for substantially failing to meet the requirements for continued listing; 120 stocks have been removed for reasons such as listing on a national securities exchange or involvement in an acquisition. Pursuant to amendments recently adopted by The Board, lenders subject to Regulation G will become subject to a revised Regulation U on April 1, 1998 and Regulation G will be removed from the Code of Federal Regulations. Also on April 1, 1998, Regulation U will be revised so that lenders other than brokers and dealers will no longer be required to apply the Board's margin requirements to all OTC stocks on the OTC List. Instead, lenders subject to the revised Regulation U will be required to apply the Board's margin requirements only to those OTC stocks that qualify as NMS securities. The names of these securities are available at the National Association of Securities Dealers, Inc., and at the Securities and Exchange Commission. Lenders subject to Regulation T and borrowers subject to Regulation X who are required under Section 224.3(a) to conform credit they obtain to Regulation T must continue to use the OTC List until publication of the next OTC List, anticipated for May 1998. An amendment to Regulation T that will make all stocks trading in the Nasdaq Stock Market marginable at brokers and dealers will be effective January 1, 1999. The Board will cease publication of the OTC List at that time. The Foreign List is composed of foreign equity securities that are eligible for margin treatment at broker-dealers. Effective July 1, 1996, foreign stocks that have a "ready market" for purposes of the Securities Exchange Commission's (SEC) net capital rule may be included on the Foreign List. The SEC effectively treats all stocks included on the Financial Times/Standard & Poor's Actuaries World Indices (FT/S&P-AW Indices) as having a "ready market" for capital purposes. The Board is adding 24 foreign stocks and deleting 38, based on changes to the FT/S&P-AW Indices. The revised Foreign List now contains 1,942 securities displayed in country order. It is unlawful for any person to cause any representation to be made that inclusion of a stock on the OTC List or the Foreign List indicates that the Board or the Securities and Exchange Commission has in any way passed upon the merits of any such stock or transaction therein. Any references to the Board in connection with these Lists or any stocks thereon in any advertisement or similar communications is unlawful.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today that the Reserve Banks will adhere to a standard holiday schedule next year and remain open for normal operations on December 31, 1999. Although various financial and trade groups have been considering whether a banking holiday on December 31, 1999, would ease potential disruptions that may be caused by the century date change, the Board believes that a banking holiday is not warranted. The Board said bank resources would be better spent preparing for the year 2000 change-over rather than addressing the operating, financial, legal and other consequences that would flow from a date-change holiday. As part of its year 2000 preparations, the Federal Reserve plans a comprehensive program for banks to test computers used for Fedwire transfers, automated clearing house transactions, and other central bank services for compliance with the date change. A schedule will be issued shortly with actual testing beginning at mid-year and continuing through 1999. This program will permit banks to send test transactions across a variety of dates pertaining to the century date change. Testing for depository institutions will be coordinated through their district Federal Reserve Banks.
Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan The current fiscal situation Before the Committee on the Budget, U.S. Senate January 29, 1998 Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee, in just a few weeks, the Federal Reserve Board will submit its semiannual report on monetary policy to the Congress. That report, and my accompanying testimony, will give a detailed assessment of the outlook for the U.S. economy and the implications for monetary policy. This morning, I would like to direct most of my comments to the fiscal situation. But let me begin by offering a few observations about the current direction of the economy. First, it is clear that the U.S. economy has been exceptionally healthy, with robust gains in output, employment, and income. At the same time, inflation has remained low--indeed, declining by most measures--over the past year. Second, to date, we have as yet experienced only the peripheral winds of the Asian crisis. But before spring is over, the abrupt current-account adjustments that financial difficulties are forcing upon several of our Asian trading partners will be showing through here in reductions in demand for our exports and intensified competition from imports. All of this suggests that the growth of economic activity in this country will moderate from the recent brisk pace. Third, as I've noted previously, such a moderation would appear helpful at this juncture. The growth of output has caused employment to rise much faster than the working-age population and there are limits to how far this can go. Pressures in the labor market likely contributed to the acceleration of wages in recent months. Since price inflation has been minimal and domestic profit margins firm, productivity appears to have accelerated sufficiently last year to damp increases in unit labor costs. How long that pattern can continue is still an unresolved issue. The likelihood that we shall be seeing some lower prices on imported goods as a result of the difficulties in Asia may afford some breathing room from inflation pressures. But they will not permanently suppress the risks inherent in tightened labor markets. Conversely, a continuation of the Asian crisis should give us pause in assuming that our economy will remain robust indefinitely. As a consequence, we must be vigilant to the reemergence of destabilizing influences--both higher inflation, and shortfalls in demand and decreases in some prices that would press the disinflation process too far, too fast. One very favorable aspect of our economic performance over the past few years has been the remarkable improvement in the federal budget picture. The deficit dropped to its lowest level in more than two decades in fiscal 1997, and yesterday the Congressional Budget Office released projections that show the budget remaining essentially in balance over the next few years, moving to annual surpluses equal to 1 percent of GDP by the middle of the next decade. The reduction in federal borrowing to date and in prospect is already paying off for the U.S. economy by helping hold down long-term interest rates and, in turn, providing support to private capital spending and other interest-sensitive outlays. But much hard work remains to be done to ensure that the projected surpluses actually materialize and that we remain on track to address our longer-run fiscal and demographic challenges. The CBO projections provide a good starting point: They are based on sensible economic and technical assumptions and thus offer a reasonable indication of how the budget is likely to evolve over the next 10 years if economic conditions remain favorable and current budgetary policies remain in place. But, as CBO highlights in its latest report, such forecasts are subject to considerable error. Indeed, as recently as last winter, when fiscal 1997 was already well under way, both CBO and OMB were still overestimating that year's deficit by more than $100 billion. In the case of CBO, about two-thirds of the error was in receipts, including nearly $50 billion more tax receipts than would have been expected based on the actual behavior of income as measured in the national income and product accounts. This overage helped lift the receipts share of GDP to an historical high. Such "tax surprises" are nothing new--in fact, in the early 1990s, growth of receipts fell well short of expectations based on the trends in aggregate income and the tax laws then in place. And, even after the fact, our knowledge about the sources of such surprises has been limited. Thus, we cannot rule out the possibility that the forces behind last year's tax surge will prove transitory and dissipate more rapidly than CBO has assumed, implying lower receipts and renewed deficits for the years ahead. Indeed, all else equal, had the surprise fallen on the other side--downward instead of upward--we would be looking at non-trivial budget deficits at least through the beginning of the coming decade. Moreover, the CBO projection assumes that discretionary spending will be held to the statutory caps, which allow almost no growth in nominal outlays through fiscal 2002. Given the declining support for further reductions in defense spending, keeping overall discretionary spending within the caps is likely to require sizable, but as yet unspecified, real declines in nondefense programs from current levels. Not surprisingly, many observers are skeptical that the caps will hold, and battles over appropriations in coming years may well expose deep divisions that could make the realization of the budget projections less likely. In addition, although last year's legislation cut medicare spending substantially, experience has highlighted the difficulty of controlling this program, raising the possibility that the savings will not be so great as anticipated--especially if resistance develops among beneficiaries or providers. Uncertainties such as these argue for caution as you begin work on the 1999 budget. We have no guarantee that the projected surpluses will actually materialize. An even more important consideration, though, is the need to address the erosion of the budget after the next decade, a task that will become increasingly difficult the longer it is postponed. The favorable budget picture over the next decade, unless steps are taken, will almost inevitably turn to large and sustained deficits as the baby boom generation moves into retirement, putting massive strains on the social security and medicare programs. Indeed, especially in light of these inexorable demographic trends, I have always emphasized that we should be aiming for budgetary surpluses and using the proceeds to retire outstanding federal debt. This would put further downward pressure on long-term interest rates, which would enhance private capital investment, labor productivity, and economic growth. The outpouring of proposals for using the anticipated surplus does not bode well for the prospect of maintaining fiscal discipline. In recent years the President and the Congress have been quite successful, contrary to expectations, in placing, and especially holding, caps on discretionary spending. More recently, they have started to confront the budget implications of the surge in retirements that is only a decade away. We must not allow the recent good news on the budget to lull us into letting down our guard. Although many of the individual budget proposals may have merit, they must be considered in the context of a responsible budget strategy for the longer run. Over the decades our budgetary processes have been biased toward deficit spending. Indeed, those processes are strewn with initiatives that had only a small projected budgetary cost, but produced a sizable drain on the Treasury's coffers over time. As you are well aware, programs can be easy to initiate or expand, but extraordinarily difficult to trim or shut down once a constituency develops that has a stake in maintaining the status quo. In closing, I want to commend Chairman Domenici and the committee for your insistence on fiscal responsibility and for years of persistent effort. Your work has contributed importantly to shrinking the budget deficit and bringing surpluses within sight. These projections of surpluses, which are based on an extrapolation of steady economic growth and subdued inflation over the coming years, implicitly assume that monetary and fiscal policymakers will remain attentive to potential sources of instability. If this is the scenario that, in fact, unfolds and the budget moves into surplus within the next few years, the increase in national saving will pay off handsomely in preparing our economy and our budget for the challenges of the twenty-first century.
Testimony of Governor Susan M. Phillips Circuit breakers for equity-related markets Before the Subcommittee on Securities of the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate January 29, 1998 I am pleased to appear today to discuss circuit breakers for equity-related markets. The introduction of circuit breakers was one of the recommendations of the 1988 Report of the President's Working Group on Financial Markets. At that time, the Working Group was concerned about the potential for sharp declines in prices and soaring trading volumes to overwhelm the market infrastructure of trading, clearing, and credit systems. As the Working Group observed, threats to the market infrastructure can trigger ad hoc and destabilizing market closings. In recommending circuit breakers, the Working Group intended to substitute planned trading halts for unplanned ones "...without increasing the overall frequency of such disruptions." Importantly, there was no presumption that circuit breakers could alter fundamental equity prices. As events have unfolded, equity prices have risen substantially over the last decade, but relatively minor changes have been made to the system of circuit breakers. We now face the prospect that the circuit breakers will be triggered relatively frequently and in the absence of strains on system capacity sufficient to overwhelm the financial system and create an ad hoc or destabilizing shutdown. October 27 of last year provided the first illustration of these possibilities. We are aware of no evidence that ad hoc market closings were imminent or that back offices were overwhelmed at the time the circuit breakers were tripped. The Federal Reserve Board supports revisions to the circuit breakers. The Board believes that markets should be allowed to remain open to ensure that equity portfolios can be valued reliably and that investors can adjust their holdings and thereby effectively manage their risks. The decision to close markets should neither be taken lightly nor be taken frequently. Indeed, the evidence is inconclusive at best as to whether circuit breakers are a useful feature of our markets. If a system of planned market closings such as the circuit breakers is deemed desirable, it should be structured in such a way that closings occur very rarely and then only when the market infrastructure would otherwise be placed at risk. As part of the current reassessment of circuit breakers, some have suggested halting trading for the day when prices decline a fairly large amount, say 20 percent, regardless of how early in the day that price decline occurs. This represents a significant shift from the Working Group's original recommendation, which did not contemplate a daily limit. The Federal Reserve Board does not support this step. It is an illusion to believe that investors' fears will be assuaged merely by closing markets. Such a closure could well have the opposite effect -- it might increase investor concerns, causing them to dump shares at the next opportunity. This, in turn, might exacerbate difficulties re-opening markets and maintaining liquidity. In addition, when the incentive to trade is great, sophisticated investors will find ways of transacting, even when the domestic markets are closed, while small investors will be denied that opportunity. The Working Group's original support for some form of planned trading halts should be placed in the context of the other recommendations of the Report . The Group noted the need to strengthen the capital structure of market participants, the capacity of trading mechanisms, and the credit, clearing, and payment systems that undergird trading. Much progress has been made in these areas, as evidenced by the way systems and market participants handled the market move on October 27, 1997. Disruptive, ad hoc shutdowns seem much less likely to occur. The combined force of these enhancements makes the case for circuit breakers less compelling today than ten years ago. At a minimum, it argues for higher triggers today. The original circuit breakers represented price declines of 12 percent and 20 percent, but halts are now triggered by price moves of only 4 1/2 percent and 7 percent. In redesigning circuit breakers, the details are best left to be negotiated among the affected markets, with the oversight of the relevant regulatory authorities. Nonetheless, certain broad principles should be followed. The circuit breakers should be coordinated. The trading halts should not be triggered so frequently as to create more disruptions than the unplanned halts they are intended to prevent. The system should be simple enough that market participants have no trouble understanding when trading halts will be triggered. Finally, the system should embody a mechanism that allows periodic adjustments to trigger levels. One of the consequences of the way circuit breakers functioned on October 27 is that the usual closing procedures on markets did not occur. This precipitated current discussion about a redesign of circuit breakers to facilitate the ability to trade at the close and to establish closing prices. Normal business practices assume that trades at the close will be possible for managing market and credit risks and that these prices will be available for valuing portfolios. We support efforts to ensure that circuit breakers do not hinder these critical processes. The Subcommittee also has requested comment on Rule 80A of the New York Stock Exchange, which limits certain types of program trading when the Dow Jones Industrial Average moves more than 50 points in a day. The Federal Reserve Board generally refrains from taking a specific position on rules that have been put in place by the individual markets. However, as I indicated earlier, the Board believes that, as a matter of principle, markets should be left to trade freely, except in very unusual circumstances. Because the level at which the rule is triggered has not been adjusted as prices have risen, the restriction recently has been triggered daily, even as markets continued to function well. In this light, the existing Rule 80A restriction seems wholly unnecessary. In summary, the Federal Reserve Board believes that the goal of policy in this area is to make markets more resilient to shocks rather than to pursue an unrealistic aim of curbing volatility. Almost every element of the market infrastructure has been strengthened since the 1987 crash. These changes have made our markets better able to withstand shocks. The redesign of the circuit breakers should take this added resiliency into account, or else the circuit breakers themselves run the risk of becoming disruptive.
Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan The current Asia crisis and the dynamics of international finance Before the Committee on Banking and Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives January 30, 1998 The global financial system has been evolving rapidly in recent years. New technology has radically reduced the costs of borrowing and lending across traditional national borders, facilitating the development of new instruments and drawing in new players. One result has been a massive increase in capital flows. Information is transmitted instantaneously around the world, and huge shifts in the supply and demand for funds naturally follow. This burgeoning global system has been demonstrated to be a highly efficient structure that has significantly facilitated cross-border trade in goods and services and, accordingly, has made a substantial contribution to standards of living worldwide. Its efficiency exposes and punishes underlying economic weakness swiftly and decisively. Regrettably, it also appears to have facilitated the transmission of financial disturbances far more effectively than ever before. As I testified before this Committee three years ago, the then emerging Mexican crisis was the first such episode associated with our new high-tech international financial system. The current Asian crisis is the second. We do not as yet fully understand the new system's dynamics. We are learning fast, and need to update and modify our institutions and practices to reduce the risks inherent in the new regime. Meanwhile, we have to confront the current crisis with the institutions and techniques we have. Many argue that the current crisis should be allowed to run its course without support from the International Monetary Fund or the bilateral financial backing of other nations. They assert that allowing this crisis to play out, while doubtless having additional negative effects on growth in Asia, and engendering greater spill-overs onto the rest of the world, is not likely to have a large or lasting impact on the United States and the world economy. They may well be correct in their judgment. There is, however, a small but not negligible probability that the upset in East Asia could have unexpectedly negative effects on Japan, Latin America, and eastern and central Europe that, in turn, could have repercussions elsewhere, including the United States. Thus, while the probability of such an outcome may be small, its consequences, in my judgment, should not be left solely to chance. We have observed that global financial markets, as currently organized, do not always achieve an appropriate equilibrium, or at least require time to stabilize. Opponents of IMF support also argue that the substantial financial backing, by cushioning the losses of imprudent investors, could exacerbate moral hazard. Moral hazard arises when someone can reap the rewards from their actions when things go well but do not suffer the full consequences when things go badly. Such a reward structure, obviously, could encourage excessive risk taking. To be sure, this is a problem, though with respect to Asia some investors have to date suffered substantial losses. Asian equity losses, excluding Japan, since June 1997 worldwide are estimated to have exceeded $700 billion of which more than $30 billion has been lost by U.S. investors. Substantial further losses have been recorded in bonds and real estate. Moreover, the policy conditionality, associated principally with IMF lending, which dictates economic and financial discipline and structural change, helps to mitigate some of the moral hazard concerns. Such conditionality is also critical to the success of the overall stabilization effort. As I will be discussing in a moment, at the root of the problems is poor public policy that has resulted in misguided investments and very weak financial sectors. Convincing a sovereign nation to alter destructive policies that impair its own performance and threaten contagion to its neighbors is best handled by an international financial institution, such as the IMF. What we have in place today to respond to crises should be supported even as we work to improve those mechanisms and institutions. Accordingly, I fully back the Administration's request to augment the financial resources of the IMF--U.S. participation in the New Arrangements to Borrow and an increase in the U.S. quota in the IMF. Hopefully, neither will turn out not to be needed, and no funds will be drawn. But it is better to have it available if that turns out not to be the case and quick response to a pending crisis is essential. I also believe it is important to have mechanisms, such as the Treasury Department's Exchange Stabilization Fund, that permit the United States in exceptional circumstances to provide temporary bilateral financial support, often on short notice, under appropriate conditions and on occasion in cooperation with other countries. In my testimony before this Committee in mid-November, I endeavored to outline the roots of the current crisis. This morning I should like to carry the analysis a bit further. Companies in Korea and many other Asian countries have become formidable world-class producers in a number of manufacturing sectors using advanced technologies, but in a number of cases they permitted leverage to rise to levels that could only be sustained with continued very rapid growth. Growth, however, was destined to slow. Asian economies to varying degrees over the last half century have tried to combine rapid growth with a much higher mix of government-directed production than has been evident in the essentially market-driven economies of the West. Through government inducements, a number of select, more sophisticated manufacturing technologies borrowed from the advanced market economies were applied to these generally low-productivity and, hence, low-wage economies. Thus, for selected products, exports became competitive with those of the market economies, engendering rapid overall economic growth. There was, however, an inevitable limit to how far this specialized Asian economic regime could develop. As the process broadened beyond a few select applications of advanced technologies, overall productivity continued to increase and the associated rise in the average real wage in these economies blunted somewhat the competitive advantage enjoyed initially. As a consequence of the slackening of export expansion caused in part by losses in competitiveness because of exchange rates that were pegged to the dollar, which was appreciating against the yen, aggregate economic growth slowed somewhat, even before the current crisis. For years, domestic savings and rapidly increasing capital inflows had been directed by governments into investments that banks were required to finance. As I pointed out in previous testimony, lacking a true market test, much of that investment was unprofitable. So long as growth was vigorous, the adverse consequences of this type of non-market allocation of resources were masked. Moreover, in the context of pegged exchange rates that were presumed to continue, if not indefinitely, at least beyond the term of the loan, banks and nonbanks were willing to take the risk to borrow dollars (unhedged) to obtain the dollar-denominated interest rates that were invariably lower than those available in domestic currency. Western, especially American investors, diversified some of their huge capital gains of the 1990s into East Asian investments. In hindsight, it is evident that those economies could not provide adequate profitable opportunities at reasonable risk to absorb such a surge in funds. This surge, together with distortions caused by government planning, has resulted in huge losses. With the inevitable slowdown, business losses and nonperforming bank loans surged. Banks' capital eroded rapidly and, as a consequence, funding sources have dried up, as fears of defaults have risen dramatically. In an environment of weak financial systems, lax supervisory regimes, and vague guarantees about depositor or creditor protections, bank runs have occurred in several countries and reached crisis proportions in Indonesia. Uncertainty and retrenchment have escalated. The state of confidence so necessary to the functioning of any economy has been torn asunder. Vicious cycles of ever rising and reinforcing fears have become contagious. Some exchange rates have fallen to levels that are understandable only in the context of a veritable collapse of confidence in the functioning of an economy. A similar breakdown was also evident in Mexico three years ago, albeit to a somewhat lesser degree. In late 1994, the government was rapidly losing reserves in a vain effort to support a currency that had come under attack when the authorities failed to act expeditiously and convincingly to contain a burgeoning current account deficit financed in large part by substantial short-term flows denominated in dollars. These two recent crisis episodes have afforded us increasing insights into the dynamics of the evolving international financial system, though there is much we do not yet understand. With the new more sophisticated financial markets punishing errant government policy behavior far more profoundly than in the past, vicious cycles are evidently emerging more often. For once they are triggered, damage control is difficult. Once the web of confidence, which supports the financial system, is breached, it is difficult to restore quickly. The loss of confidence can trigger rapid and disruptive changes in the pattern of finance, which, in turn, feeds back on exchange rates and asset prices. Moreover, investor concerns that weaknesses revealed in one economy may be present in others that are similarly situated means that the loss of confidence can quickly spread to other countries. At one point the economic system appears stable, the next it behaves as though a dam has reached a breaking point, and water (read, confidence) evacuates its reservoir. The United States experienced such a sudden change with the decline in stock prices of more than 20 percent on October 19, 1987. There is no credible scenario that can readily explain so abrupt a change in the fundamentals of long-term valuation on that one day. Such market panic does not appear to reflect a simple continuum from the immediately previous period. The abrupt onset of such implosions suggests the possibility that there is a marked dividing line for confidence. When crossed, prices slip into free fall--perhaps overshooting the long-term equilibrium--before markets will stabilize. But why do these events seem to erupt without some readily evident precursor? Certainly, the more extended the risk-taking, or more generally, the lower the discount factors applied to future outcomes, the more vulnerable are markets to a shock that abruptly triggers a revision in expectations and sets off a vicious cycle of contraction. Episodes of vicious cycles cannot be easily forecast, as our recent experience with Asia has demonstrated. The causes of such episodes are complex and often subtle. In the case of Asia, we can now say with some confidence that the economies affected by this crisis faced a critical mass of vulnerabilities; ex ante, some were more apparent than others, but the combination was not generally recognized as critical. Once the recent crisis was triggered in early July with Thailand's forced abandonment of its exchange rate peg, it was apparently the lethal combination of pegged exchange rates, high leverage, weak banking and financial systems, and declining demand in Thailand and elsewhere that transformed a correction into a collapse. Normally the presence of these factors would have produced a modest retrenchment, not the kind of discontinuous fall in confidence that leads to a vicious cycle of decline. But with a significant part of short-term liabilities, bank and nonbank, denominated in foreign currencies (predominantly dollars), unhedged, the initial pressure on domestic currencies led to a sharp crack in the fixed exchange rate structure of many East Asian economies. The belief that local currencies could, virtually without risk of loss, be converted into dollars at any time was shattered. Investors, both domestic and foreign, endeavored en masse to convert to dollars, as confidence in the ability of the local economy to earn dollars to meet their fixed obligations diminished. Local exchange rates fell against the dollar, inducing still further declines. The weakening of growth also led to lowered profit expectations and contracting net capital inflows of dollars. This was an abrupt change from the pronounced acceleration through 1996 and the first half of 1997. The combination of continued strong demand for dollars to meet debt service obligations and the slowed new supply, destabilized the previously fixed exchange rate regime. This created a marked increase in uncertainty and retrenchment, further reducing capital inflows, still further weakening local currency exchange rates. This vicious cycle will continue until either defaults or restructuring lowers debt service obligations, or the low local exchange rates finally induce a pickup in the supply of dollars. These virulent episodes appear to be at the root of our most recent breakdowns in Mexico and Asia. Their increased prevalence may, in fact, be a defining characteristic of the new high-tech international financial system. We shall never be able to alter the human response to shocks of uncertainty and withdrawal; we can only endeavor to reduce the imbalances that exacerbate them. While, as indicated earlier, I do not believe we are as yet sufficiently knowledgeable of the full complex dynamics of our increasingly developing high-tech financial system, enough insights have been gleaned from the crises in Mexico and Asia (and previous experiences) to enable us to list a few of the critical tendencies toward disequilibrium and vicious cycles that will have to be addressed if our new global economy is to limit the scope for disruptions in the future. These elements have all, in times past, been factors in international and domestic economic disruptions, but they appear more stark in today's market. Leverage Certainly in Korea, probably in Thailand, and possibly elsewhere, a high degree of leverage (the ratio of debt to equity) appears to be a place to start. While the key role of debt in bank balance sheets is obvious, its role in the efficient functioning of the nonbank sector is also important. Nevertheless, exceptionally high leverage often is a symptom of excessive risk taking that leaves financial systems and economies vulnerable to loss of confidence. It is not easy to imagine the cumulative cascading of debt instruments seeking safety in a crisis when assets are heavily funded with equity. The concern is particularly relevant to banks and many other financial intermediaries, whose assets typically are less liquid than their liabilities and so depend on confidence in the payment of liabilities for their continued viability. Moreover, both financial and nonfinancial businesses can employ high leverage to mask inadequate underlying profitability and otherwise have inadequate capital cushions to match their volatile environments. Excess leverage in nonfinancial business can create problems for lenders including their banks; these problems can, in turn, spread to other borrowers that rely on these lenders. Fortunately, since lending by nonfinancial firms to other businesses is less prevalent than bank lending to other banks, direct contagion is less likely. But the leverage of South Korea's chaebols, because of their size and the pervasive distress, has clearly been an important cause of bank problems with their systemic implications. Interest rate and currency risk Banks, when confronted with a generally rising yield curve, have a tendency to incur interest rate or liquidity risk by lending long and funding short. This exposes them to shocks, especially those institutions that have low capital-asset ratios. When financial intermediaries, in addition, seek low-cost, unhedged, foreign currency funding, the dangers of depositor runs, following a fall in the domestic currency, escalate. Weak banking systems Banks play a crucial role in the financial market infrastructure. When they are undercapitalized, have lax lending standards, and are subjected to weak supervision and regulation, they become a source of systemic risk both domestically and internationally. Interbank funding, especially in foreign currencies Despite its importance for distributing savings to their most valued use, short-term interbank funding, especially cross border may turn out to be the Achilles' heel of an international financial system that is subject to wide variations in financial confidence. This phenomenon, which is all too common in our domestic experience, may be particularly dangerous in an international setting. Moral hazard The expectation that monetary authorities or international financial institutions will come to the rescue of failing financial systems and unsound investments has clearly engendered a significant element of moral hazard and excessive risk taking. The dividing line between public and private liabilities, too often, becomes blurred. Weak central banks To effectively support a stable currency, central banks need to be independent, meaning that their monetary policy decisions are not subject to the dictates of political authorities. Securities markets Recent adverse banking experiences have emphasized the problems that can arise if banks are almost the sole source of intermediation. Their breakdown induces a sharp weakening in economic growth. A wider range of nonbank institutions, including viable debt and equity markets, are important safeguards of economic activity when banking fails. Inadequate legal structures Finally, an effective competitive market system requires a rule of law that severely delimits government's arbitrary intrusion into commercial disputes. Defaults and restructuring will not always be avoidable. Indeed "creative destruction," as Joseph Schumpeter put it, is often an important element of renewal in a dynamic market economy, but an efficient bankruptcy statute is required to aid in this process, including in the case of cross-border defaults. * * * Interest and currency risk taking, excess leverage, weak financial systems, and interbank funding are all encouraged by the existence of a safety net. In a domestic context, it is difficult to achieve financial balance without a regulatory structure that seeks to simulate the market incentives that would tend to control these financial elements if there were not broad safety nets. It is even more difficult to achieve such a balance internationally among sovereign governments operating out of different cultures. Thus, governments have developed a patchwork of arrangements and conventions governing the functioning of the international financial system that I believe will need to be thoroughly reviewed and altered as necessary to fit the needs of the new global environment. A review of supervision and regulation of private financial institutions, especially those that are supported by a safety net, is particularly pressing because those institutions have played so prominent a role in the emergence of recent crises. As I have testified previously, I believe that, in this rapidly expanding international financial system, the primary protection from adverse financial disturbances is effective counterparty surveillance and, hence, government regulation and supervision should seek to produce an environment in which counterparties can most effectively oversee the credit risks of potential transactions. Here a major improvement in transparency, including both accounting and public disclosure, is essential. To be sure, counterparties often exchange otherwise confidential information as a condition of a transaction. But broader dissemination of detailed disclosures of governments, financial institutions, and firms, is required if the risks inherent in our global financial structure are to be contained. A market system can approach an appropriate equilibrium only if the signals to which individual market participants respond are accurate and adequate to the needs of the adjustment process. Among the important signals are product and asset prices, interest rates, debt by maturity, detailed accounts of central banks, and private enterprises. Blinded by faulty signals, a competitive free-market system cannot reach a firm balance except by chance. In today's rapidly changing market place producers need sophisticated signals to hone production schedules and investment programs to respond to consumer demand. There is sufficient bias in political systems of all varieties to substitute hope (read, wishful thinking) for possibly difficult preemptive policy moves, both with respect to financial systems and economic policy. There is often denial and delay in instituting proper adjustments. Recent propensities to obscure the need for change have been evidenced by unreported declines in official reserves, issuance by governments of the equivalent to foreign currency obligations, or unreported large forward short positions against foreign currencies. It is very difficult for political leaders to incur what they perceive as large immediate political costs to contain problems that they see (often dimly) as only prospective. Reality eventually replaces hope, but the cost of delay is a more abrupt and disruptive adjustment than would have been required if action had been more preemptive. Increased transparency for businesses, financial institutions, and governments is a key ingredient in fostering more discipline on private transactors and on government policymakers. Increased transparency can counter political bias in part by exposing for all to see the risks to stability of current policies as they develop. Under such conditions, failure to act would also be perceived as having political costs. I suspect that recent political foot dragging by governments in both developed and developing countries on the issue of greater transparency is credible evidence of its power and significance. Transparency, which is so important to foster safe and sound lending practices, is, of course, less relevant for local currency lending if banks are guaranteed with sovereign credits. Moreover, transparency becomes especially difficult to create for organizations and corporations with large interlocking ownerships. Cross holdings of stock lead too often to lending on the basis of association, not economic value. The list of problems that must be addressed to achieve balance in our future global financial system could be significantly extended, but let me end with a notion that is relevant also to today's crisis. It is becoming increasingly evident that supervision and regulation should address excess nonperforming loans expeditiously. The expected values of the losses on these loans are, of course, a subtraction from capital. But since these estimates are uncertain, they embody an additional risk premium that reduces the markets' best estimate of the size of effective equity capital even if capital is replenished. It is, hence, far better to remove these dubious assets and their associated risk premium from bank balance sheets, and dispose of them separately, preferably promptly. * * * As a consequence of the unwinding of market restrictions and regulations, and the rapid increase in technology, the international financial system has expanded at a pace far faster than either domestic GDP or cross-border trade. To reduce the risk of systemic crises in such an environment, an enhanced regime of market incentives, involving greater sensitivity to market signals, more information to make those signals more robust, and broader securities markets--coupled with better supervision--is essential. Obviously appropriate macropolicies, as ever, are assumed. But attention to microdetails is becoming increasingly pressing. Nonetheless, it is reasonable to expect that despite endeavors at risk containment and prevention the system may fail in some instances, triggering vicious cycles and all the associated contagion for innocent bystanders. A backup source of international financial support provided only with agreed conditions to address underlying problems, the task assigned to the IMF, can play an essential stabilizing role. The availability of such support must be limited because its size cannot be expected to expand at the pace of the international financial system. I doubt if there will be worldwide political support for that. In closing, I should like to stress that the significant degree of volatility that continues to exist in Asian markets indicates exceptionally high levels of uncertainty, bordering on panic. It is not reasonable to expect that the substantial investments needed to implement meaningful structural reforms can proceed very far until we observe a simmering down of frenetic changes in asset prices and exchange rates. That is likely to result only when stability of banking and financial systems generally is achieved. As I indicated in my November testimony, the failure of the fragile banking systems of East Asia to hold steady as financial pressures increased was a defining element in the developing crisis. The stabilization of those banking systems is crucial, if confidence, that has been so thoroughly undercut in this most debilitating crisis, is to be restored.