For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today published proposed revisions to the official staff commentary that applies and interprets the requirements of Regulation M, Consumer leasing. Comment is requested by January 22, 1999 . The proposed revisions provide guidance on disclosures for lease advertisements, multiple-item leases, renegotiations and extensions, and estimates of official fees and taxes. The Board's notice is attached. |
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today published proposed revisions to the official staff commentary that applies and interprets the requirements of Regulation Z, Truth in Lending. Comment is requested by January 22, 1999 . The proposed revisions address the issuance of unsolicited multifunction credit cards, credit sales involving trade-ins, and payment schedules that include private mortgage insurance. The Board's notice is attached. |
For immediate release |
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of a combined Order to Cease and Desist and Order of Assessment of Civil Money Penalties against Putra Masagung and P.T. Gunung Agung, Ltd. Corporation, Jakarta, Indonesia, and an Order of Prohibition against Mr. Masagung. Mr. Masagung and P.T. Gunung Agung, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the order in connection with allegations that Mr. Masagung and P.T. Gunung Agung violated the Bank Holding Company Act as a result of P.T. Gunung Agung's acquisition of a beneficial ownership interest in The San Francisco Company, San Francisco, California, a registered bank holding company. The San Francisco Company owns the Bank of San Francisco. The order requires Mr. Masagung and P.T. Gunung Agung to sell their interests in The San Francisco Company through a voting trust. The order also requires Mr. Masagung to pay a civil money penalty of $250,000 and P.T. Gunung Agung to pay a civil money penalty of $200,000. The issuance of the order by the Board does not relate in any manner to the condition or activities of the Bank of San Francisco, and the sale by Mr. Masagung and P.T. Gunung Agung of their interests in the San Francisco Company should not affect the bank's operations. A copy of the Order is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among the Southern Security Bank, Hollywood, Florida, the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, and the State Comptroller and Banking Commissioner of the State of Florida. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board, along with the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of Thrift Supervision (the Agencies) have issued a uniform interagency policy statement regarding intercompany tax allocation agreements for banking organizations and savings associations that file an income tax return as members of a consolidated group. The policy statement is effective immediately. The statement is intended to provide guidance to institutions regarding the allocation and payment of taxes among a bank holding and its depository institution subsidiaries. In general, intercorporate tax settlements between an institution and its parent company should be conducted in a manner that is no less favorable to the institution than if it were a separate taxpayer. The policy statement is the result of the Agencies's ongoing effort to implement section 303 of the Riegle Community Development and Regulatory Improvement Act of 1994, which requires the Agencies to work jointly to make uniform their regulations and guidelines implementing common statutory or supervisory policies. The interagency statement is attached. |
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced that it has decided not to make regulatory changes with respect to the remaining legal disparities that exist between Federal Reserve Banks and private-sector banks in the presentment and settlement of checks. The Board has concluded that the costs associated with further reducing these legal disparities would outweigh any payments system efficiency gains. The decision is based on the Board's analysis of comments received on the effects of its 1994 same-day settlement rule and on whether further changes in this area are warranted. The Board's notice is attached. |
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today requested comment on the potential benefits and drawbacks of a modification to its Regulation CC, Availability of Funds and Collection of Checks, that would shorten the maximum hold for many nonlocal checks. Comments are requested by March 15, 1999 . This modification would shorten the availability schedule for nonlocal checks from five to four business days but permit a depositary bank to retain a five-day schedule for those categories of nonlocal checks that it certifies are not generally returned within a shorter period. This proposal is one of several alternative modifications to the nonlocal check availability schedule that the Board is considering. The Board's notice is attached. |
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of an Order of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty against the P.T. Ekspor Impor Bank Indonesia (Persero), Jakarta, Indonesia and the bank's New York Agency. P.T. Ekspor Impor Bank Indonesia (Persero) and the Agency, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order in connection with allegations that they failed to comply with the terms of the Written Agreement that they entered into on December 29, 1994 with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and the Superintendent of Banks of the State of New York. P.T. Ekspor Impor Bank Indonesia (Persero) and the Agency paid a $50,000 penalty to the Federal Reserve Board and paid $50,000 to New York State. A copy of the Order is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of an Order of Prohibition against Fred J. Smilek, a former officer of the Chemical Bank, New York, New York, a former state member bank. Mr. Smilek, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order due to his alleged misappropriation of approximately $275,000 during the period when he was an officer of the bank. A copy of the Order is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of an Order of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty against Kassahum Kebede, a former employee and institution-affiliated party of the Bankers Trust Company, New York, New York, a state member bank. Mr. Kebede, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order in connection with his involvement in the recording of leveraged derivative transactions on the books and records of the Bankers Trust Company. Mr. Kebede paid a fine of $15,000. A copy of the Order is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced the issuance of a Final Decision and Order of Prohibition and Restitution against Ricardo Carrasco, former employee of the New York Branch of BankBoston International, Coral Gables, Florida. The Order prohibits Mr. Carrasco from participating in the conduct of the affairs of any financial institution or holding company and requires him to make restitution of $73 million to reimburse BankBoston International for losses he caused in connection with certain overdraft accounts. A copy of the Final Decision and Order is attached
For immediate release |
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Adairsville Bancshares, Inc., Adairsville, Georgia; the Bank of Adairsville, Adairsville, Georgia; the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta; and the Banking Commissioner of the State of Georgia. The Written Agreement includes provisions addressing Year 2000 readiness. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board is requesting comment on proposed amendments to Regulation CC to temporarily extend one-year merger transition provisions to facilitate banks' efforts for Year 2000 readiness. Comment, originally requested by January 4, 1999, has been extended to February 1, 1999. The proposal would provide additional time for banks that merge between July 1998 and May 1999 to implement software changes. The proposal would allow these banks to continue to be treated as separate banks until June 1, 2000. The normal one-year transition period would resume for mergers effected after May of 1999. The proposal recognizes that banks are dedicating a large amount of their automation resources to renovating and testing software and replacing noncompliant systems to address Year 2000 computer problems. During this period banks may be challenged to make and test other programming changes, including those required to comply with merger transition provisions of Regulation CC. The Board is seeking comment on the need for the proposal and whether the proposed liberalization of the regulation's merger transition provisions are adequate to avoid contention for programming and testing resources necessary to manage banks' readiness efforts for Year 2000. The Board's notices are attached. |
For immediate release Interim Regulatory Reporting and Capital Guidance on FAS 133, "Accounting for Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities" The Reports Task Force of the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC), acting under delegated authority, is announcing its decisions regarding the appropriate regulatory reporting treatment for derivatives. The Office of Thrift Supervision and the Federal Reserve Board have reached similar reporting decisions for the savings associations and bank holding companies that they supervise. Additionally, the Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Office of Thrift Supervision (the agencies) are describing the appropriate interim regulatory capital treatment of derivatives for banks, bank holding companies, and savings associations (collectively, banking organizations). The agencies are taking these actions in response to the June 1998 issuance of Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 133, "Accounting for Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities" (FAS 133). Although FAS 133 does not become effective until fiscal years beginning after June 15, 1999, banking organizations may adopt the standard early. This new accounting standard requires that all derivatives be recorded on the balance sheet as assets or liabilities at their fair value. In addition, it significantly changes the accounting for derivatives used for hedging purposes and for financial instruments with certain types of embedded derivatives. These new accounting requirements may affect the amount of a banking organization's recorded assets, liabilities, and equity, and corresponding regulatory capital levels. The agencies are issuing the attached interim guidance to explain how derivatives should be reported in the bank Reports of Condition and Income (Call Report), the Consolidated Financial Statements for Bank Holding Companies (FR Y-9C), and the Thrift Financial Report (TFR), and treated under the agencies' existing capital standards after a banking organization adopts FAS 133. Regulatory Reporting For purposes of the Call Report, FR Y-9C, and TFR, changes in the fair value of many derivatives are to be reflected in net income. However, FAS 133 requires that the effective portion of the change in the fair value of derivatives used in certain types of hedges (cash flow hedges) be excluded from net income and reflected on the balance sheet in a separate component of equity (referred to as "accumulated other comprehensive income" in FAS 133). For banks and bank holding companies, until any revisions are made to the relevant regulatory reports, those accumulated changes in fair value should be reported on the same Call Report and FR Y-9C lines that are used to report net unrealized holding gains (losses) on available-for-sale securities. For savings associations, those accumulated changes in fair value should be reported on the same TFR line that is used to report other components of equity capital. Regulatory Capital Until the agencies determine otherwise, the separate component of equity resulting from cash flow hedges should not be included in (i.e., should be excluded from) regulatory capital. Additionally, the existing risk-based capital treatment for derivatives remains in effect, pending further review. In other words, recording a derivative on the balance sheet under FAS 133 will not change the risk-weighted asset amount for that derivative. The implementation of FAS 133, however, may still affect an institution's regulatory capital. Changes in the fair value of derivatives that are recognized in net income will be included in undivided profits (retained earnings for bank holding companies and savings associations), which is a component of Tier 1 capital. Furthermore, the on-balance-sheet reporting of derivatives may affect the total assets reported by banking organizations with derivatives, directly affecting the institution's leverage ratio. The agencies are evaluating the impact of FAS 133 on regulatory reporting and capital in conjunction with other supervisory issues. However, pending the completion of that analysis, banking organizations should follow the regulatory reporting guidance and capital treatment summarized above and more fully described in the attachment. Attachment Footnotes In general, the effective portion of a hedge is best described as the change in fair value on the derivative that offsets the change in expected cash flows on the hedged item.