Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan Our banking history Before the Annual Meeting and Conference of the Conference of State Bank Supervisors, Nashville, Tennessee May 2, 1998 The theme of your meeting this year--Back to the Future--made me think about how much the past tells us about the future or, put another way, how much we can learn by, in effect, reading the minutes of the last meeting. In this period of accelerating change in the complexity of our financial structure, and a sharp uptick in the size of merged firms, the uncertainty of where we go from here is helpfully served by reviewing how we got here. For bank supervision, reflections about our banking history also highlight the extent to which our supervisory policies mirror the infrastructure and political decisions that create the framework in which banks operate. No matter how regulated and supervised, throughout our history many of the benefits banks provide modern societies derive from their willingness to take risks and from their use of a relatively high degree of financial leverage. Through leverage, in the form principally of taking deposits, banks perform a critical role in the financial intermediation process; they provide savers with additional investment choices and borrowers with a greater range of sources of credit, thereby facilitating a more efficient allocation of resources and contributing importantly to greater economic growth. Indeed, it has been the evident value of intermediation and leverage that has shaped the development of our financial systems from the earliest times--certainly since Renaissance goldsmiths discovered that lending out deposited gold was feasible and profitable. But it is also that very same leverage that makes banks so sensitive to the risk they take and aligns the stability of the economy with the critical role of supervision, both by supervisors and by the market. Chartered Banking (1781-1838) At the very beginning of our banking history, American banks--like banks in virtually every other nation--were, in fact, supervised by the market. But--in contrast to other countries--our banking system evolved the dual structure that so distinguishes our country from others. Those seeking to circulate bank notes in the United States in our earliest days usually sought a corporate charter either from state or federal authorities. However, quite shortly after our founding, the chartering was almost solely at the state level. Entry into the banking business was far from free. Indeed, by the early 1800s chartering decisions by state authorities became heavily influenced by political considerations. Aside from restrictions on entry, for much of the antebellum period state regulation largely took the form of restrictions inserted into bank charters, which were individually negotiated and typically had a life of ten or even twenty years. The regulation and supervision of early American banks were modest and appear to have been intended primarily to ensure that banks had adequate specie reserves to meet their debt obligations, especially obligations on their circulating notes. Nonetheless, the very early history of American banking was an impressive success story. Not a single bank failed until massive fraud brought down the Farmers Exchange Bank in Rhode Island in 1809. Thereafter, a series of severe macroeconomic shocks--the War of 1812, the depression of 1819, and the panic of 1837--produced waves of failures. What should be emphasized, however, is the stability of banking in the absence of severe economic shocks, a stability that reflected mainly the discipline of the marketplace. A bank's ability to circulate its notes was dependent on the public's confidence in its ability to redeem its notes on demand. When confidence was lacking in a bank, its notes tended to exchange at a discount to specie and to the rates of other, more creditworthy, banks. Early in the 1800s, private money brokers seem to have made their first appearance. These brokers, our early arbitrageurs, purchased bank notes at a discount and transported them to the issuing bank, where they demanded par redemption. Moreover, the Suffolk Bank, chartered in 1818, entered the business of collecting country bank notes in 1819. In effect, the Suffolk Bank created the first regional clearing system. By doing so, it effectively constrained the supply of notes by individual banks to prudential levels and thereby allowed the notes of all of its associated banks to circulate consistently at face value. Free Banking (1837-1863) The Second Bank of the United States also played an important role in limiting note issuance all over the country by presenting bank notes for specie payment. The resultant intense political controversy over the charter renewal of the Second Bank of the United States, and the wave of bank failures following the panic of 1837 led many states to reconsider their fundamental approach to banking regulation. In particular, in 1838 New York introduced a new approach, known as free banking, which in the following two decades was emulated by many other states. Free banking meant free entry under the terms of a general law of incorporation rather than through a specific legislative act. The public, especially in New York, had become painfully aware that the restrictions on entry in the chartered system were producing a number of adverse effects. For one thing, in the absence of competition, access to bank credit was perceived to have become politicized--banks' boards of directors seemed to regard those who shared their political convictions as the most creditworthy borrowers, a view not unknown more recently in East Asia. In addition, because a bank charter promised monopoly profits, bank promoters were willing to pay handsomely for the privilege and legislators apparently eagerly accepted payment, often in the form of allocations of bank stock at below-market prices. While free banking was not actually as free as commonly perceived, it also was not nearly as unstable. The perception of the free banking era as an era of "wildcat" banking marked by financial instability and, in particular, by widespread significant losses to noteholders also turns out to be exaggerated. Recent scholarship has demonstrated that free bank failures were not as common and resulting losses to noteholders were not as severe as earlier historians had claimed. Nonetheless, it is fairly clear that the strength of banks varied from state to state, with regulation and supervision uneven. As a consequence mainly of the panic of 1837, the public became aware of the possibility that banks could prove unable to redeem their notes and changed their behavior accordingly. Discounting of bank notes became widespread. Indeed, between 1838 and the Civil War quite a few note brokers began to publish monthly or biweekly periodicals, called bank note reporters, that listed prevailing discounts on thousands of individual banks. Throughout the free banking era the effectiveness of market prices for notes, and their associated impact on the cost of funds, imparted an increased market discipline, perhaps because technological change--the telegraph and the railroad--made monitoring of banks more effective and reduced the time required to send a note home for redemption. Between 1838 and 1860 the discounts on notes of new entrants diminished and discounts came to correspond more closely to objective measures of the riskiness of individual banks. Part of this reduction in riskiness was a reflection of improvement in state regulation and supervision. Part was also private market regulation in an environment in which depositor and note holders were not protected by a safety net. That is, the moral hazard we all spend so much time worrying about today had not yet been introduced into the system. National Banking (1863-1913) During the Civil War, today's bank structure was created by the Congress. It seems clear that a major, if not the major, motivation of the National Bank Act of 1863 was to assist in the financing of the Civil War. But the provisions of the act that incorporated key elements of free banking provide compelling evidence that contemporary observers did not regard free banking as a failure. These provisions included free entry and collateralized bank notes. The 1863 act introduced competition to state banks, but in 1864, the Congress adopted an important amendment which called for taxing the issuance of state bank notes. It is not clear if the intention was to assure only one kind of currency or to force the states out of the banking business. But whatever its purpose, with the tax on notes the number of state banks fell from about 1,500 in 1864 to 250 by the end of the decade. Any forecast at that time would quite reasonably have concluded that state banks would become historic relics. Such a projection, however, would have been quite wrong, beginning what has become an unending stream of such erroneous forecasts about the demise of state banks. Forced to find a substitute for notes, state banks pioneered demand deposits. Within ten years after the note tax, state banks had more deposits than national banks--a lead maintained, I might add, until 1943. By 1888, only 20 years after the low point, there were more state banks than national banks (approximately 3,500 vs. 3,100), a lead maintained to this day. While the emphasis on demand deposits showed the creativity and innovation of state banks, I must tell you the first Comptroller of the Currency won the rhetoric contest. In the 1863 Annual Report of the Comptroller of the Currency, he proposed that the National Bank Act . . . be so amended that the failure of a national bank be declared prima facie fraudulent, and that the officers and directors, under whose administration such insolvency shall occur, be made personally liable for the debts of the bank, and be punished criminally, unless it shall appear, upon investigation, that its affairs were honestly administered. (p. 51) So much for moral hazard! And, surely, here we observe the intellectual origin of prompt corrective action! Central Banking and the Safety Net By the latter decades of the 19th century, both the economy and our banking system grew rapidly. A fully functioning gold standard governed monetary expansion and was perceived to provide an "automatic" stabilizing policy. It was only with the emergence of periodic credit crises late in the century and especially in 1907, that creation of a central bank gained support. These crises were seen largely as a consequence of the inelastic currency engendered by the National Bank Act. But, even with the advent of the Federal Reserve in 1913, monetary policy through the 1920s was largely governed by gold standard rules. Creation of the Federal Safety Net When the efforts of the Federal Reserve failed to prevent the bank collapses of the 1930s, the Banking Act of 1933 created federal deposit insurance. The subsequent evidence appears persuasive that the combination of a lender of last resort (the Federal Reserve) and federal deposit insurance have contributed significantly to financial stability and have accordingly achieved wide support within the Congress. Inevitably, however, such significant government intervention has been a mixed blessing. The federal safety net for banks clearly diminishes the effectiveness of private market regulation, creates perverse incentives for some banks to take excessive risk, and requires that we substitute more government supervision and regulation for the market discipline that played such an important role through much of our banking history. To cite the most obvious and painful example, without federal deposit insurance, private markets presumably would never have permitted thrift institutions to purchase the portfolios that brought down the industry insurance fund and left taxpayers responsible for huge losses. To be sure, government regulators and politicians have learned from this experience and taken significant steps to diminish the likelihood of a recurrence. But, the safety net undoubtedly still affects decisions by creditors of depository institutions. Indeed, the lower cost of funds provided to banks by the federal safety net provides a significant subsidy to banks, and limiting this subsidy has proved to be one of the most difficult aspects of current efforts to achieve financial modernization. While the safety net requires more supervision and regulation, in recent years rapidly changing technology has begun to render obsolete much of the bank examination regime established in earlier decades. Bank regulators are perforce being pressed to depend increasingly on ever more complex and sophisticated private market regulation. Indeed, these developments reinforce the truth of one of the key lessons from our banking history--that private counterparty supervision is still the first line of regulatory defense. This is certainly the case for the rapidly expanding bank derivatives markets and other off-balance sheet transactions. The complexity and speed of transactions and the growing complexity of the instruments have required both federal and state examiners to focus more on supervising risk management procedures rather than actual portfolios. Indeed, I would characterize recent examination innovations and proposals as attempting both to harness and simulate market forces in the supervision of banks. Again, the lessons of early American banking should encourage us in this endeavor--a real move back to the future. Indeed, state supervisors are used to adjusting to market realities, having led their federal counterparts in permitting more experiments and flexibility, from NOW accounts to adjustable rate mortgages, from insurance sales to regional compacts. It is not just the experimenting and the flexibility that state banking has brought to the system that is so beneficial. The dual banking system also offers protection against overzealousness in regulation by permitting banks to have a choice of more than one federal regulator by the act of selecting a state or federal charter. That choice has served as a constraint on arbitrary and capricious policies at the federal level. True, it is possible that two or more federal agencies can engage in a "competition in laxity"--but I worry considerably more about the possibility that a single federal regulator would inevitably become rigid and insensitive to the needs of the marketplace. In my judgment, so long as the existence of a federal guarantee of deposits and other elements of the safety net call for federal regulation of banks, such regulation should entail a choice of federal regulator in order to ensure the critical competitiveness of our banks. Back to the Future For all of these reasons, as well as our historical experience as a nation, we at the Federal Reserve remain strong supporters of the dual banking system. Our experience with examination partnerships with the states has been positive, and the empirical evidence on failure rates speaks well for the quality of state bank examinations. The ability of the states to produce an innovative and vibrant alternative to the federal structure has continued for over 130 years and can only be applauded. However, as you look back to your roots for inspiration and example, we should all be aware of the challenges you are facing. On the one hand, state banks have increased their share of the number of banks each year since 1965, but on the other, your share of banking assets, after rising each year since 1989, fell by about 2.5 percentage points last year as interstate consolidation began to leave its mark. It is too early to tell whether this is the beginning of an irreversible trend or a short-term adjustment. Clearly, conventional wisdom argues that interstate branching is less burdensome for national banks dealing with one supervisory authority. However, in 1997, all of the components were put in place for you to revise this perception. In July of last year, the Congress enacted the home state rule for state banks. This legislation, as you know, permits home state laws to apply in host states to branches of out-of-state banks, and for such branches to get equal footing with national banks for permissible activities. The congressional action followed the 1996 state/federal protocol and nationwide supervisory agreement designed to facilitate the seamless supervision and examination of interstate, state-chartered banks. I am told that the agreement is generally working well and that state and federal regulators are continuing to refine their coordination and cooperation. The State-Federal Working Group is planning a survey to find out exactly where impediments exist and how further enhancements could be made. But, if state jurisdictional issues make it inefficient for state banks to branch across state lines, the national bank charter will gain more adherents. Indeed, I must emphasize that state bank supervisors, by how you use the flexibility now permitted to you, control the future of the dual banking system. You have it in your own power to recover from a federal action, as your predecessors did in the 1870s and 1880s. Or, if states make the costs of interstate expansion relatively expensive for state-chartered banks, then the state banks will continue to lose share to national banks, as occurred in the 1860s and last year. Either way, the future you go back to is very much in your own hands.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the appointment of Lynn S. Fox as Assistant to the Board for public affairs, effective June 1. She will succeed Joseph R. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, who is retiring at the end of May. At the same time, the Board announced the appointments of Jennifer J. Johnson as Secretary of the Board and Robert de V. Frierson as Associate Secretary, also effective June 1. Before joining the Board staff in 1986, Ms. Fox, currently Deputy Congressional Liaison, worked on banking issues for Congressman John LaFalce of New York and for the House Banking Subcommittee on Economic Stabilization. She joined the Board's staff in 1986 as Congressional Liaison Assistant where she served until 1988. In 1990, she became Director of Corporate Relations for Harvey Mudd College in Claremont, California, but returned to the Board in 1992 as Special Assistant for Congressional Liaison. She was named to her current position in 1994. She holds a B.A. in American Studies from Smith College and an MBA from George Washington University. Ms. Johnson joined the Board's staff in 1975 as an attorney in the Legal Division, and progressed to Senior Counsel in 1982. She left the Board in 1986 to become Vice President at Shawmut Bank, where she was later promoted to General Counsel and Secretary. She rejoined the Board in 1989 as Associate Secretary, and was promoted to Deputy Secretary in 1994. She holds an A.B. in economics and sociology from Mount Holyoke College and a J.D. from the University of Pennsylvania. Mr. Frierson joined the Legal Division as an attorney in 1987, was promoted to Senior Attorney in 1988, Managing Senior Counsel in 1991, and Assistant General Counsel in 1994. He holds a B.A. in English and a J.D. from the University of Virginia.
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan Understanding today's international financial system Before the 34th Annual Conference on Bank Structure and Competition of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago May 7, 1998 Events in Asia over the past year reinforce once more the fact that, while our burgeoning global system is efficient and makes a substantial contribution to standards of living worldwide, that same efficiency exposes and punishes underlying economic imprudence swiftly and decisively. These global financial markets, engendered by the rapid proliferation of cross-border financial flows and products, have developed a capability of transmitting mistakes at a far faster pace throughout the financial system in ways that were unknown a generation ago. Today's international financial system is sufficiently different, in so many respects, from its predecessors that it can reasonably be characterized as new, as distinct from being merely a continuing evolution from the past. As a consequence, it is urgent that we accelerate our efforts to develop a sophisticated understanding of how this high-tech financial system works. Specifically, we need such an understanding if we are to minimize the chances that we will experience a systemic disruption beyond our degree of comprehension or our ability to respond effectively. We need it if we are to continue to make progress in reducing settlement risk in foreign exchange markets and to ensure a sound infrastructure for payments and settlement systems generally. And we need it if we are to have confidence in our processes of supervision and regulation. In this regard, I intend to focus my remarks this morning on three related topics: I will start by examining the crises in Asia, which, along with the one in Mexico just a few years ago, provide the first evidence of how crises arise in the new system, especially the central role that banks play. I will note that, while the support provided to banks by public safety nets appears to be an element of stability in the new system, it has also been part of the process that engendered recent crises. Next, I will consider why, if the existence of safety nets can encourage crises, we continue to provide them. Finally, I will consider possible policy responses to some of the system's evident problems and tensions. Put differently, can we learn to stabilize our burgeoning, sometimes frenetic, new international financial system so that we can realize its full potential? *** Let me start with Asia. In hindsight, it is evident that those leveraged economies could not provide adequate profitable opportunities at reasonable risk in the 1990s to absorb the surge in capital inflows. That surge reflected in part the diversification of the western equity markets' huge capital gains to a sector of the world which was perceived as offering above average returns. Together with distortions caused by a long-entrenched government planning ethos, the flood of investment resulted--some would say inevitably--in massive deadweight losses. As activity slowed, burdened by fixed-cost obligations that were undertaken on the presumption of continuing growth, business losses and nonperforming bank loans surged. The capital of banks in Asian economies--especially when properly accounted for--eroded rapidly. As a consequence, funding sources dried up as fears of defaults rose dramatically. In an environment of weak financial systems, lax supervisory regimes, and vague assurances about depositor or creditor protections, the state of confidence so necessary to the functioning of any banking system was torn asunder. Bank runs occurred in several countries and reached crisis proportions in Indonesia. Uncertainty and retrenchment escalated. In short, the slowing in activity in Asia exposed the high fixed costs of a leveraged economy, especially one with fixed obligations in foreign currencies. Failures to make payments induced vicious cycles of contagious, ever rising, and reinforcing fears. It is quite difficult to anticipate such crises. Every borrower, whether a bank or a nonbank company, presumably structures its balance sheet to provide a sufficient buffer against the emergence of illiquidity or insolvency. The scramble by borrowers to protect their balance sheets when this buffer is unexpectedly breached can lead to a surge in the demand for liquidity that in turn produces a run on the financial system. At one moment, an economy appears stable, the next it is subject to an implosion of fear-induced contraction. In this context a preventive effort to lessen the probabilities of such crises arising--for example, by bolstering the financial system's buffer through more capital or improved bank supervision--may not in itself further insulate a country from crisis if financial institutions, now faced with a lower cost of capital or lower spread on their debt, leverage away the increased buffer. Indeed, one form of moral hazard is that an initially sound financial system that attracts low risk premia could merely induce a ratcheting up of the risks that a nation's borrowers choose to take on. This is not to disparage endeavors to bolster financial systems. But we should keep in mind that some of the advantages of such initiatives could be drained away by moral hazard. What is becoming increasingly clear, and what is particularly relevant to this conference, is that, in virtually all cases, what turns otherwise seemingly minor imbalances into a crisis is an actual or anticipated disruption to the liquidity or solvency of the banking system, or at least of its major participants. That fact is of critical importance for understanding both the Asian and the previous Latin American crises. Depending on circumstances, the original impulse for the crisis may begin in the banking system or it may begin elsewhere and cause a problem in the banking system that converts a troubling event into an implosive crisis. The aspects of the banking system that produce such outcomes are not particularly opaque. First, exceptionally high leverage has often been a symptom of excessive risk-taking that left financial systems and economies vulnerable to loss of confidence. It is not easy to imagine the cumulative cascading of debt instruments seeking safety in a crisis when assets are heavily funded with equity. Moreover, financial (as well as nonfinancial) businesses have employed high leverage to mask inadequate underlying profitability and did not have adequate capital cushions to match their volatile environments. Second, banks, when confronted with a generally rising yield curve, which is more often the case than not, have had a tendency to incur interest rate or liquidity risk by lending long and funding short. This has exposed banks, especially those that had inadequate capital to begin with, to a collapse of confidence when interest rates spiked and capital was eroded. In addition, when financial intermediaries, in an environment of fixed exchange rates, but still high inflation premiums and domestic currency interest rates, sought low-cost, unhedged, foreign currency funding, the dangers of depositor runs, following a fall in the domestic currency, escalated. Third, banks play a crucial role in the financial market infrastructure. A sound institution can fend off unexpected shocks. But when they are undercapitalized, have lax lending standards, and are subjected to weak supervision and regulation, they have become a source of systemic risk to both domestic and international financial systems. Fourth, recent adverse banking experiences have emphasized the problems that can arise if banks, especially vulnerable banks, are almost the sole source of intermediation. Their breakdown induces a marked weakening in economic growth. A wider range of nonbank institutions, including viable debt and equity markets, can provide important safeguards of economic activity when the banking system fails. Fifth, despite its importance for distributing savings to their most valued investment use, excessive short-term interbank funding, especially cross border, may turn out to be the Achilles' heel of an international financial system that is subject to wide variations in financial confidence. This phenomenon, which is all too common in our domestic experience, may be particularly dangerous in an international setting. I shall return to this issue later. Finally, an important contributor to past crises has been moral hazard, that is, a distortion of incentives that occurs when the party that determines the level of risk receives the gains from, but does not bear the full costs of, the risks taken. Interest rate and currency risk-taking, excess leverage, weak financial systems, and interbank funding have all been encouraged by the existence of a safety net. The expectation that national monetary authorities or international financial institutions will come to the rescue of failing financial systems and unsound investments clearly has engendered a significant element of excessive risk-taking. The dividing line between public and private liabilities, too often, has become blurred. *** Given that the existence of safety nets generates moral hazard, and moral hazard distorts incentives, why do we continue to provide safety nets to support our financial systems? It is important to remember that, notwithstanding the possibility of excessive leverage, many of the benefits banks provide modern societies derive from their willingness to take risks and from their use of a relatively high degree of financial leverage. Through leverage, in the form principally of taking deposits, banks perform a critical role in the financial intermediation process; they provide savers with additional investment choices and borrowers with a greater range of sources of credit, thereby facilitating a more sophisticated allocation of resources that appears to contribute importantly to greater economic growth. Indeed, it has been the evident value of intermediation and leverage that has shaped the development of our financial systems from the earliest times--certainly since Renaissance goldsmiths discovered that lending out deposited gold was both feasible and profitable. In addition, central bank provision of a mechanism for converting highly illiquid portfolios into liquid ones, in extraordinary circumstances, has led to a greater degree of leverage in banking than market forces alone would support. Traditionally this has been accomplished by making discount or Lombard facilities available, so that individual depositories could turn illiquid assets into liquid resources and not exacerbate unsettled market conditions by the forced selling of such assets or the calling of loans. More broadly, open market operations, in situations like that which followed the crash of stock markets around the world in 1987, satisfy marked increased needs for liquidity for the system as a whole that otherwise could feed cumulative, self-reinforcing, contractions across many financial markets. To be sure, we should recognize that if we choose to have the advantages of a leveraged system of financial intermediaries, the burden of managing risk in the financial system will not lie with the private sector alone. As I noted, with leveraging there will always exist a possibility, however remote, of a chain reaction, a cascading sequence of defaults that will culminate in financial implosion if it proceeds unchecked. Only a central bank, with its unlimited power to create money, can with a high probability thwart such a process before it becomes destructive. Hence, central banks will of necessity be drawn into becoming lenders of last resort. But implicit in the existence of such a role is that there will be some form of allocation between the public and private sectors of the burden of risk, with central banks responsible for managing the most extreme, that is the most systemically sensitive, outcomes. Thus, central banks have been led to provide what essentially amounts to catastrophic financial insurance coverage. Such a public subsidy should be reserved for only the rarest of disasters. If the owners or managers of private financial institutions were to anticipate being propped up frequently by government support, it would only encourage reckless and irresponsible practices. In theory, the allocation of responsibility for risk-bearing between the private sector and the central bank depends upon the private cost of capital. In order to attract, or at least retain, capital, a private financial institution must earn at minimum the overall economy's marginal cost of riskless capital, adjusted for firm-specific risk. In competitive financial markets, the greater the leverage, the higher the rate of return, before adjustment for risk. If private financial institutions have to absorb all financial risk, then the degree to which they can leverage will be restrained, the financial sector smaller, and its contribution to the economy more limited. On the other hand, if central banks effectively insulate private institutions from potential losses, however incurred, increased laxity could threaten a major drain on taxpayers or produce inflationary instability as a consequence of excess money creation. Once a private financial institution infers the amount of capital it must devote to ensure against, first, illiquidity and, finally, insolvency, the size of its balance sheet for maximum rate of return on equity, adjusted for risk, is determined. That inference depends on the institution's judgment of how much of the tail of its risk distribution requires a capital provision. The central bank is presumed to respond to the remainder of the risk tail by lending freely and reducing the danger of illiquidity. Protecting private financial institutions' solvency through guarantees of liabilities risks significant moral hazard. In practice, the policy choice of how much, if any, of the extreme market risk that government authorities should absorb is fraught with many complexities. Yet we central bankers make this decision every day, either explicitly or by default. Moreover, we can never know for sure whether the decisions we made were appropriate. The question is not whether our actions are seen to have been necessary in retrospect; the absence of a fire does not mean that we should not have paid for fire insurance. Rather, the question is whether, ex ante, the probability of a systemic collapse was sufficient to warrant intervention. Often, we cannot wait to see whether, in hindsight, the problem will be judged to have been an isolated event and largely benign. Thus, governments, including central banks, have been given certain responsibilities related to their banking and financial systems that must be balanced. We have the responsibility to prevent major financial market disruptions through development and enforcement of prudent regulatory standards and, if necessary in rare circumstances, through direct intervention in market events. But we also have the responsibility to ensure that private sector institutions have the capacity to take prudent and appropriate risks, even though such risks will sometimes result in unanticipated bank losses or even bank failures. Our goal as supervisors, therefore, should not be to prevent all bank failures, as I have suggested to this conference many times, but to maintain sufficient prudential standards so that banking problems that do occur do not become widespread. We try to achieve the proper balance through official regulations, as well as through formal and informal supervisory policies and procedures. To some extent, we do this over time by signalling to the market, through our actions, the kinds of circumstances in which we might be willing to intervene to quell financial turmoil, and conversely, what levels of difficulties we expect private institutions to resolve by themselves. The market, then, responds by adjusting the risk premium addition to the riskless cost of capital available to banks. *** To return to the question I raised at the beginning: Can we learn to stabilize our burgeoning, sometimes frenetic, new international financial system so that we can realize its full potential? What types of regulatory initiatives appear fruitful in achieving the benefits and minimizing the costs of the new system? In addressing those questions, I will confine myself again to issues related more narrowly to banks: in particular, to bank supervision and to possible ways in which the behavior of individual banks could be improved. I will not discuss the important issues concerning the need for efficient bankruptcy procedures or for alternative means for coordinating debtors and creditors, both in the domestic context in many countries and in the cross-border context, that may be required in our new system. While failures will inevitably occur in a dynamic market, the safety net--not to mention concerns over systemic risk--requires, to repeat, that regulators not be indifferent to how banks manage their risks. To avoid having to resort to numbing micromanagement, regulators have increasingly insisted that banks put in place systems that allow management to have both the information and procedures to be aware of their own true risk exposures on a global basis and to be able to manage such exposures. The better these risk information and control systems, the more risk a bank can prudently assume. In that context, an enhanced regime of market incentives, involving greater sensitivity to market signals and more information to make those signals more robust, is essential. In this rapidly expanding international financial system, the primary protection from adverse financial disturbances is effective counterparty surveillance and, hence, government regulation and supervision should seek to produce an environment in which counterparties can most effectively oversee the credit risks of potential transactions. Here a major improvement in transparency is essential. To be sure, counterparties often exchange otherwise confidential information as a condition of a transaction. But broader dissemination of detailed disclosures of governments, financial institutions, and firms is required if the risks inherent in our global financial structure are to be contained. A market system can approach an appropriate equilibrium only if the signals to which individual market participants respond are accurate and adequate to the needs of the adjustment process. Among the important signals are product and asset prices, interest rates, debt by maturity, and detailed accounts of central banks and private enterprises. I find it difficult to believe, for example, that the crises that arose in Thailand and Korea would have been nearly so virulent had their central banks published data prior to the crises on net reserves instead of the not very informative gross reserve positions only. Some inappropriate capital inflows would almost surely have been withheld and policymakers would have been forced to make difficult choices more promptly if earlier evidences of difficulty had emerged. Increased transparency can expose the prevalence of pending problems, but it cannot be expected to discourage all aberrant behavior. It has not prevented reliance on real estate for collateral from becoming problematic from time to time. East Asia has been no exception. When real estate values fall sharply, as they do from time to time, such collateral tends to become highly illiquid. Removal of legal impediments to more widespread forms of collateral and to prompt access to collateral would be helpful in dealing with these problems. It is increasingly evident that nonperforming loans should be dealt with expeditiously and not allowed to fester. The expected values of the losses on these loans are, of course, a subtraction from capital. But since these estimates are uncertain, they embody an additional risk premium that further reduces the market's best estimate of the size of effective equity capital. Funding becomes more difficult. Partly reflecting uncertainties with respect to their nonperforming loans, Japanese banks in London, for example, are currently required to pay about a 15 basis point add-on over what markets require for major western banks for short-term deposits denominated in yen. It is, hence, far better to remove these dubious assets and their associated risk premium from bank balance sheets, and dispose of them separately, preferably promptly. A predicate to addressing nonperforming loans expeditiously is better and more forceful supervision, which requires more knowledgeable bank examiners than, unfortunately, many economies enjoy. In all countries, we need independent bank examiners who understand banking and business risk, who could in effect, make sound loans themselves because they understand the process. Similarly, we need loan officers at banks that understand their customers' business--loan officers that could, in effect, step into the shoes of their customers. Lack of a cadre of loan officers who have experience in judging lending risk can produce debilitating losses even when lending is not directed by government inducement or the need to support members of an associated group of companies. Experienced bank supervision cannot fully substitute for poor lending procedures, but presumably it could encourage better practice. Apparently even that has been lacking in many economies. And training personnel and developing adequate supervisory systems will take time. I pointed earlier to cross-border interbank funding as potentially the Achilles' heel of the international financial system. Creditor banks expect claims on banks, especially banks in emerging economies, to be protected by a safety net and, consequently, consider them to be essentially sovereign claims. Unless those expectations are substantially altered--as when banks actually incur significant losses--governments can be faced with the choice either of validating those expectations or of risking serious disruption to payments systems and to financial markets in general. Arguably expectations of safety net support have increased the level of cross border interbank lending from that which would be supported by unsubsidized markets themselves. This would suggest resource misallocation. Accordingly, it might be useful to consider ways in which some added discipline could be imposed on the interbank market. Such discipline, in principle, could be imposed on either debtor or creditor banks. For example, capital requirements could be raised on borrowing banks by making the required level of capital dependent not just on the nature of the banks' assets but also on the nature of their funding. An increase in required capital can be thought of as providing a larger cushion for the sovereign guarantor in the event of a bank's failure. That is, it would shift more of the burden of the failure onto the private sector. Alternatively, the issue of moral hazard in interbank markets could be addressed by charging banks for the existence of the sovereign guarantee, particularly in more vulnerable countries where that guarantee is more likely to be called upon and whose cost might deter some aberrant borrowing. For example, sovereigns could charge an explicit premium, or could impose reserve requirements, earning low or even zero interest rates, on interbank liabilities. Increasing the capital charge on lending banks, instead of on borrowing banks, might also be effective. Under the Basle capital accord, short-term claims on banks from any country carry only a twenty percent risk weight. The higher cost to the lending banks associated with a higher risk weight would presumably be passed on to the borrowing banks. Borrowing banks, at the margin, might reduce their total borrowing or shift their borrowing to nonbank sources of funds, perhaps with the shift facilitated by the lending banks, who might advert to securitization of short-term interbank lending if regulatory capital charges exceeded internal requirements. In either case, there would tend to be a reduction in interbank exposures, a significant source of systemic risk. To be evaluated in any such initiative is whether such regulation would disrupt liquidity in the interbank market to a point where such costs exceed the benefits of reduced interbank exposure. *** We are interacting every day with an emerging new international financial structure, one with great potential for facilitating the creation of wealth and rising standards of living. Our understanding of the new system continues to improve, as does our ability to gauge and manage risks. Still, the new system will doubtless at times appear threatening and unstable. But that is the price of progress. In my judgment, at the end of the day, it will be a price well worth paying.
Remarks by Vice Chair Alice M. Rivlin The U.S. retail payments system Before the 34th Annual Conference on Bank Structure and Competition of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago May 7, 1998 Payments systems are a hot topic right now, both here and abroad. There is lots of excitement about technological miracles that could revolutionize the way average people pay for the things they buy. Smart cards, home-banking, and ideas still on the drawing boards hold the promise of making payments quicker, cheaper, safer, and more convenient for payor and payee alike, and for banishing cumbersome paper and coin to museums and private collections forever. In this context, I'd like to focus my remarks close to home: on the U.S. small dollar or retail payments system, which has distinguished itself by proving extraordinarily resistant to change and persistently wedded to the paper check. The checkless society has been predicted at meetings like this one for several decades. But the number of checks Americans write is still increasing, albeit slowly, while total checks decline in almost all other industrial countries. Indeed, we appear to be the only industrial country in which the per capita number of checks written is still rising--despite rapid growth in payments by credit and debit cards or other electronic means. In an age when messages go around the world in seconds at minimal cost, American citizens and companies are still writing 66 billion payment messages on little pieces of paper, most of which are mechanically sorted, transported by truck or airplane and stored in drawers and shoeboxes. This anachronism is worthy of serious thought. Are Americans destined to continue our long love affair with the paper check for decades, or are we finally approaching the long-predicted dawn of the checkless society and the prospect of a rapid shift to all electronic retail payments? If so, what kind? What are the issues that need to be addressed by payments system providers and regulators (and the Federal Reserve is both) as we think together about how the U.S. can move to an efficient, convenient, and safe electronic payments system? Why is this the right moment to focus on this subject? In general, payments issues attract little attention. The payments system is the lifeblood of the economy. It carries the essential messages without which our complex economy would break down, just as the human body would cease to function if the circulatory system did not get the oxygen to the right place at the right time. But like the circulatory system, few people think about the payments system as long as it works. As long as the payments system is at least reasonably convenient, reliable and efficient, as it had been for decades in industrial countries, including our own, no one pays it much mind. The new focus on payments, however, does not arise out of a breakdown, but out of simultaneous opportunities. Changes in the structure of financial systems and markets offer opportunities for rethinking how payments should be made. In Europe, the advent of the euro not only forces revamping of existing payments systems to deal with a new currency, but provides an opportunity to modernize old systems that might have lumbered along unnoticed for quite a while. In the U.S., mergers are forcing financial institutions to combine their payments infrastructures. A merger may surface the fact that the new partners currently have different and possibly incompatible approaches to check processing, for example. The merger may provide an opportunity for designing a new approach to payments that would not otherwise have occurred, or not soon. A simultaneous reason for the payments vogue is that technology is suddenly offering us options for sending retail payments faster, cheaper and more conveniently than ever before. The rapid advance of computer and telecommunications technology has already revolutionized wholesale payments, enabling huge volumes of transactions to move almost instantly across vast distances. Now, as familiarity with computers spreads beyond geeks and techies to ordinary folks, the potential has arisen for making retail payments systems faster, cheaper, and more convenient as well. Why has the American system of retail payments been so resistant to change? There may be something about money that generates a special conservatism and fear of the unknown. The shift to the euro clearly has strong emotional overtones for many Europeans, especially older Europeans, who feel some important part of their heritage is disappearing with the franc, the mark, and the lire. The tangibility of paper may have some emotional appeal. It's not gold, but at least you can see it, touch it, lock it up and know where it is. But one does not have to appeal to the irrational to see reasons for the persistence of checks. Checks are easy to write, widely accepted and their legal status as proof of payment is clear. Moreover, they appear cheap to the user. In their eagerness to attract deposits, depository institutions have made checking accounts as attractive as possible, seldom charging per check fees, relying on minimum balance requirements or low interest rates on transaction balances to recoup costs. Broker-dealers and other seekers after the same funds have offered "free" checking to compete. Moreover, check users get the benefits of float. Thus, the check writer and the receiver perceive the costs of using checks as low and have little incentive to seek an alternative. Moreover, alternative electronic systems run straight into the network problem. The value of signing on to a new electronic payment network, such as electronic bill paying system or a smart card, depends on a lot of people and businesses being able and willing to accept the payment. At the same time, people and businesses are unwilling to invest in new payment processing equipment unless they are sure a lot of payors will use it. Electronic systems also exhibit huge economies of scale. Average costs plummet as volume rises, so small volume is a large handicap. This vicious cycle makes it hard for any new system to get off the ground and even harder when there are several competing systems each claiming to be the great wave of the future. The result is ferment and frustration in the financial services industry, coupled with fear that some outside force--usually a particularly successful and often demonized software vendor--will suddenly find a way to overcome the reluctance and inertia of banks and their customers and set up a whole new payments mechanism that wholly or mostly bypasses the institutions we now call "banks". Without strong leadership and active consensus building across the diverse institutions and constituencies that make up the users and providers of retail payments, we may be stuck in this dilemma for quite a while. As we think about how we can get out of this box and modernize the nation's retail payments system more rapidly, it is a mistake to structure the problem as a stark choice between "free market" solutions, on the one hand, and governmental or regulatory solutions, on the other. The retail payments system, like telephone service or electric power, clearly has some public utility aspects. There is a strong common interest in ensuring that the economy has a safe, reliable, accessible and efficient payments system, retail as well as wholesale. It was in part this strong common interest that prompted the Congress to create the Federal Reserve and to give it both operational and regulatory authority in the payments area. At the same time, the efficient delivery of retail payments is greatly enhanced by competition among providers and the technological and process innovation that results from that competition. The problem is that when the system is a network, relying on competition to move to the next generation of technology, without any attempt to build consensus or set standards, may retard change. It may result in under-investment, because no one knows which way to go, or balkanized systems may emerge that are not interoperable and can be made so later only at considerable expense. On the other hand, if choices are made too early, or standards set too soon, many of the benefits of competitive innovation may be lost. The challenge, and it is a big one, is to find a way for the participants in the payments system--users, providers, and regulators--to work together so that we continue to get the benefits of competition, but clear some of these hurdles and move on to the next generation of retail payments systems as rapidly as possible. Over a year ago, when I first came to the Fed, Chairman Greenspan asked me to chair a committee--composed of one of my fellow governors and two Federal Reserve Bank presidents--to consider the role of the Federal Reserve in the retail payments system, especially in the traditional areas of check and ACH and in the newly emerging electronic payments--some still just a gleam in some technical genius's eye--that might become important in the future. We didn't worry about cash because we assumed that as long as people want to use it, the Fed, as central bank, has to provide it. We didn't concern ourselves with wholesale payments systems like Fedwire, because they are not controversial. Wholesale payments and net settlements are essential functions of a central bank. But we did spend a lot of time and effort thinking about the check market (where the Fed processes about 1/3 of the interbank checks) and the ACH market (where we process about 80 percent of ACH payments). In both markets, the Federal Reserve differentially serves smaller depository institutions and more remote locations. We considered some drastic options--including getting out of the check and ACH processing markets altogether or selling our operations to a private entity. We drew heavily on Fed system staff and others for analysis, but the most interesting part of effort to me was getting out around the country to payments system forums held in all 12 Federal Reserve Districts to get input from participants in the payments system, including some in this room. Those forums were diverse and often lively. We learned a lot, but two themes emerged clearly: One was that most depository institutions, especially smaller ones, including community banks and credit unions, did not want to see the Fed exit the check clearing or the ACH businesses. They feared being dependent on a small number of large institutions, often their competitors. They envisioned more limited service and higher prices if the Fed left the market. A few big institutions seemed eager to absorb the business, but, surprisingly, not many. Most big banks are too busy with other opportunities to want to expand their correspondent relationships or invest heavily in the check clearing market--not obviously a future growth market. Another theme that ran through the forums was a call for more Federal Reserve leadership in helping the payments industry cope with change and emerging technology. Many institutions urged us to work more actively with them to help sort out the new technologies and figure out what some of the viable options are for the payments system (or systems) of the future. The report of the Committee, which was released in early January, strongly reflects the impact from those forums. We came to two general conclusions: One was that the Fed should remain a provider of check collection and ACH services with the explicit goal of enhancing the efficiency, effectiveness and convenience of both systems; while ensuring access for all depository institutions. Second, the Fed should play a more active leadership role, working closely and collaboratively with the providers and users, to enhance efficiency of check and ACH and to help evolve strategies for moving to the next generation of payments instruments. The first recommendation--not exiting--got the most attention. But the second is far more important--this was not a status quo report. The Committee believed that over the next few years, the payments system is likely to (and should) evolve rapidly, and that the Fed and the payments community need to think together about how this evolution can take place to everyone's advantage, especially the consumer. The Committee wants to explore how the Fed could play a constructive role, not operationally, but as convener of groups to try to chart new directions for the payments system and remove obstacles to its evolution. Specifically, the Committee--which now consists of myself, Governors Kelley and Ferguson, Presidents McDonough and Minehan--is exploring four major initiatives. We are considering whether additional steps need to be taken to level the playing field between the Fed and private check processors might increase competition and enhance the efficiency of check collection. In particular, would changes in Regulation CC (the same day settlement rule) enhance market competition? We are also focussing on the question of whether electronic check presentment (ECP), truncation and imaging--if more widely, or even universally, used--would enhance the efficiency of the check collection system. The Committee examined this question in preparing its January report. We concluded the jury was still out and that the Fed should work actively with the private sector to array experience and information. If wide use of ECP with truncation early in the check collection process would make the system as a whole more efficient, then it's worth mutual thought about what techniques and incentives would get us there faster. But we need to consider the possibility that ECP with truncation and imaging is an interim technology in a check market that might be disappearing. If so, investing in ECP could be a mistake that would delay the evolution of more cost effective future technologies. The Committee wants to focus attention on the usefulness and potential future role of ACH. We will be working with providers and users as well as with NACHA to explore how to make ACH services more user-friendly and to increase ACH use for direct deposit of payrolls, direct billing and other actual and potential payments. Finally, and most important, we want to interact with the financial services industry, vendors, and potential users to share information about emerging forms of retail electronic payments. What are the potential advantages and disadvantages of these new mechanisms? Is there a need for new standards, for security safeguards, or for legal changes to enhance the effectiveness of new forms of electronic payments. I am not predicting the imminent arrival of the checkless society. Those who predicted that--and there were many--have lived to eat their words. I do believe, however, that we are at a stage in the evolution of retail payments in the U.S. when the technological potential for major change is available and all the parties concerned with payments should be thinking and talking about how we can best work together in the interest of more efficient, convenient, safe and accessible means of making retail payments in the future.
Remarks by Governor Laurence H. Meyer Before the 1998 Community Reinvestment Act Conference of the Consumer Bankers Association, Arlington, Virginia May 12, 1998 Community Reinvestment in an Era of Bank Consolidation and Deregulation It is a pleasure to be here this afternoon to share with you some thoughts on the future of retail banking in this era of bank consolidation and deregulation. I want to spend my time with you today reviewing how some of the more dramatic changes in the retail banking milieu might be affecting the traditional relationships between banks and their communities, and especially those communities in which reinvestment and fair lending are important concerns. The evolving banking structure, regulatory reform, and innovation in business processes driven by improved technology and intense market competition have combined to transform consumer finance and, indeed, the American economy. At no time in our history has credit been more available and more affordable to virtually all income groups, than it is today. The Community Reinvestment Act has contributed to this increase in the availability and affordability of credit. At a minimum, CRA has helped spur the development of new tools and techniques to help serve credit needs that in the past banks were either unable or unwilling to serve. At its best, CRA also has stimulated competition for loans and banking services in low- and moderate-income communities, leading many institutions on a continuing search for techniques to help better understand and mitigate consumer lending risks. Two-Edged Sword But the pace of change in recent years has been dizzying, not only for consumers, but for lenders and your institutions, and the notion of reinvestment responsibilities for financial institutions may have become somewhat muddled. Banking organizations face unprecedented challenges in the midst of intensifying competition from other banks and nonbank lenders. It is a daily challenge to just keep up with new competitors, new credit products, technological breakthroughs, and an increasingly sophisticated customer base. For some of you, it may be a challenge to just keep up with your bank's name. Add to the mix pressures created by the need to explore alternative delivery systems, such as internet banking, and the year 2000 problem, and it might appear that just keeping up, let alone, actually growing your businesses, is your main job. If all this is of concern to you, it is not surprising that virtually all of these changes are viewed by many consumers and the communities you work in as, at least, threatening, if not downright frightening. While many consumers appreciate the additional services and increased convenience created by many of these changes in retail banking, and are willing to pay for them, others have deep concerns about the direction of consumer finance, generally, and banking in particular. Clearly, both the substance and the pace of change are like the proverbial two-edged sword. At the same time they are creating new problems and public concerns, they are also stimulating fantastic new business opportunities. Today I want to look briefly at three broad changes affecting consumer banking that reflect both sides of this two-edged sword. These are: (1) consolidation of the consumer credit industry that is creating mammoth regional and nationwide banking organizations; (2) the evolving regulatory framework which is providing increased flexibility and access to new products and markets; and (3) new business processes that have been made possible by innovative uses of new technologies. In each case, these changes can create both new problems and, I believe, also new opportunities for banks in helping meet their community credit needs. Financial Institution Consolidation Let me begin with the quickening pace of bank consolidation, which is being driven not only by a desire to obtain market power, but the need to become more efficient. The potential benefits of consolidation are well known. It often can help reduce costs, expand the range of products available to consumers, improve productivity, and facilitate economies of scale that enable banks to provide more services at reasonable prices, while reducing risk by adding geographic diversity to portfolios . Consolidation, especially across the artificial geographic boundaries created by the old public policy, has vastly improved convenience for millions of consumers. But it also continues to raise a number of concerns among consumers and public policymakers. They are concerned that mergers can reduce the availability of financial services, especially in low- and moderate-income areas, where banking offices may be closed and hours of operation may be reduced. They are concerned that consolidation in the industry could reduce competition and result in higher prices overall for credit and credit-related services. They are concerned that large regional or national financial institutions may cause the transfer of decision-making authority out of their communities, resulting in reduced willingness by the acquiring institution to respond to particular community needs. They perceive that the evolution of the financial services industry, now well underway, may threaten CRA's effectiveness and reduce the availability of credit and credit-related services for low- and moderate-income persons and areas. And they are concerned that mergers can have a negative impact in local economies through layoffs at merged institutions and reduced overall corporate support for community programs. While there may be cases where such perceptions have become reality, we also need to recognize that consolidation is also creating many advantages and opportunities that can benefit banks and their lower-income communities. First, under the right circumstances, larger, highly diversified retail institutions can facilitate more effective partnerships at the local level, and may feel the need to work more closely with local groups than did the predecessor bank. Acquiring institutions that are moving into a new market may have to rely more heavily on expertise of local officials and community-based development groups to maintain effective reinvestment programs. So in many cases, I think mergers can provide a built-in incentive to reinvigorate dialogue between affected banking organizations and communities. There is a caution here, however. While mergers may provide some built-in incentives for bank-community group cooperation, that cooperation needs to be grounded in substantive working partnerships that make a difference, not just in writing a check and walking away. It is critical that the larger, more diversified banking organizations that are emerging continue to work on the front lines of neighborhood revitalization alongside community-based organizations. Another possible opportunity flowing from mergers is that they often can bring greater resources to the local reinvestment process. Larger institutions, with their greater diversity of products and services, increased capital, and often considerable community and economic development experience and expertise, may be much more effective partners in reinvestment programs than their predecessor institutions in a community. And larger institutions, especially those that operate in multiple geographic markets or regions can take best practices, products, and services to the regional or even national level. Still, more resources that are not well adapted to local needs, just won't get the job done. Those resources need to be deployed with sensitivity to local conditions if banks and their communities are to fully benefit. In that regard, I think that both bankers and regulators may need to bring new energy to the whole issue of evaluating the effectiveness of CRA-related lending programs. While CRA may be helping stimulate the flow of loan dollars from banks in the form of standardized products, it does not guarantee their effectiveness in helping address community or neighborhood needs. Turning to another type of opportunity, it is also important to consider that mergers often help create healthier institutions that are more able to meet consumer needs and provide more effective competition for nonbank lenders. In the long run, this may be of great benefit to local communities. To the extent that consolidation continues to make banks healthy competitors for deposits and, especially loans, it helps keep financial activity flowing through institutions that have CRA responsibilities. Finally, mergers may be helping strengthen support for regional and national community development intermediaries as one proven way to work in local markets. These intermediaries, such as the Local Initiatives Support Corporation, the Enterprise Foundation, or the Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation, bring value-added services to the community development process. They provide low cost seed and gap financing, community development project packaging services and technical assistance to local community-based organizations. Both larger financial institutions and local community-based organizations are generally comfortable with such intermediaries. One concern, here, however, is that larger financial institutions could be led to believe that all they have to do is write a check to these national intermediaries and then sit back and let them do the work. As a stand-along strategy, that would be a mistake. It would ignore the hundreds of local community development groups who do not have access to help from these national intermediaries, but have proven quite effective when working with the banking community at the local level. Deregulation and New Bank Powers A second set of problems and opportunities in community reinvestment seems to stem from concerns about the general trend toward deregulation and new powers for banks that enable them to enter new financial service businesses. There is a general public concern that as deregulation, and efforts to reduce regulatory burden on financial institutions, proceed, banking organizations will simply pay less attention to community credit needs and reinvestment opportunities. Geographic deregulation, for example, has caused concerns about the loss of community perspective and influence in bank decision-making. Product deregulation and new bank powers, such as the ability to sell insurance, operate discount brokerage businesses, or underwrite certain securities, are sometimes seen as deflecting resources from CRA efforts. Banks will simply move capital and manpower to these new lines of business that appear to demonstrate greater profit potential than does providing small loans in local communities. Of course, a corollary to that proposition is that bank regulators are more concerned about reducing regulatory burden than in ensuring that legislative intent is carried out. On that point I can assure you that this is not the case. But I think it is important to see deregulation in quite another light. It can also provide a host of new opportunities for banks to serve their communities. For example, geographic deregulation is providing many of the same advantages I touched on a moment ago in the discussion of consolidation. It provides banks with potentially larger markets and greater economies of scale for products targeted to low- and moderate-income areas, and ultimately enables banks to offer more affordable pricing. As in all types of lending, the geographic diversity of a bank's loan portfolio, including its affordable housing and community development loans, provides an extra layer of risk mitigation. On the product side, deregulation can increase breadth of tools available to provide value-added services for low and moderate-income areas. For example, the authority to underwrite municipal revenue bonds could help provide long-term, low cost financing for both small and larger communities and provides greater competition. New insurance powers may enable banking companies to offer property insurance in ways that could provide greater competition and improved availability and pricing in low- and moderate-income areas. Helping ensure the availability of property insurance also can help protect bank loans and investments in those same areas, and help promote neighborhood economic stability. New Business Processes Industry consolidation, deregulation and expanded use of new technologies have helped financial service providers develop and use new business processes. This third major change in the banking environment, may be the most salient of all in its potential effects on low- and moderate-income consumers. Clearly, many of these new business processes, such as credit scoring and automated underwriting, reflect a mass-market approach to lending that has greatly increased efficiency in making consumer and small business loans. But these new business processes have also raised a number of issues. There are concerns, for example, that automated underwriting and credit scoring foster a "one-size-fits-all" approach to lending that is inappropriate in lower-income communities. Community development groups have raised concerns that use of such systems makes it more difficult for lenders to experiment with new, or more flexible underwriting standards that may not fit computerized models. This, they fear, could reduce use of creative approaches in community lending. They are also concerned that such practices may force applicants who might be viewed as creditworthy by a more personalized system into higher-priced "B" or "C" quality lending programs. Finally, if these techniques are not used properly, they could result in disparate impact discrimination. The opportunities here, however, are quite clear. Credit scoring and automated underwriting have, in fact, been major factors in expanding access to credit for low- and moderate-income households and communities. When used properly, they enable banks to reduce costs and manage risks associated with small dollar loans. These new technologies and business processes allow banks to engage in sophisticated risk-based pricing while helping to reduce costs. One quite interesting development is use of these technologies by banks to develop and market new credit programs that are specifically targeted toward low- and moderate-income consumers. New mortgage products, for example, that employ low or no down payments and up to 100 percent loan-to-value ratios are made possible by credit scoring and automated underwriting. And many of the products have received secondary market acceptance. These new technologies also have significantly expanded consumer access to credit cards and are being used by many lenders to underwrite small business loans based on the creditworthiness of the business owner. New technologies also present new opportunities to help meet the need for depository services for low- and moderate-income households on a more cost effective basis. Advances in ATM technology, debit cards, electronic benefits transfer programs, wider use of direct, electronic deposit of paychecks and, perhaps, development of a broader market for smart cards, hold the promise of vast improvements in both convenience for consumers and cost efficiencies for bankers. One promising concept, now being explored by a few institutions, with the help of technology, is the idea of "individual development accounts," or IDAs for short. IDAs are a form of automatic savings account for low- and moderate-income persons, for which a match is provided, usually by a nonprofit organization or government entity. Their purpose is to help lower-income families build assets in the same way that many consumers use 401(k) plans. Under most IDA concepts, as consumers maintain a savings rate over time, the match is guaranteed and the funds can be withdrawn for an agreed upon purpose, such as a down payment for a home mortgage, or to help capitalize a microenterprise. Usually IDA programs incorporate direct deposit systems and some nonprofit groups and banks are exploring the use of electronic benefits transfer systems to help create IDA programs for benefits recipients. To the extent that technology can help make these types of small accounts more cost effective, they could be an excellent tool to help build assets of lower-income consumers and communities. Ultimately, they could result in more community lending. Conclusion This has been just a brief overview of some of the community reinvestment opportunities being fostered by the changing shape of banking. While there is every expectation that the evolution of financial services will continue to be driven by the market, it is also likely that public policy, including policy governing what a modernized banking system will look like, will color your perception of the marketplace. But as we all know, these changes -- bank consolidation, deregulation and new business processes -- are creating new tensions in bank/community relationships. Many of these tensions are finding their way into CRA protests and political debate about the best way to modernize our banking system. I would conclude, however, that although the evolution of consumer financial services is much like a two-edged sword, creating both problems and opportunities, there's no need for you to fall on it. Banks and their communities would be wise to explore the kinds of opportunities I've touched on while continuing to identify and help mitigate problems resulting from this evolutionary process. So this is clearly no time for anyone to relax. How well we as regulators and you as bankers manage the process of change will determine whether current reinvestment successes can be sustained.
Remarks by Vice Chair Alice M. Rivlin Commencement address At New York University, Robert F. Wagner Graduate School of Public Service, New York, N.Y. May 12, 1998 I am delighted to be part of this joyous occasion marking the graduation of the class of 1998 from the Robert F. Wagner Graduate School of Public Service. My personal association with NYU goes back a long way. As a small child in the 1930s, I was an NYU faculty brat. My association with Dean Boufford does not go back so far, but I got to know her when she served in the Department of Health and Human Services in Washington. She did a wonderful job there and I know she is doing great things here at the Wagner School. Graduations are always good moments in life. They give everyone at least a brief sense of completion -- faculty and administrators, as well as graduates. All those seemingly endless projects, reports, papers, exams and theses did finally get done. They were handed in, read and graded. And you are actually here getting a degree. Furthermore, your parents and spouses and children and friends are suddenly all very proud of you -- all at the same time. They've forgotten how they fussed at you for working so hard. They've forgotten all those skeptical questions. You're getting a masters degree in what ? Why aren't you going to medical school or to law school? Why aren't you going to business school so you can get a job on Wall Street and make a lot of money? Now they are all just proud of you and glad you got it done, whatever it was. But I have a special reason to be pleased. I am delighted that this talented, diverse group of people has chosen public service. That means you share my deep conviction that public service matters. It matters that we run our governments well -- efficiently, effectively, responsively -- at all levels. It matters that we make the best possible public decisions. This is not a question of ideology, of left or right or center. It's independent of whether you believe in a big government or a smaller one. The fact that you devoted your time and energy to prepare for public service means you care about good government -- government that functions well and does what people want it to do. Moreover, even if you are not going directly into a public service job, your presence here indicates that you share my conviction that people in leadership positions in all parts of our society -- in the private, nonprofit, and public sectors -- need to understand public issues and participate as knowledgeably as possible in public decisions. During your careers, many of you will go back and forth between the public and private sectors and between different levels of government. The skills, knowledge, analytical tools and the ways of approaching problems that you learned here at NYU will be just as useful wherever you are. I'm especially proud of you for having chosen to study public service in the 1990s, when so many Americans seem confused and conflicted about government. Anti-government rhetoric gets shriller in each election. Candidates who have spent their whole careers in elected office seem to think they can only get reelected by bashing government. I find it quite distressing, but they do get audience response. They say vague things -- government is too big, meddles too much, taxes too much, is full of incompetent or malevolent bureaucrats that never get things done -- and the audience cheers. But if they say they want to cut Medicare, drug treatment, social security, police protection, parks, daycare, or schools, the cheering stops and the room empties. Apparently a lot of Americans want public services -- indeed, they want more responses and quicker -- they just don't like government in the abstract. Many of you will remember about two and a half years ago, when the budget negotiations between the President and the Congress reached an impasse, the money ran out, and the Federal government actually shut down. In the first day or so, there was a lot of political rhetoric about how the government would shut down and no one would notice. The anti-government orators pictured paper shuffling bureaucrats quietly disappearing without a trace. I was Director of the Office of Management and Budget at that time. OMB was then trying desperately to figure out how to comply with the shutdown law without causing too much damage, suffering and future cost. Congresses had said that "essential services" were exempt, but who and what was "essential"? Clearly the military had to stay at their posts. Air traffic controllers had to be there. No one wanted to throw open the gates of federal prisons, so prison employees had to stay on the job. No one wanted to open the borders to illegal immigrants, hazardous drugs and other smuggling, so customs and immigration workers had to keep on working. People had to get medical services. Social security checks were specifically exempted by Congress; but what about veterans checks? What about meat inspectors? It was hard to find "non-essentials." One of the minor decisions I had to make was whether to turn off the national Christmas tree, which stood behind the White House on National Park Service land. The tree obviously wasn't "essential," so we were about to turn it off when the local electric utility said they'd donate the power and some other citizens chipped in to pay security guards. No one wanted the lights to go out. But the anti-government folks seriously misread the public. As people discovered they couldn't visit a national park, couldn't travel abroad because they couldn't get their passport renewed, couldn't close on their new house because the FHA or VA mortgage approval couldn't be processed, and couldn't get next semester's student loan approved, politicians began hearing the anger. The government reopened, and even the most government-bashing politicians said, "Let's resolve never, never to do that again." It was an expensive national reality check. Ambivalence about government is very American and probably basically healthy. It was less evident, however, when I was starting into a public policy career, at what was perhaps the high point of American faith in government. Like many of you, I always wanted to be involved in politics and policy to try to make the world better. Back then, it was not so fashionable to be cynical. I was part of the idealistic post World War II generation that was focussed on peace and international understanding, rebuilding war torn countries and creating new international organizations like the United Nations and the World Bank. My first job was in the Marshall Plan. There were plenty of domestic challenges, too. The depression was a recent memory; poverty was high; and racial and gender discrimination was rampant, overt and legally sanctioned. There was plenty of hope and optimism. There were plenty of obvious challenges to meet and wrongs to right. By the time I was in graduate school and beginning a professional career, there were also exciting new analytical tools to be tried out. Macroeconomists were building models in order to improve forecasts and predict the effects of policy decisions. Social policy analysts were beginning to measure policy outcomes, collect data on success and failure, and figure out cost effective strategies by doing actual experiments and learning from the results. In retrospect, we were all a bit carried away with these new tools. We didn't understand as well as you do now how really hard it is to make policy and how much the painstaking, nitty gritty work of implementation matters to the outcome. We learned that on the job. I feel unusually lucky to have been in some exciting places at times when big changes were going on that a public policy wonk and public servant could revel in being part of. I was at the Department of Health, Education and Welfare in the 1960s, when the Great Society legislation had just passed and we were evaluating what worked and what didn't. We were very hopeful about Head Start and compensatory education. It was already clear that welfare needed reform. Medicaid and Medicare were just getting going, but it was already obvious that they were going to be much more expensive than the original advocates thought and that delivering quality medical care at affordable prices was going to be a very difficult, continuing problem. Some thirty years later, it still is. I was at the Congressional Budget Office in the mid 1970s and early 1980s, when the struggle to get control of the Federal budget was just beginning. Congress was impressed with the analytical strength the Administration had developed and wanted some number crunchers and policy wonks of their own. I got the rare privilege of setting up a new government agency, making the rules, hiring the people, and getting it started. I am very proud of CBO and the work it has done over the last 23 years. I also had another rare privilege -- after some years of private sector activity -- of joining the Office of Management and Budget under the Clinton Administration, at just the moment when the mounting budget deficits clearly had to be dealt with. Some of us had been struggling with the deficits, sounding warnings throughout the 1980s, saying things like "we'd better deal with the deficit now when the economy is growing because it will only get worse in a recession," and feeling that the country just wasn't listening. Suddenly, we were sitting around a table with the President of the United States and creating a budget that would really reduce the deficit. The deficit in fiscal year 1992 was $290 billion. The optimists among us thought that, if we were tough and lucky, we might cut the deficit in half by 1997. It's great to be part of a win. The deficit has come down faster than even the optimists thought. This year, we will actually have a budget surplus. Nobody thought that was possible back in 1993. Were we smart or lucky? Some of each. Everyone worked hard -- both Congress and the Administration. Compromises were made. The resulting budgets weren't anybody's ideal policy but they worked, and the economy has done much better than anyone dared hope. Success always takes a combination of good policy and good luck; just as failure usually takes a combination of mistakes and bad luck. Now I am lucky enough to be at the Federal Reserve at an especially fascinating time. The U. S. economy is doing astonishingly well. The economic growth is strong; the unemployment rate is at 4.3 percent for first time in decades; inflation is remarkably benign; and the U. S. industry is competing well around the world. The challenge now is to keep the good news flowing and to keep the economy growing, without overheating, at the highest sustainable rate. Keeping the economy growing is especially important right now as we try to reform welfare. I could not have predicted when I was starting out with a graduate degree and a passion for public policy that I would be a player in such fascinating events. You can't predict now what challenges will come your way. If you jotted down this afternoon some guesses about the paths your careers would take over the next several decades, I can only guarantee you one thing: your guesses will prove to be quite wildly wrong. Most of the exciting and rewarding challenges that will face you in your careers would seem quite improbable now. I can only promise you that the challenges will be difficult and exciting. But let me venture a few general predictions anyway. I believe that compared to my generation of public service enthusiasts, fewer of you will focus on Federal government domestic policy and instead, more of your collective time, energy and effort will go into three overlapping areas: problems that cross national boundaries or that somehow involve work with other countries and cultures; problems at the intersection of the public and private sectors; problems that require mobilizing local community effort to achieve results. The international point is obvious. Borders don't count for so much anymore. Environmental concerns -- the atmosphere, the oceans, the climate, and the forests involve international cooperation. Economies are tied together more intimately. Poverty, violence, refugees in one part of the world affect us all. The Asian crisis has been a stark reminder that events in economies on the other side of the world -- in places that few of us know much about -- can affect us very directly. The public/private borders are also blurring. Most of you will wander back and forth over these indistinct boundaries as you organize partnerships, help public agencies imitate the successes of markets, and help private entities deal with their public responsibilities. Rebuilding our cities will take builders, banks, housing authorities, schools, community organizations and governments. And a lot of your effort, I predict, will be at the community level -- whether the community is a neighborhood, a town or city, rural area or some other piece of geography like a region or a watershed. I'm not saying there aren't huge challenges at the federal level and exciting jobs to be done. I hope some of you are headed for places like HHS, CBO, OMB and the Federal Reserve because we need you. But I hope many of you are also headed for state and local governments, community efforts of all kinds, and mixed public/private jobs. The problems that most people are now worried about (crime, drugs, decaying neighborhoods, training for new kinds of jobs, welfare reform, child welfare, strengthening families and neighborhoods) are not problems with national solutions. Washington can make it easier or harder, but the real action is close to the ground. If we are to revitalize neighborhoods, transform schools so students are better prepared to cope with modern life, deliver more effective health care, integrate older people better into society, and have more breathable air and more drinkable water, many of you will have to devote your efforts to pulling people, businesses, unions, schools and churches together to improve the place where you live and to make communities work. So, I am happy that you have chosen to study public service and delighted to have had the privilege of sharing this happy occasion with you. Congratulations and good luck!
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice of HUBCO, Inc., Mahwah, New Jersey, to acquire MSB Bancorp, Inc., and thereby acquire its savings bank subsidiary, MSB Bank, both in Goshen, New York. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. HUBCO, Inc. Mahwah, New Jersey Order Approving the Acquisition of a Savings Association By order of the Board of Governors, effective May 13, 1998. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the proposal of Regions Financial Corporation, Birmingham, Alabama, to merge with First Commercial Corporation, Little Rock, Arkansas, and thereby acquire its banking and nonbanking subsidiaries. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Regions Financial Corporation Birmingham, Alabama Order Approving Merger of Bank Holding Companies By order of the Board of Governors, effective May 13, 1998. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Appendix First Commercial Corporation's Subsidiary Banks and Nonbanking Subsidiaries A. Subsidiary Banks Arkansas 1. First Commercial Bank, N.A., Little Rock. 2. Arkansas Bank and Trust Company, Hot Springs. 3. Arkansas State Bank, Clarksville. 4. Benton State Bank, Benton. 5. Citizens First Bank, Arkadelphia. 6. Citizens First Bank, El Dorado. 7. Citizens First Bank, Fordyce. 8. Clinton State Bank, Clinton. 9. Farmers & Merchants Bank, Rogers. 10. First Bank of Arkansas, Jonesboro. 11. First National Bank of Conway, Conway. 12. First National Bank of Nashville, Nashville. 13. First National Bank of Russellville, Russellville. 14. First National Bank of Searcy, Searcy. 15. Morrilton Security Bank, N.A., Morrilton. 16. State First National Bank, Texarkana. 17. The Security Bank, Harrison. Texas 18. First National Bank of Palestine, Palestine. 19. Kilgore First National Bank, Kilgore. 20. Longview National Bank, Longview. 21. Lufkin National Bank, Lufkin. 22. State First National Bank, Texarkana. 23. Stone Fort National Bank of Nacogdoches, Nacogdoches. 24. Tyler Bank and Trust, N.A., Tyler. Oklahoma 25. Oklahoma National Bank of Duncan, Duncan. 26. Security National Bank & Trust Company, Norman. Louisiana 27. Springhill Bank & Trust Company, Springhill. Tennessee 28. First Commercial Bank of Memphis, N.A., Memphis. B. Nonbanking Subsidiaries First Commercial Mortgage Company, Little Rock, Arkansas, which engages in making and servicing loans, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(1) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(1)). First Commercial Trust Company, N.A., Little Rock, Arkansas, which engages in trust company functions, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(5) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(5)). Footnotes Regions also has requested the Board's approval to hold and exercise an option to purchase up to 19.9 percent of the voting shares of First Commercial if certain events occur. The option would expire on consummation of the proposal. All banking data are as of June 30, 1997, and include acquisitions by Regions and First Commercial that have been approved by the appropriate federal supervisors after that date. A bank holding company's home state is that state in which the operation of the bank holding company's banking subsidiaries were principally conducted on July 1, 1996, or the date on which the company became a bank holding company, whichever is later. 12 U.S.C.  1841(o)(4)(C). See 12 U.S.C.  1842(d)(1)(A) and (B) and 1842(d)(2)(A) and (B). Regions is adequately capitalized and adequately managed, as defined by applicable law. First Commercial's subsidiary banks have been in existence and continuously operated for the minimum period of five years required under the respective state laws. See Ark. Code Ann.  23-48-405 (Michie 1997); Tex. Finance Code Ann.  38.003(a) (West 1997); La. Rev. Stat. Ann.  6:535(C) and 6:538 (West 1997); Tenn. Code Ann.  45-2-1403(a)(1) (Michie 1997); Okla. Stat. Ann. tit. 6,  502(F) (West 1998). On consummation of the proposal, Regions would control less than 10 percent of the total amount of deposits of insured depository institutions in the United States. Regions also would not exceed applicable state law deposit limitations, as calculated under state law, in each state in which First Commercial operates. See Ark. Code Ann.  23-48-406 (25 percent); Tex. Finance Code Ann.  38.002(a) (20 percent); Tenn. Code Ann.  45-2-1404 (30 percent); Okla. Stat. Ann. tit. 6,  502(C) (15 percent). All other requirements of section 3(d) of the BHC Act would be met on consummation of the proposal. 12 U.S.C.  1842(c)(1)(B). The Shreveport-Bossier City banking market comprises Bossier, Caddo, DeSoto, and Webster Parishes in Louisiana. Market share data are as of June 30, 1997. In this context, depository institutions include commercial banks, savings banks, and savings associations. Market share data are based on calculations in which the deposits of thrift institutions are included at 50 percent. The Board previously has indicated that thrift institutions have become, or have the potential to become, significant competitors of commercial banks. See WM Bancorp, 76 Federal Reserve Bulletin 788 (1990); National City Corporation, 70 Federal Reserve Bulletin 743 (1984). Thus, the Board has regularly included thrift deposits in the calculation of market share on a 50-percent weighted basis. See First Hawaiian, Inc., 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 52 (1991). Under the revised Department of Justice Merger Guidelines, 49 Federal Register 26,823 (1984), a market in which the post-merger HHI is more than 1800 is considered to be highly concentrated. The Department of Justice has informed the Board that a bank merger or acquisition generally will not be challenged (in the absence of other factors indicating anticompetitive effects) unless the post-merger HHI is at least 1800 and the merger increases the HHI by more than 200 points. The Department of Justice has stated that the higher than normal threshold for an increase in HHI when screening bank mergers and acquisitions for anticompetitive effects implicitly recognizes the competitive effects of limited-purpose and other nondepository financial entities. The Statement of the Federal Financial Supervisory Agencies Regarding the Community Reinvestment Act provides that a CRA examination is an important and often controlling factor in the consideration of an institution's CRA record and that reports of these examinations will be given great weight in the applications process. See 54 Federal Register 13,742 and 13,745 (1989). Each of First Commercial's subsidiary banks also received a rating of "satisfactory" or better from the appropriate federal regulator at its most recent examination for CRA performance. An additional 3,430 agricultural loans, totalling $81 million, were outstanding as of June 30, 1996. Over 92 percent of these loans, totalling $41.2 million, were in amounts of less than $100,000. Population data are as of 1995. All statistical data for Sumter County and for Alabama are from the U.S. Bureau of the Census. Per capita income in 1993 in Sumter County was $12,120, compared to $17,129 in all of Alabama. Per capita retail sales in 1992 were $3,582 in Sumter County, compared to $6,983 in all of Alabama. Per capita deposits, based on FDIC data as of June 30, 1994, were $5,325 in Sumter County, compared to $8,861 in all of Alabama. Twenty-nine of Regions Bank's small business loans in Sumter County, totalling $669,000, were made to businesses with gross annual revenues of less than $1 million. Seven of these loans, totalling $79,000, were made to businesses with gross incomes of less than $1 million. Sumter County has a total of six census tracts, of which two are designated as LMI census tracts. Examiners noted that Regions Mortgage also developed the Wallace Mortgage Program with the State Treasurer of Alabama to fund up to $2,000 of the down payment for first time LMI home buyers through a second mortgage loan to be forgiven after 10 years of continuous ownership of the home. Regions Mortgage received 40 percent of all funds allotted to the program prior to its termination by the state in 1995. In addition, according to Regions, Regions Mortgage is the largest originator of state-funded loans to LMI borrowers under the Alabama Housing Finance Authority bond program. These projects include construction and permanent financing in the amount of approximately $3.9 million to construct 136 low-income housing units in Millbrook, Alabama; approximately $3 million to construct Virginia Meadows II, a 112 unit low-income housing project in Montgomery, Alabama; and approximately $1.2 million to help to purchase and rehabilitate 147 low-income homes in the Meadow Hills neighborhood of Huntsville, Alabama. In Sumter County, Alabama, Regions Bank invested $849,000 in a limited partnership to rehabilitate low-income housing. The data, for example, do not account for the possibility that an institution's outreach efforts may attract a larger proportion of marginally qualified applicants than other institutions attract and do not provide a basis for an independent assessment of whether an applicant who was denied credit was, in fact, creditworthy. Credit history problems and excessive debt levels relative to income (reasons most frequently cited for a credit denial) are not available from HMDA data. Examiners also compared loan files of approved applications from minorities and non-minorities to ensure that there was no disparate treatment in the credit terms offered. The comparison showed no evidence of discrimination or disparate treatment. See 12 C.F.R. 225.28 (b)(1) and (5). 12 U.S.C.  1843(c)(8). See 12 C.F.R. 225.26. Two commenters requested that the Board hold a public meeting or hearing on the proposal to obtain additional factual evidence concerning the lending record of Regions. Section 3(b) of the BHC Act does not require the Board to hold a public hearing on an application unless the appropriate supervisory authority for the bank to be acquired makes a timely written recommendation of denial. The Board has not received such a recommendation from the appropriate supervisory authorities. Under its rules, the Board also may, in its discretion, hold a public meeting or hearing on an application to acquire a bank if a meeting or hearing is necessary or appropriate to clarify factual issues related to the application and to provide an opportunity for testimony, if appropriate. 12 C.F.R. 225.16(e). The Board has carefully considered the commenters' request in light of all the facts of record. In the Board's view, commenters have had ample opportunity to submit their views, and have submitted substantial written comments that have been carefully considered by the Board in acting on the proposal. The commenters' request fails to identify disputed issues of fact that are material to the Board's decision that may be clarified by a public meeting or hearing. The commenters also fail to indicate the matters that may be presented by others and why a public meeting or hearing is necessary for the proper presentation or consideration of their views. For these reasons, and based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that a public meeting or hearing is not required or warranted in this case. Accordingly, the request is hereby denied. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Phillips, Meyer, Ferguson, and Gramlich.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today the issuance of enforcement actions against five foreign banking organizations with banking offices in the United States to address serious deficiencies in their anti-money laundering programs. Temporary Cease and Desist Orders were issued against Banco Nacional de Mexico (Banamex), Mexico; Banca Serfin, S.A., Mexico; Banco Internacional, S.A. (Bital), Mexico; Bancomer, S.A., Mexico; and Banco Santander, Spain. Each of these foreign banks operates one or more branches or agencies in the United States. The enforcement actions result from an extensive undercover sting operation conducted by the U.S. Department of Justice and U.S. Department of the Treasury. The Federal Reserve assisted these law enforcement agencies. In connection with the undercover operation, the Departments of Justice and Treasury announced today the indictment and arrest of several bankers charged with laundering approximately $70 million in the United States and abroad. They also announced the indictment of two of the Mexican banks subject to the Boards enforcement actions (Bancomer, S.A. and Banca Serfin, S.A.). The Boards Temporary Cease and Desist Orders require the banks, among other things, to implement new anti-money laundering policies and procedures designed to correct the deficiencies in their current programs. Federal Reserve examiners will continue to monitor the activities of the banks subject to the enforcement actions to ensure full compliance with all applicable money laundering-related laws and regulations
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today the issuance of a Temporary Cease and Desist Order against Banco Industrial de Venezuela, Caracas, Venezuela, to address serious deficiencies in the bank's anti-money laundering program. The Board's order is identical to the ones issued on May 18 against four Mexican banks and one Spanish bank, and results from the extensive undercover "sting" operation conducted by the U.S. Departments of Justice and Treasury. In connection with the undercover operation, a Banco Industrial de Venezuela official has been charged with violations of U.S. criminal money laundering statutes, and she was arrested on May 19. This arrest was done in conjunction with the arrests of several Mexican bankers over the weekend. The Board's Temporary Cease and Desist Order requires Banco Industrial de Venezuela, among other things, to implement new anti-money laundering policies and procedures designed to correct the deficiencies in its current program. Federal Reserve examiners will continue to monitor the activities of the bank in the United States to ensure full compliance with all applicable money laundering-related laws and regulations.
Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan The current Asian crisis and the financial resources of the IMF Before the Committee on Agriculture, U.S. House of Representatives May 21, 1998 The global financial system has been evolving rapidly in recent years. New technology has radically reduced the costs of borrowing and lending across traditional national borders, facilitating the development of new instruments and drawing in new players. Information is transmitted instantaneously around the world, and huge shifts in the supply and demand for funds naturally follow, resulting in a massive increase in capital flows. This burgeoning global system has been demonstrated to be a highly efficient structure that has significantly facilitated cross-border trade in goods and services and, accordingly, has made a substantial contribution to standards of living worldwide. Its efficiency exposes and punishes underlying economic imprudence swiftly and decisively. Regrettably, it also appears to have facilitated the transmission of financial disturbances far more effectively than ever before. Three years ago, the Mexican crisis was the first episode associated with our new high-tech international financial system. The current Asian crisis is the second. We do not as yet fully understand the new system's dynamics. We are learning fast, and need to update and modify our institutions and practices to reduce the risks inherent in the new regime. Meanwhile, we have had to confront the current crisis with the institutions and techniques we have. Many argued that the Asian crisis should be allowed to run its course without support from the International Monetary Fund or the bilateral financial backing of other nations. They asserted that allowing this crisis to play out, while doubtless having additional negative effects on growth in Asia, and engendering greater spill-overs onto the rest of the world, would not likely have a large or lasting impact on the United States and the world economy. They may well have been correct in their judgment, and some would argue that events over the past six months have proved them right; we have so far avoided the type of continuing downward spiral that some feared. There was and is, however, a small but not negligible probability that the upset in East Asia could have unexpectedly large negative effects on Japan, Latin America, and eastern and central Europe that, in turn, could have repercussions elsewhere, including the United States. Thus, while the probability of such an outcome may be small, its consequences, in my judgment, should not have been left solely to chance. We have observed that global financial markets, as currently organized, do not always achieve an appropriate equilibrium, or at least require time to stabilize. Moreover, the effects of the Asian crisis on the real economies of the immediately affected countries, as well as on our own economy, are only now just being felt. Opponents of IMF support for member countries facing international financial difficulties also argued that such substantial financial backing, by cushioning the losses of imprudent investors, encourages excessive risk-taking. There doubtless is some truth in that, though arguably it has been the expectation of governments' support of their financial systems that has been the more obvious culprit, at least in the Asian case. In any event, any expectations of broad bailouts have turned out to have been disappointed. Many if not most investors in Asian economies have to date suffered substantial losses. Moreover, the policy conditionality, associated principally with IMF lending, which dictates economic and financial discipline and structural change, helps to mitigate some of the inappropriate risk-taking on the part of governmental authorities. At the root of the problems has been poor public policy that has resulted in misguided investments and very weak financial sectors. Convincing a sovereign nation to alter destructive policies that impair its own performance and threaten contagion to its neighbors is best handled by an international financial institution, such as the IMF. What we have in place today to respond to crises should be supported even as we work to improve those mechanisms and institutions. Some observers have also expressed concern about whether we can be confident that IMF programs for countries, in particular the countries of East Asia, are likely to alter their economies significantly and permanently. My sense is that one consequence of this Asian crisis is an increasing awareness in the region that market capitalism, as practiced in the West, especially in the United States, is the superior model; that is, it provides greater promise of producing rising standards of living and continuous growth. Although East Asian economies have exhibited considerable adherence to many aspects of free-market capitalism, there has, nonetheless, been a pronounced tendency toward government-directed investment, using the banking system to finance that investment. Given a record of real growth rates of close to 10 percent per annum over an extended period of time, it is not surprising that it has been difficult to convince anyone that the economic system practiced in East Asia could not continue to produce positive results indefinitely. Following the breakdown, an increasing awareness, bordering in some cases on shock, that their economic model was incomplete, or worse, has arguably emerged in the region. As a consequence, many of the leaders of these countries and their economic advisors are endeavoring to move their economies much more rapidly toward the type of economic system that we have in the United States. The IMF, whatever one might say about its policy advice in the past, has played an important role in this process, providing advice and incentives that promote sound money and long-term stability. The IMF's current approach in Asia is fully supportive of the views of those in the West who understand the importance of greater reliance on market forces, reduced government controls, scaling back of government-directed investment, and embracing greater transparency--the publication of all the data that are relevant to the activities of the central bank, the government, financial institutions, and private companies. It is a reasonable question to ask how long this conversion to embracing market capitalism in all its details will last in countries once temporary IMF financial support has come to an end. We are, after all, dealing with sovereign nations with long traditions, not always consonant with market capitalism. But my sense is that there is a growing understanding and appreciation of the benefits of market capitalism as we practice it, and that what is being prescribed in IMF-supported programs fosters their own interests. Similarly, it is a reasonable question to ask whether the U.S. authorities should not seek greater assurance that the ongoing process of reform in the IMF's policies and operations will produce additional concrete results before we agree to augment the IMF's resources. I have reason to believe that the management and staff of the IMF are committed to a process of change. We face a somewhat more difficult task in convincing the IMF's membership as a whole of the need for change. However, I am confident that our leverage in this regard would be reduced if the United States failed to agree promptly to the proposed increases in the IMF's resources. Accordingly, I continue fully to back the Administration's request to augment the financial resources of the IMF by approving as quickly as possible U.S. participation in the New Arrangements to Borrow and an increase in the U.S. quota in the IMF. Hopefully, neither will turn out to be needed, and no funds will be drawn. Although the tendency in recent months toward stabilization in the East Asian economies is encouraging, clearly those economies are not out of the woods as recent events attest. Moreover, we have not yet put in place the strengthening of the international financial architecture that would enable us in the future to place less reliance on the IMF to deal with potential systemic crises. Thus it is better to have the IMF fully equipped if a quick response to a pending crisis is essential.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice and application of Banc One Corporation, Columbus, Ohio, to acquire First Commerce Corporation, New Orleans, Louisiana, and its wholly owned banking and nonbanking subsidiaries. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Banc One Corporation Columbus, Ohio Order Approving the Acquisition of a Bank Holding Company Banc One Corporation ("Banc One"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 3 of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C.  1842) to acquire First Commerce Corporation, New Orleans, Louisiana ("First Commerce"), and its wholly owned subsidiary banks: First National Bank of Commerce, New Orleans; City National Bank of Baton Rouge, Baton Rouge; Rapides Bank & Trust Company in Alexandria, Alexandria; The First National Bank of Lafayette, Lafayette; The First National Bank of Lake Charles, Lake Charles; and Central Bank, Monroe, all in Louisiana. Banc One also has requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C.  1843(c)(8)) and section 225.24 of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.24) to acquire First Commerce Service Corporation, New Orleans, Louisiana, and thereby engage in data processing activities that are permissible for bank holding companies under section 225.28(b)(14) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(14)). Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published in accordance with the Board's rules (63 Federal Register 3896 (1998)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the proposal and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in sections 3 and 4 of the BHC Act. Banc One, with total consolidated assets of $116.2 billion, is the eighth largest commercial banking organization in the United States, controlling approximately 2.3 percent of total banking assets of insured commercial banks ("total banking assets") in the United States. Banc One operates subsidiary banks in Arizona, Colorado, Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, Louisiana, Ohio, Oklahoma, Texas, Utah, West Virginia, and Wisconsin. Banc One also engages in a broad range of permissible nonbanking activities in the United States through subsidiaries. First Commerce, with total consolidated assets of $9.5 billion, is the 62d largest commercial banking organization in the United States, controlling less than 1 percent of the total banking assets in the United States. First Commerce operates six banks in Louisiana and engages in permissible nonbanking activities. On consummation of the proposal, and after accounting for the proposed divestitures, Banc One would remain the eighth largest commercial banking organization in the United States, with total consolidated assets of approximately $125.7 billion, representing approximately 2.5 percent of total nationwide banking assets. Banc One is the third largest depository institution in Louisiana, controlling $4.2 billion in deposits, representing approximately 9.8 percent of total deposits in insured depository institutions in the state. First Commerce is the largest depository institution in Louisiana, controlling $7.7 billion of deposits, representing approximately 18 percent of total deposits in the state. On consummation of the proposal, and accounting for the proposed divestitures, Banc One would become the largest commercial banking organization in Louisiana, controlling approximately $11.2 billion in deposits, representing approximately 26.3 percent of the total deposits in the state. Interstate Analysis Section 3(d) of the BHC Act allows the Board to approve an application by a bank holding company to acquire control of a bank located in a state other than the home state of such bank holding company if certain conditions are met. For purposes of the BHC Act, the home state of Banc One is Ohio, and Banc One proposes to acquire banks in Louisiana. All of the conditions for an interstate acquisition enumerated in section 3(d) are met in this case. In view of the facts of record, the Board is permitted to approve this proposal under section 3(d) of the BHC Act. Competitive Considerations The BHC Act prohibits the Board from approving an application under section 3 of the BHC Act if the proposal would result in a monopoly, or would substantially lessen competition in any relevant banking market, unless the Board finds that the anticompetitive effects of the proposal are clearly outweighed in the public interest by the probable effect of the proposal in meeting the convenience and needs of the community to be served. Banc One and First Commerce compete in the following banking markets in Louisiana: Baton Rouge, Iberia, Lafayette, Lake Charles, Lincoln, Monroe, Morehouse, Shreveport-Bossier City, and New Orleans. The Board has carefully reviewed the competitive effects of the proposal in each of the Louisiana banking markets in which Banc One and First Commerce compete in light of all the facts of record, including the characteristics of the markets and the projected increase in the concentration of total deposits in depository institutions in these markets ("market deposits"), as measured by the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index ("HHI") under the Department of Justice Merger Guidelines ("DOJ Guidelines"). The Board also has carefully examined the number of competitors that would remain in each of the banking markets following consummation of the proposal. Consummation of the proposal, without divestitures, would be consistent with the DOJ Guidelines in the Iberia, Morehouse, and Shreveport-Bossier City banking markets. To mitigate the anticompetitive effects of the proposal in the Lafayette, Lake Charles, Lincoln, and Monroe banking markets, Banc One has committed to divest 25 branches that control approximately $614.5 million in deposits. With the proposed divestitures, the concentration levels in each of the markets would be consistent with the DOJ Guidelines after consummation of the proposal. Consummation of the proposal would exceed the DOJ Guidelines, as measured by the HHI, in the Baton Rouge and New Orleans banking markets. As the Board has indicated in previous cases, in a market in which the competitive effects of a proposal as measured by market indexes and market share exceed the DOJ Guidelines, the Board will consider whether other factors tend to mitigate the competitive effects of the proposal. The number and strength of factors necessary to mitigate the competitive effects of a proposal depend on the level of market concentration and size of the increase in market concentration. Baton Rouge Banking Market. Banc One is the third largest of 25 depository institutions in the Baton Rouge banking market, and controls deposits of $895.9 million, representing 15.4 percent of market deposits. First Commerce is the second largest depository institution in the market, and controls deposits of $971.7 million, representing 16.7 percent of market deposits. After consummation of the proposal, Banc One would become the largest depository institution in the market, controlling 32.1 percent of the market deposits, and the HHI would increase 515 points to 1895. Twenty-four depository institutions, including several large multi-state banking organizations other than Banc One, would remain in the Baton Rouge banking market after consummation of the proposal. In addition, one of Louisiana's largest banking organization would be the second largest depository institution in the market and would control more than 25 percent of market deposits. The Baton Rouge banking market also has characteristics that make it attractive for entry. Baton Rouge is Louisiana's second largest city. The rate of growth in population and market deposits and the level of per capita income in this market exceed, on average, those of other Louisiana Metropolitan Statistical Areas ("MSAs"). Recent entries by depository institutions also indicate that the market is attractive. Since 1994, four commercial banks have entered the market de novo, and four have entered by acquisition. In addition, another commercial bank has received regulatory approval and plans to enter the market de novo in June 1998. New Orleans Banking Market. Banc One is the fifth largest of 41 depository institutions in the New Orleans banking market and controls deposits of $627.3 million, representing 4.4 percent of market deposits. First Commerce is the largest depository institution in the market and controls deposits of $4.4 billion, representing 30.8 percent of market deposits. After consummation of the proposal, Banc One would become the largest depository institution in the market, controlling 35.2 percent of market deposits, and the HHI would increase 272 points to 2099. The New Orleans banking market is the largest banking market in Louisiana. Approximately 39 competitors other than Banc One would remain in the market after consummation of the proposal, including all of the state's largest depository institutions. Three of these competitors would each have market shares of over 15 percent of market deposits, and the second largest depository institution in the market would have over 23 percent of market deposits. In addition, per capita income, deposits per branch, population per branch, and deposit growth in the market are above the averages in other Louisiana MSAs. Since 1994, three depository institutions have entered the market de novo, and six have entered by acquisition, which indicates that the market is attractive for entry. Views of Other Agencies and Conclusion. The Department of Justice conducted a detailed review of the proposal and advised the Board that, in light of the proposed divestitures, consummation of the proposal would not likely have a significantly adverse effect on competition in any relevant market. The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation also have not objected to consummation of the proposal. Based on all the facts of record, and for the reasons discussed above, the Board has determined that consummation of the proposal would not be likely to result in a significantly adverse effect on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in any relevant banking market. Accordingly, subject to completion of the proposed divestitures, the Board has determined that competitive factors are consistent with approval of the proposal. Other Factors Under the BHC Act The BHC Act also requires the Board, in acting on an application, to consider the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the companies and banks involved in a proposal, the convenience and needs of the community to be served, and certain other supervisory factors. A. Financial, Managerial, and Other Supervisory Factors The Board has carefully considered the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of Banc One, First Commerce, and their respective subsidiary banks, and other supervisory factors in light of all the facts of record. As part of this consideration, the Board has reviewed relevant reports of examination and other supervisory information prepared by the Reserve Banks and other federal agencies. The Board notes that the bank holding companies and their subsidiary banks are currently well capitalized and are expected to remain so after consummation of the proposal. The Board also has considered other aspects of the financial condition and resources of the two organizations, the structure of the proposed transaction, and the managerial resources of each of the entities and the combined organization. Based on these and other facts of record, the Board concludes that considerations relating to the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of Banc One, First Commerce, and their respective subsidiaries are consistent with approval of the proposal, as are the other supervisory factors that the Board must consider under section 3 of the BHC Act. B. Convenience and Needs Considerations The Board has carefully considered the effect of the proposed acquisition on the convenience and needs of the community to be served in light of all the facts of record. The Board has long held that consideration of the convenience and needs factor includes a review of the records of the relevant depository institutions under the Community Reinvestment Act ("CRA") (12 U.S.C.  2901 et seq. ). As provided in the CRA, the Board evaluates the convenience and needs factor in light of examinations by the primary federal supervisor of the CRA performance records of the relevant institutions. All of Banc One's subsidiary banks have received "outstanding" or "satisfactory" ratings for their appropriate federal supervisors at the most recent examinations of their CRA performance. Banc One's lead bank, Bank One, N.A., Columbus, Ohio, received an "outstanding" performance rating and Banc One's largest bank in terms of assets, Bank One, Texas, N.A., Dallas, Texas, received a "satisfactory" performance ratings from their appropriate federal supervisor, the Office of the Comptroller of Currency ("OCC"). In addition, Banc One, Louisiana, N.A., New Orleans, Louisiana, received a "satisfactory" performance rating from the OCC. All of First Commerce's subsidiary banks also have received "outstanding" or "satisfactory" ratings for CRA performance from their appropriate federal supervisors. The Board also has carefully reviewed Banc One's lending activities and its compliance with fair lending laws. As part of that review, the Board has considered information developed in the course of its supervision of Banc One regarding the institution's fair lending oversight, procedures, and practices and, in light of all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that Banc One's record of fair lending is consistent with approval of this proposal. The Board has considered all the facts of record, including the CRA performance records of the subsidiary banks of Banc One and First Commerce, relevant reports of examination, and the comments received. Based on all the facts of record, and for the reasons discussed above, the Board concludes that convenience and needs considerations are consistent with approval of the proposal. Nonbanking Activities Banc One also has filed a notice, under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act, to acquire First Commerce Service Corporation and thereby to engage in data processing activities. The Board has determined by regulation that the provision of certain data processing services is closely related to banking for purposes of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Banc One has stated that, following consummation of the proposal, it will conduct its data processing activities in accordance with the limitations set forth in Regulation Y and the Board's orders and interpretations. In order to approve the proposal under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act, the Board also must determine that the proposed activities are a proper incident to banking, that is, that the proposal "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public, such as greater convenience, increased competition, or gains in efficiency that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices." As part of its evaluation of these factors, the Board considers the financial condition and managerial resources of the notificant and its subsidiaries, including the companies to be acquired, and the effect of the proposed transaction on those resources. For the reasons noted above, and based on all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that financial and managerial considerations are consistent with approval of the notice. The Board also has considered the competitive effects of the proposed acquisition by Banc One of First Commerce Service Corporation. The market for data processing services is unconcentrated and that there are numerous providers of the services. As a result, consummation of the proposal would have a de minimis effect on competition. The Board also expects that the acquisition would provide added convenience to First Commerce's customers and to other members of the public by increasing operating efficiencies and providing expanded services to customers of First Commerce and Banc One. Additionally, there are public benefits to be derived from permitting capital markets to operate so that bank holding companies may make potentially profitable investments in nonbanking companies where these investments are consistent, as in this case, with the relevant considerations of the BHC Act and from permitting banking organizations to allocate their resources in a manner they believe most efficient. Accordingly, based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the balance of public benefits that the Board must consider under the proper incident to banking standard of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act is favorable and consistent with approval of the proposal. Conclusion Based on the foregoing, and in light of all the facts of record, including the comments received, the Board has determined that the application and notice should be, and hereby are, approved. Approval of the application and notice is specifically conditioned on compliance by Banc One with all the commitments made in connection with the proposal and with the conditions stated or referred to in this order, including Banc One's divestiture commitment. The Board's determination on the nonbanking activities also is subject to all the terms and conditions set forth in Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.25(c) (12 C.F.R. 225.7 and 225.25(c)), and to the Board's authority to require such modification or termination of the activities of a bank holding company or any of its subsidiaries as the Board finds necessary to ensure compliance with, and to prevent evasion of, the provisions of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders thereunder. For purposes of this transaction, the commitments and conditions referred to above shall be deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision, and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The acquisition of First Commerce's subsidiary banks shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day following the effective date of this order, and the proposal shall not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective May 26, 1998. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Appendix A Banking Markets in which Banc One and First Commerce Compete Baton Rouge: Ascension, East Baton Rouge, Iberville, Livingston, and West Baton Rouge Parishes plus the northern half of Assumption Parish, and the town of Union in St. James Parish. Iberia: Iberia Parish. Lake Charles: Calcasieu and Cameron Parishes, plus the southern half of Beauregard Parish. Lafayette: Lafayette, Acadia, St. Landry, St. Martin, and Vermillion Parishes, excluding the town of Mermentau in Acadia Parish and the town of Gueydan in Vermillion Parish. Lincoln: Lincoln Parish. Monroe: Monroe and Ouachita Parishes Morehouse: Morehouse Parish. New Orleans: Jefferson, Orleans, Plaquemines, St. Bernard, St. Charles, St. John the Baptist, St. Tammany, and St. James Parishes, less the town of Union in St. James Parish. Shreveport-Bossier City: Bossier, Cado, DeSoto and Webster Parishes. Appendix B A. Banking Markets In Which Consummation of the Proposal Would Not Exceed the DOJ Guidelines Without Divestitures. Iberia: After consummation of the proposal, Banc One would control 18.4 percent of the market deposits and would become the third largest of nine depository institutions in the market. The HHI would increase 166 points to 2515. Morehouse: After consummation of the proposal, Banc One would control 23.0 percent of the market deposits and would become the second largest of six depository institutions in the market. The HHI would increase 129 points to 2349. Shreveport-Bossier City: After consummation of the proposal, Banc One would control 25.4 percent of the market deposits and would become the largest of 18 depository institutions in the market. The HHI would increase 17 points to 1813. B. Banking Markets In Which Consummation of the Proposal Would Not Exceed the DOJ Guidelines With Proposed Divestitures. Lafayette: Banc One proposes to divest seven branches, controlling deposits of $195.0 million, to a competitor suitable to the Board. Following such divestiture, and after consummation of the proposal, Banc One would control 24.5 percent of the market deposits and would become the largest of 40 depository institutions in the market. The HHI would increase not more than 276 to 896. Lake Charles: Banc One proposes to divest eight branches, controlling deposits of $154.8 million, to a competitor suitable to the Board. Following such divestiture, and after consummation of the proposal, Banc One would control 33.4 percent of market deposits and become the largest of eight competitors. The HHI would increase not more than 127 points to 2414. Lincoln: Banc One proposes to divest two branches, controlling deposits of $73.6 million, to a competitor suitable to the Board. Following such divestiture, and after consummation of the proposal, Banc One would control 34.4 percent of market deposits and become the largest of seven competitors. The HHI would increase 64 points to 2116. Monroe: Banc One proposes to divest eight branches, controlling deposits of $191.1 million, to a competitor suitable to the Board. Following such divestiture, and after consummation of the proposal, Banc One would control 39.3 percent of market deposits and become the largest of eleven competitors. The HHI would increase not more than 181 points to 2227. Footnotes Banc One intends to merge First Commerce with a wholly owned non-operating subsidiary of Banc One. First Commerce would be the surviving corporation and a wholly owned subsidiary of Banc One that would be renamed Louisiana Banc One Corporation. In addition, Banc One has requested the Board's approval to hold and exercise options to purchase up to 19.9 percent of the voting shares of First Commerce if certain events occur. The options would expire on consummation of the proposal. Banc One also would acquire 9.9 percent of the voting shares of First United Bank of Farmerville, Farmerville, Louisiana ("First United") from First Commerce. Banc One has agreed to abide by certain commitments made by First Commerce that were relied on by the Board to ensure that First Commerce would not exercise a controlling influence over the management and policies of First United and to divest the shares of First United within six months after consummating the acquisition of First Commerce. Asset data are as of December 31, 1997, and deposit data are as of June 30, 1997. In this context, depository institutions include commercial banks, savings banks, and savings associations. A bank holding company's home state is that state in which the operations of the bank holding company's banking subsidiaries were principally conducted on July 1, 1996, or the date on which the company became a bank holding company, whichever is later. 12 U.S.C.  1841(o)(4)(C). 12 U.S.C.  1842(d)(1)(A) & (B) and 1842(d)(2)(A) & (B). Banc One is adequately capitalized and adequately managed, as defined by applicable law. On consummation of the proposal, Banc One and its affiliates would control less than 10 percent of the total amount of deposits of insured depository institutions in the United States, and less than 30 percent of the total amount of deposits in Louisiana. In addition, First Commerce's subsidiary banks have been in existence and have continuously operated for at least five years, as required by Louisiana law. La. Rev. Stat.  6:538 (1997). All other requirements of section 3(d) of the BHC Act also would be met on consummation of the proposal. 12 U.S.C.  1842(c)(1)(B). These banking markets are described in Appendix A. Market share data are based on calculations that include the deposits of thrift institutions at 50 percent. The Board previously has indicated that thrift institutions have become, or have the potential to become, significant competitors of commercial banks. See, e.g., Midwest Financial Group, 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 386 (1989); National City Corporation, 70 Federal Reserve Bulletin 743 (1984). Thus, the Board has regularly included thrift deposits in the calculation of market share on a 50 percent weighted basis. See, e.g., First Hawaiian Inc. , 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 52 (1991). Under the DOJ Merger Guidelines, 49 Federal Register 26,823 (1984), a market in which the post-merger HHI is more than 1800 is considered highly concentrated. The DOJ has informed the Board that a bank merger or acquisition generally will not be challenged (in the absence of other factors indicating anticompetitive effects) unless the post-merger HHI is at least 1800 and the merger increases the HHI by more than 200 points. The DOJ has stated that the higher than normal HHI thresholds for screening bank mergers for anticompetitive effects implicitly recognize the competitive effect of limited-purpose lenders and other non-depository financial institutions. Market data for these banking markets after consummation of the proposal are described in Appendix B. Banc One has committed to execute sales agreements with an out-of-market competitor in the Lincoln banking market and a competitively suitable purchaser in the Lafayette, Lake Charles and Monroe banking markets and to complete divestitures within 180 days of consummation of the acquisition. Banc One also has committed that, in the event it is unsuccessful in completing any divestiture within 180 days of consummation, it will transfer the unsold branch(es) to an independent trustee that is acceptable to the Board and that will be instructed to sell the branches promptly. See, e.g., First Union Corporation, 84 Federal Reserve Bulletin __ (Order dated April 13, 1998). Market data for these banking markets after consummation of the proposal are also described in Appendix B. See First Union Corporation, 84 Federal Reserve Bulletin __ (Order dated April 13, 1998); NationsBank Corporation, 84 Federal Reserve Bulletin 129 (1998). The Board notes that the Statement of the Federal Financial Supervisory Agencies Regarding the Community Reinvestment Act ("Agency CRA Statement") provides that a CRA examination is an important and often controlling factor in the consideration of an institution's CRA record and that reports of these examinations will be given great weight in the applications process. See 54 Federal Register 13,742 and 13,745 (1989). A commenter contends that he has had unsatisfactory experiences with a Banc One subsidiary bank in business and personal banking transactions. The Board has carefully reviewed the comment in light of all the facts of record, and has provided the comment to the OCC, which is the appropriate federal supervisor of the bank. See 12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(14). 12 U.S.C.  1843(c)(8). See 12 C.F.R. 225.26. One commenter requests that the Board not act on the Banc One/ First Commerce proposal until his employment discrimination lawsuit against Banc One and one of its subsidiary banks is settled and until the Board investigates pending employment discrimination complaints filed against Banc One with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. Commenter's lawsuit was dismissed by a federal district court and the dismissal was upheld on appeal. The Board previously has noted, moreover, that disputes that arise under a statute administered and enforced by another agency in areas such as employment discrimination are beyond the Board's jurisdiction under the statutory factors in the BHC Act. Based on a review of all the facts of record, the Board concludes that the record in this case is sufficient to warrant Board consideration and action on the proposal at this time, and that further delay of consideration of the proposal or denial of the proposal on the basis of informational insufficiency is not warranted. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Ferguson and Gramlich. Absent and not voting: Governors Kelley, Phillips, and Meyer.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice of Norwest Corporation, Minneapolis, Minnesota, to engage de novo in underwriting and dealing, to a limited extent, in all types of debt securities. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Norwest Corporation Minneapolis, Minnesota Norwest Investment Services, Inc. Minneapolis, Minnesota Order Approving Notice to Engage in Underwriting and Dealing in All Types of Debt Securities on a Limited Basis Norwest Corporation ("Norwest"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), and its wholly owned subsidiary, Norwest Investment Services, Inc. ("Company"), have requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C.  1843(c)(8)) and section 225.24 of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.24) to engage de novo in underwriting and dealing, to a limited extent, in all types of debt securities. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (63 Federal Register 17,874 (1998)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the notice and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Norwest, with total consolidated assets of $88.5 billion, is the 11th largest commercial banking organization in the United States. Norwest operates subsidiary banks in 16 states and engages through its subsidiaries in a broad range of permissible nonbanking activities. Company currently engages in limited underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities, as permitted under section 20 of the Glass-Steagall Act (12 U.S.C.  377). Company is, and will continue to be, a broker-dealer registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") and a member of the National Association of Securities Dealers, Inc. ("NASD"). Accordingly, Company is subject to the recordkeeping and reporting obligations, fiduciary standards, and other requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C.  78a et seq. ), the SEC, and the NASD. The Board has determined that -- subject to the prudential framework of limitations established in previous decisions to address the potential for conflicts of interests, unsound banking practices, or other adverse effects -- the proposed activities of underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities are so closely related to banking as to be proper incidents thereto within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. The Board also has determined that conduct of the proposed activities is consistent with section 20 of the Glass-Steagall Act, provided that the company engaged in the underwriting and dealing activities derives no more than 25 percent of its gross revenues from underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities. Norwest has committed that Company will conduct the proposed underwriting and dealing activities using the same methods and procedures, and subject to the same prudential limitations, as established by the Board in the Section 20 Orders. Norwest also has committed that Company will conduct its bank-ineligible underwriting and dealing activities subject to the Board's revenue restriction. As a condition of this order, Norwest is required to conduct its bank-ineligible securities underwriting and dealing activities subject to the revenue restrictions and the Operating Standards established for section 20 subsidiaries ("Operating Standards"). In order to approve this notice, the Board also must consider whether performance of the proposed activities is a proper incident to banking, that is, whether the activities proposed "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public . . . that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices." As part of its evaluation of these factors, the Board considers the financial condition and managerial resources of the notificant and its subsidiaries and the effect the transaction would have on such resources. The Board has reviewed the capitalization of Norwest and Company in accordance with the standards set forth in the Section 20 Orders and finds the capitalization of each to be consistent with approval of the proposal. With respect to Company, this determination is based on all the facts of record, including Norwest's projections of the volume of Company's underwriting and dealing activities in bank-ineligible securities. The Board also has reviewed the managerial resources of Norwest and its subsidiaries in light of examination reports and other supervisory information. Based on all other facts of record, including the commitments provided in this case and the proposed managerial and risk systems of Company, the Board has concluded that financial and managerial considerations are consistent with approval of the notice. In addition, the Board has carefully considered the competitive effects of the proposal. The Board expects that the de novo entry of Company into the market for the proposed services would provide added convenience to Norwest's customers, lead to improved methods of meeting customer financing needs, and increase the level of competition among existing providers of these services. For the reasons set forth, and based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that performance of the proposed activities by Company can reasonably be expected to produce public benefits that outweigh possible adverse effects under the proper incident to banking standard of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. On the basis of all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the notice should be, and hereby is, approved, subject to all the terms and conditions in this order. The Board's approval of this proposal extends only to activities conducted within the limitations of this order, including the Board's reservation of authority to establish additional limitations to ensure that Company's activities are consistent with safety and soundness, avoidance of conflicts of interests, and other relevant considerations under the BHC Act. Underwriting and dealing in any manner other than as approved in this order and the Section 20 Orders (as modified by the Modification Orders) is not within the scope of the Board's approval and is not authorized for Company. Included among the conditions set forth in the Section 20 Orders is a condition that Company not commence the proposed underwriting and dealing activities until the Board has determined that Norwest and Company have established policies and procedures to ensure compliance with this order and the Section 20 Orders, including computer, audit, and accounting systems, internal risk management procedures and controls, and the necessary operational and managerial infrastructure for underwriting and dealing in all types of debt securities. On the basis of a recent review by the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis ("Reserve Bank"), and based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that Norwest and Company have established the managerial and operational infrastructure and other policies and procedures necessary to comply with the requirements of this order and the Section 20 Orders for underwriting and dealing in debt securities. Accordingly, Company may commence underwriting and dealing in all types of debt securities as permitted by, and subject to the other conditions of, this order and the Section 20 Orders. The Board's determination also is subject to all the terms and conditions set forth in Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.25(c) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.7 and 225.25(c)), and to the Board's authority to require such modification or termination of the activities of a bank holding company or any of its subsidiaries as the Board finds necessary to ensure compliance with, and to prevent evasion of, the provisions of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders issued thereunder. The Board's decision is specifically conditioned on compliance with all the commitments made in connection with this notice and the conditions set forth in this order and the above-noted Board regulations and orders. These commitments and conditions are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The proposal shall not be commenced later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Reserve Bank, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective May 26, 1998. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes Asset and ranking data are as of December 31, 1997. As used in this order, the term "bank-ineligible securities" refers to securities that a member bank may not underwrite or deal in directly under section 16 of the Glass-Steagall Act (12 U.S.C.  24(Seventh)). Company has authority to underwrite and deal in, to a limited extent, certain municipal revenue bonds, 1-4 family mortgage-related securities, commercial paper, and consumer receivable related securities. Company also is authorized to engage in a variety of other nonbanking activities. See Norwest Corporation , 76 Federal Reserve Bulletin 79 (1990); see also Letter Interpreting Section 20 Orders , 81 Federal Reserve Bulletin 198 (1995). See Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, et al. , 76 Federal Reserve Bulletin 158 (1990); J.P. Morgan & Co. Incorporated, et al. , 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 192 (1989), aff'd sub nom. Securities Industries Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System , 900 F.2d 360 (D.C. Cir. 1990); Citicorp, et al. , 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 473 (1987), aff'd sub nom. Securities Industry Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System , 839 F.2d 47 (2d Cir.), cert. den. , 486 U.S. 1059 (1988); as modified by Review of Restrictions on Director, Officer and Employee Interlocks, Cross-Marketing Activities, and the Purchase and Sale of Financial Assets Between a Section 20 Subsidiary and an Affiliated Bank or Thrift , 61 Federal Register 57,679 (1996), and Amendments to Restrictions in the Board's Section 20 Orders , 62 Federal Register 45,295 (1997) (collectively, "Section 20 Orders"). See Section 20 Orders. Compliance with the revenue limitation shall be calculated in accordance with the method stated in the Section 20 Orders, as modified by Order Approving Modifications to the Section 20 Orders , 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 751 (1989), 10 Percent Revenue Limit on Bank-Ineligible Activities of Subsidiaries of Bank Holding Companies Engaged in Underwriting and Dealing in Securities , 61 Federal Register 48,953 (1996), and Revenue Limit on Bank-Ineligible Activities of Subsidiaries of Bank Holding Companies Engaged in Underwriting and Dealing in Securities , 61 Federal Register 68,750 (1996) (collectively, "Modification Orders"). 12 C.F.R. 225.200. Company may provide services that are necessary incidents to the proposed underwriting and dealing activities. Unless Company receives specific approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act to conduct the activities independently, any revenues from the incidental activities must be treated as ineligible revenues subject to the Board's revenue limitations. 12 U.S.C.  1843(c)(8). See 12 C.F.R. 225.24. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Ferguson and Gramlich. Absent and not voting: Governors Kelley, Phillips, and Meyer.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today issued a final report prepared by the System Task Force on Internal Credit Risk Models. The Task Force was created to assess potential uses of internal credit risk models within the supervisory and regulatory processes. The report describes current uses of internal models by major U.S. banking organizations, and outlines possible uses of the models for assessing bank capital adequacy. The report concludes that significant difficulties exist with respect to model construction, data availability, and model validation procedures, so that near-term uses of the models within the regulatory process are limited. However, the report also concludes that models may, over the somewhat longer term, become useful in at least the following two roles: The development of specific and practical examination guidance for assessing the capital adequacy of large, complex banking organizations, and The setting of regulatory capital requirements against selected instruments that have largely evolved subsequent to adoption of the Basle Accord on risk- based capital, such as credit enhancements supporting securitization programs. A copy of the Executive Summary of the report is attached. The full report is available upon request from Publications Services, Mail Stop 127, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, D.C. 20551. It is also available on the Board's internet site under "regulation and supervision" (145 KB PDF) (49 KB PDF)