For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice of Fifth Third Bancorp, Cincinnati, Ohio, to acquire all the voting shares of The Ohio Company, Columbus, Ohio, and thereby engage in various nonbanking activities, including underwriting and dealing in, to a limited extent, all types of debt and equity securities, other than interests in open-end investment companies. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Fifth Third Bancorp Cincinnati, Ohio Order Approving Notice to Engage in Nonbanking Activities Fifth Third Bancorp ("Bancorp"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8)) and section 225.24 of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.24) to acquire all of the voting shares of The Ohio Company ("Company"), and thereby indirectly acquire Cardinal Management Corp., both in Columbus, Ohio. Bancorp would thereby engage in the following nonbanking activities: performing functions or activities that may be performed by a trust company, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(5) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(5)); providing financial and investment advisory services, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(6) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(6)); providing securities brokerage, riskless principal, and private placement services, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(7)(i)-(iii) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(7)(i)-(iii)); underwriting and dealing in government obligations and money market instruments in which state member banks may underwrite and deal under 12 U.S.C. §§ 335 and 24(7) ("bank-eligible securities"), pursuant to section 225.28(b)(8)(i) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(8)(i)); providing employee benefit consulting services, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(9)(ii) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(9)(ii)); and underwriting and dealing in, to a limited extent, all types of debt and equity securities other than interests in open-end investment companies ("bank-ineligible securities"). Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (63 Federal Register 17,181 (1998)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the notice and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Bancorp, with total consolidated assets of approximately $21.4 billion, is the 39th largest banking organization in the United States. Bancorp operates subsidiary banks in 4 states, and engages through other subsidiaries in a broad range of permissible nonbanking activities. Company is, and after consummation of the proposal will continue to be, registered as a broker-dealer with the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. § 78a et seq. ), and a member of the National Association of Securities Dealers, Inc. ("NASD"). Accordingly, Company is, and will continue to be, subject to the record-keeping and reporting obligations, fiduciary standards, and other requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the SEC, and NASD. Cardinal Management Corp. ("Cardinal Management") is registered with the SEC as an investment adviser under the Investment Advisers Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. § 80b-1 et seq. ) ("Advisers Act") and is, and will continue to be, subject to the record-keeping and reporting obligations, fiduciary standards, and other requirements of the Advisers Act and the SEC. Underwriting and Dealing in Bank-Ineligible Securities The Board has determined that -- subject to the framework of prudential limitations established in previous decisions to address the potential for conflicts of interests, unsound banking practices, or other adverse effects -- underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities is so closely related to banking as to be a proper incident thereto within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. The Board also has determined that underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities is consistent with section 20 of the Glass-Steagall Act (12 U.S.C. § 377), provided that the company engaged in the activity derives no more than 25 percent of its gross revenues from underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities. Bancorp has committed that Company will conduct its underwriting and dealing activities using the methods and procedures and subject to the prudential limitations established by the Board in the Section 20 Orders. Bancorp also has committed that Company will conduct its bank-ineligible securities underwriting and dealing activities subject to the Board's revenue limitation. As a condition of this order, Bancorp is required to conduct its bank-ineligible securities activities subject to the revenue limitation and Operating Standards established for section 20 subsidiaries ("Operating Standards"). Other Activities Approved by Regulation or Order The Board previously has determined that trust company activities; financial and investment advisory activities; securities brokerage, riskless principal, and private placement activities; bank-eligible securities underwriting and dealing activities; and employee benefits consulting services are closely related to banking within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Bancorp has committed that it will conduct these activities in accordance with the limitations set forth in Regulation Y and the Board's orders and interpretations relating to each of the activities. Other Considerations In order to approve this notice, the Board also must determine that the proposed activities "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public, such as greater convenience, increased competition, or gains in efficiency, that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices." As part of its review of these factors, the Board considers the financial and managerial resources of the notificant and its subsidiaries and the effect the transaction would have on such resources. In considering the financial resources of the notificant, the Board has reviewed the capitalization of Bancorp and Company in accordance with the standards set forth in the Section 20 Orders and finds the capitalization of each to be consistent with approval. This determination is based on all the facts of record, including Bancorp's projections of the volume of Company's underwriting and dealing activities in bank-ineligible securities. The Board also has reviewed the managerial resources of each of the entities involved in the proposal in light of examination reports and other supervisory information. In connection with the proposal, the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland ("Reserve Bank") has reviewed the policies and procedures of Company to ensure compliance with this order and the Section 20 Orders, including Company's operational and managerial infrastructure, computer, audit, and accounting systems, and internal risk management procedures and controls. On the basis of the Reserve Bank's review and all other facts of record, including the commitments provided in this case and the proposed managerial and risk management systems of Company, the Board has concluded that financial and managerial considerations are consistent with approval of the notice. The Board also has carefully considered the competitive effects of the proposal. To the extent that Bancorp and Company offer different types of products and services, the proposed acquisition would result in no loss of competition. In those markets where the product offerings of Bancorp's nonbanking subsidiaries and Company overlap, such as securities brokerage and investment advisory activities, there are numerous existing and potential competitors. Consummation of the proposal, therefore, would have a de minimis effect on competition in the market for these services, and the Board has concluded that the proposal would not have any significantly adverse competitive effects in any relevant market. In order to approve the proposal, the Board also must find that the performance of the proposed activities by Bancorp can reasonably be expected to produce benefits that would outweigh possible adverse effects under the proper incident to banking standard of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Under the framework established in this and prior decisions, consummation of the proposal is not likely to result in any significantly adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices. The Board expects that consummation of the proposal would provide added convenience to the customers of Bancorp and Company. Bancorp has indicated that consummation of the proposal would expand the range of products and services available to its customers and those of Company and has stated that the acquisition would permit Bancorp to further diversify its nonbanking operations, thereby making it less vulnerable to economic fluctuations in individual business lines. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that performance of the proposed activities by Bancorp can reasonably be expected to produce public benefits that outweigh any adverse effects of the proposal. Accordingly, the Board has determined that the performance of the proposed activities by Bancorp is a proper incident to banking for purposes of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Conclusion On the basis of all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the notice should be, and hereby is, approved, subject to all the terms and conditions described in this order. The Board's approval of the proposal extends only to activities conducted within the limitations of this order, including the Board's reservation of authority to establish additional limitations to ensure that Company's activities are consistent with safety and soundness, avoidance of conflicts of interests, and other relevant considerations under the BHC Act. Underwriting and dealing in any manner other than as approved in this order is not within the scope of the Board's approval and is not authorized for Company. The Board's determination is subject to all the terms and conditions set forth in Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.25(c) (12 C.F.R. 225.7 and 225.25(c)), and to the Board's authority to require modification or termination of the activities of a bank holding company or any of its subsidiaries as the Board finds necessary to ensure compliance with, or to prevent evasion of, the provisions and purposes of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders issued thereunder. The Board's decision is specifically conditioned on compliance with all the commitments made in connection with the notice, including the commitments and conditions discussed in this order and the Board regulations and orders noted above. The commitments and conditions are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision, and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The proposal shall not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or the Reserve Bank, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective June 1, 1998. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Footnotes Asset and ranking data are as of December 31, 1997. Company currently owns certain subsidiaries other than Cardinal Management. Bancorp has committed that Company will divest its ownership of such subsidiaries prior to consummation of the proposal or that Bancorp will otherwise conform its ownership and the activities of such subsidiaries to the requirements of the BHC Act immediately on consummation. See J.P. Morgan & Co. Inc., et. al., 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 192 (1989), aff'd sub nom. Securities Industry Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 900 F.2d 360 (D.C. Cir. 1990); Citicorp, 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 473 (1987), aff'd sub nom. Securities Industry Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 839 F.2d 47 (2d Cir.), cert. denied, 486 U.S. 1059 (1988), as modified by Review of Restrictions on Director, Officer and Employee Interlocks, Cross-Marketing Activities, and the Purchase and Sale of Financial Assets Between a Section 20 Subsidiary and an Affiliated Bank or Thrift, 61 Federal Register 57,679 (1996), Amendments to Restrictions in the Board's Section 20 Orders, 62 Federal Register 45,295 (1997); and Clarification to the Board's Section 20 Orders, 63 Federal Register 14,803 (1998) (collectively, "Section 20 Orders"). Compliance with the revenue limitation shall be calculated in accordance with the method stated in the Section 20 Orders, as modified by the Order Approving Modifications to the Section 20 Orders, 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 751 (1989); 10 Percent Revenue Limit on Bank-Ineligible Activities of Subsidiaries of Bank Holding Companies Engaged in Underwriting and Dealing in Securities, 61 Federal Register 48,953 (1996); and Revenue Limit on Bank-Ineligible Activities of Subsidiaries of Bank Holding Companies Engaged in Underwriting and Dealing in Securities, 61 Federal Register 68,750 (1996) (collectively, "Modification Orders"). In light of the fact that Bancorp proposes to acquire a going concern, the Board believes that allowing Company to calculate compliance with the revenue limitation on an annualized basis during the first year after consummation of the acquisition and thereafter on a rolling quarterly average basis would be consistent with the Section 20 Orders. See Dauphin Deposit Corporation, 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 672 (1991). 12 C.F.R. 225.200. Company may provide services that are necessary incidents to the proposed underwriting and dealing activities. Unless Company receives specific approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act to conduct the activities independently, any revenues from the incidental activities must be treated as ineligible revenues subject to the Board's revenue limitation. See 12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(5), (6), (7)(i)-(iii), (8)(i), and (9)(ii). Cardinal Management currently serves as adviser, administrator and distributor of the Cardinal Funds, a family of open-end investment companies ("mutual funds"). Bancorp has committed that Cardinal Management will cease its mutual fund distribution activities prior to consummation. In addition, Bancorp has stated that the Cardinal Funds will be merged with and into Bancorp's existing family of proprietary mutual funds shortly after consummation of the proposal and that, after such merger, Cardinal Management will not provide administrative services to mutual funds. In light of the proposed merger, Bancorp has not requested authority for Company to provide administrative services to mutual funds under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. 12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8). See 12 C.F.R. 225.26(b). Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Meyer, Ferguson, and Gramlich. Absent and not voting: Governors Kelley and Phillips.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today its approval of the application of Eagle Bancorp, Inc., to become a bank holding company by acquiring all the voting shares of EagleBank, a de novo bank, both of Bethesda, Maryland. The Board also approved the application of EagleBank to become a member of the Federal Reserve System and to establish branches at 8677 Georgia Avenue, Silver Spring, Maryland, and 110 North Washington Street, Rockville, Maryland. Attached is the Board's Order relating to these actions. Eagle Bancorp, Inc. Bethesda, Maryland Order Approving Formation of a Bank Holding Company, Membership in the Federal Reserve System, and the Establishment of Branches Eagle Bancorp, Inc. ("Eagle") has requested the Board's approval under section 3(a)(1) of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act") (12 U.S.C. § 1842(a)(1)) to become a bank holding company by acquiring all the voting shares of EagleBank, Bethesda, Maryland ("Bank"), a de novo bank chartered under the laws of Maryland. Bank also has applied pursuant to section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. § 321) to become a member of the Federal Reserve System and to establish branches at 8677 Georgia Avenue, Silver Spring, Maryland, and 110 North Washington Street, Rockville, Maryland. Notice of the applications, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (59 Federal Register 35,122 (1994)) and given in accordance with applicable law. The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the applications and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 3 of the BHC Act and the Federal Reserve Act. Eagle is a newly formed nonoperating corporation that would acquire Bank. The addition of a new bank in the relevant banking market would increase the number of alternative sources of banking products and services available to customers in the market and increase competition. The Board previously has stated that the promotion of competition through de novo entry is a positive consideration in an application under section 3 of the BHC Act. Accordingly, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposal would not have a significantly adverse effect on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in any relevant banking market, and that competitive considerations are consistent with approval. The Board has reviewed examination reports and other supervisory information, including information regarding institutions with which Eagle's principals previously were affiliated. In light of all the facts of record, the Board concludes that the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of Eagle and Bank, the convenience and needs of the communities to be served, and other supervisory factors that the Board is required to consider under section 3 of the BHC Act, are consistent with approval of the proposal. In addition, Bank has applied under section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act to become a member of the Federal Reserve System and to establish branches. The Board has considered the factors it is required to consider when reviewing applications pursuant to section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act and finds those factors to be consistent with approval. Based on the foregoing and all the facts of record, the Board has determined that these applications should be, and hereby are, approved. The Board's approval is expressly conditioned on compliance with all the commitments made by Eagle in connection with the applications. For purposes of this action, the commitments and conditions relied on by the Board in reaching this decision are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision, and as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. This transaction shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day following the effective date of this order, or later than three months following the effective date of this order, and Bank shall be open for business within six months following the effective date of this order, unless such periods are extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective June 1, 1998. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Footnotes See Wilson Bank Holding Company, 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 568 (1996). Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Meyer, Ferguson, and Gramlich. Absent and not voting: Governors Kelley and Phillips.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today its approval of the application of Norwest Corporation, Minneapolis, Minnesota, to acquire Mountain Bancshares, Inc., Newport, Minnesota, and thereby acquire Mountain Bank, Eagle, Colorado. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Norwest Corporation Minneapolis, Minnesota Order Approving Acquisition of a Bank Holding Company Norwest Corporation ("Norwest"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 3 of the BHC Act to acquire Mountain Bancshares, Inc., Newport, Minnesota ("Mountain"), and thereby acquire Mountain Bank, Eagle, Colorado. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (63 Federal Register 18,021 (1998)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the proposal and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 3 of the BHC Act. Norwest operates banks in Arizona, Colorado, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Minnesota, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New Mexico, North Dakota, Ohio, South Dakota, Wisconsin, and Wyoming. Norwest is the largest commercial banking organization in Colorado, controlling approximately $7.1 billion in deposits, representing approximately 22.1 percent of total deposits in commercial banking organizations in Colorado ("state deposits"). Mountain is the 66th largest commercial banking organization in Colorado, controlling approximately $70 million in deposits, representing less than 1 percent of state deposits. On consummation of the proposal, Norwest would remain the largest commercial banking organization in Colorado. Interstate Analysis Section 3(d) of the BHC Act allows the Board to approve an application by a bank holding company to acquire control of a bank in a state other than the home state of such bank holding company, if certain conditions are met. For purposes of the BHC Act, the home state of Norwest is Minnesota, and Mountain controls a bank in Colorado. All of the conditions for an interstate acquisition enumerated in section 3(d) are met in this case. In view of all the facts of record, the Board is permitted to approve the proposal under section 3(d) of the BHC Act. Competitive Considerations The BHC Act prohibits the Board from approving an application if the proposal would result in a monopoly or if the proposal would substantially lessen competition in any relevant market, unless the Board finds that the anticompetitive effects of the proposed transaction are clearly outweighed in the public interest by the probable effect of the transaction in meeting the convenience and needs of the community to be served. Norwest and Mountain compete in the Montrose County and the Eagle County banking markets, both in Colorado. In the Montrose County banking market, Norwest would remain the largest depository institution in the market, controlling $173.4 million in deposits, representing 38.5 percent of deposits in depository institutions in the market ("market deposits") after consummation of the proposal. Concentration in the banking market as measured by the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index ("HHI") under the Department of Justice Merger Guidelines ("DOJ Guidelines") would increase by 82 points to 2134. Twelve competitors, including Norwest, would remain in the Montrose County banking market after consummation of this proposal. The second largest competitor would control 19.7 percent of market deposits, and five other competitors, not including Norwest, each would control more than 5 percent of market deposits after consummation of the proposal. In the Eagle County banking market, Norwest would become the third largest depository institution after consummation of the proposal, controlling $71 million in deposits, representing approximately 15.1 percent of market deposits. The HHI would increase by 35 points to 4014. Five competitors, including Norwest, would remain in the market. Two competitors would control a larger percentage of market deposits than Norwest, including the largest competitor in the market which controls 58.7 percent of market deposits. Consummation of the proposal in both banking markets would be consistent with the DOJ Guidelines and Board precedent. In addition, the Department of Justice reviewed the proposal and advised the Board that consummation of the proposal would not likely have a significantly adverse effect on competition in any relevant banking market. Based on all the facts of record, including the small increases in market concentration as measured by the HHI, the number of competitors remaining, and the market shares controlled by the remaining competitors, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposal is not likely to result in any significantly adverse effects on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in any relevant banking market. Other Considerations The BHC Act requires the Board, in acting on an application, to consider the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the companies and banks involved, the convenience and needs of the communities to be served, and certain supervisory factors. The Board has reviewed these factors in light of the record, including supervisory reports of examination assessing the financial and managerial resources of the organizations. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that the financial and managerial resources and the future prospects of Norwest, Mountain, and their respective subsidiary banks are consistent with approval, as are the other supervisory factors the Board must consider under section 3 of the BHC Act. In addition, considerations related to the convenience and needs of the communities to be served, including the records of performance of the institutions under the Community Reinvestment Act, are consistent with approval of the proposal. Conclusion Based on the foregoing, and in light of all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the application should be, and hereby is, approved. The Board's approval is specifically conditioned on compliance by Norwest with all the commitments made in connection with the application. For the purposes of this action, the commitments and conditions relied on by the Board in reaching its decision are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. This transaction shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day following the effective date of this order, or later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective June 1, 1998. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Footnotes State deposit data are as of June 30, 1997. A bank holding company's home state is that state in which the operations of the bank holding company's banking subsidiaries are principally conducted on July 1, 1966, or the date on which the company became a bank holding company, whichever is later. 12 U.S.C. § 1841(o)(4)(C). See 12 U.S.C. §§ 1842(d)(1)(A) and (B) and 1842(d)(2)(A) and (B). Norwest is adequately capitalized and adequately managed, as defined by applicable law, and Mountain Bank has been in existence and operated for the minimum period of time necessary to satisfy age requirements established by applicable state law. See Colo. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 11-6.4-103(2)(1997)(five years). On consummation of the proposal, Norwest would control less than 10 percent of the total amount of deposits of insured depository institutions in the United States. Norwest would control less than 25 percent of the total amount of federally insured deposits in Colorado, as calculated under applicable Colorado law. See Colo. Rev. Stat. Ann 11-6.4-103(4)(1997). All other requirements of section 3(d) of the BHC Act also would be met on consummation of the proposal. 12 U.S.C. § 1842(c)(1)(B). The Montrose County banking market is defined as Montrose, Ouray, and San Miguel Counties in Colorado. The Eagle County banking market is defined as Eagle County, Colorado, excluding the towns of El Jebel, Basalt, and Emma. In this context, depository institutions include commercial banks, savings banks, and savings associations. Market share data used to analyze the competitive effects of the proposal are as of June 30, 1997. These data are based on calculations in which the deposits of thrift institutions are included at 50 percent. The Board previously has indicated that thrift institutions have become, or have the potential to become, significant competitors of commercial banks. See Midwest Financial Group, 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 386 (1989); National City Corporation, 70 Federal Reserve Bulletin 743 (1984). Thus, the Board has regularly included thrift deposits in the calculation of market share on a 50-percent weighted basis. See, e.g., First Hawaiian, Inc., 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 52 (1991). Under the revised Department of Justice Merger Guidelines, 49 Federal Register 26,823 (June 29, 1984), a market in which the post-merger HHI exceeds 1800 is considered highly concentrated. The Department of Justice has informed the Board that a bank merger or acquisition generally will not be challenged (in the absence of other factors indicating anticompetitive effects) unless the post-merger HHI is at least 1800 and the merger increases the HHI by more than 200 points. The Department of Justice has stated that the higher than normal HHI thresholds for screening bank mergers and acquisitions for anticompetitive effects implicitly recognize the competitive effect of limited-purpose lenders and other non-depository financial entities. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Meyer, Ferguson, and Gramlich. Absent and not voting: Governors Kelley and Phillips.
For immediate release
Testimony of Governor Laurence H. Meyer Mergers and acquisitions in banking and other financial services Before the Committee on the Judiciary, U.S. House of Representatives June 3, 1998 I am pleased to appear before this Committee on behalf of the Federal Reserve Board to discuss antitrust issues related to mergers and acquisitions between U.S. banks and between banking organizations and other financial services firms. Under U.S. law, when considering the competitive effects of a proposed bank merger or acquisition, the Board is required to apply the competitive standards contained in the Sherman and Clayton Antitrust Acts. Under these standards, the Board may not approve a proposal that would result in a monopoly or that may substantially lessen competition or tend to create a monopoly in a particular market. In the case of proposals that involve the acquisition of a nonbanking company by a bank holding company, the Board must consider whether the acquisition can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public, such as greater convenience, increased competition, or gains in efficiency that outweigh possible adverse effects. My statement today will discuss how the Federal Reserve implements these requirements. I will also try to provide some broad perspective on the ongoing consolidation of the U.S. banking system and the potential effects of bank mergers. It is important to understand that the Bank Holding Company Act does not give the Board unfettered discretion in acting on merger and acquisition proposals, and that competition is not the only criterion that the Board must consider when assessing such a proposal. Other factors that the Bank Holding Company Act requires that the Board consider include the financial and managerial resources and future prospect of the companies and banks involved in the proposal, and the effects of the proposal on the convenience and needs of the community to be served, including the performance record of the depository institutions involved under the Community Reinvestment Act. The Bank Holding Company Act also establishes nationwide and individual state deposit limits for interstate bank acquisitions and consolidated home country supervision standards for foreign banks. In my testimony before the Committee on Banking and Financial Services on April 29, I discussed each of these topics in some detail. Lastly, if a bank holding company proposes to acquire a firm that is engaging in an activity not previously approved for bank holding companies, the Board must determine whether such activities are so closely related to banking or to managing or controlling banks as to be a "proper incident" to banking. I. Trends in Mergers and Banking Structure It is useful to begin a discussion of the Board's antitrust policy toward bank mergers with a brief description of recent trends in merger activity and overall U.S. banking structure. The statistical tables at the end of my statement provide some detail that may be of interest to the Committee. Bank Mergers: There have been over 7,000 bank mergers since 1980 ( ). The pace accelerated from 190 mergers with $10.2 billion in acquired assets in 1980, to 649 with $123.3 billion in acquired assets in 1987. In the 1990s, the pace of both the number and dollar volume of bank mergers has remained high. So far this year, the rapid rate of merger activity has continued. For example, if only the five largest mergers or acquisitions approved or announced since December are completed, a total of over $500 billion in banking assets will have been acquired. The incidence of "megamergers," or mergers among very large banking organizations, is a truly remarkable aspect of current bank merger activity. But, it is useful to recall that very large mergers began to occur with growing frequency after 1980. In 1980, there were no mergers or acquisitions of commercial banking organizations where both parties had over $1.0 billion in total assets ( ). The years 1987 through 1997 brought growing numbers of such acquisitions and, reflecting changes in state and federal laws, an increasing number of these involved interstate acquisitions by bank holding companies. The largest mergers in U.S. banking history took place or were approved during the 1990s--including Chase-Chemical, Wells Fargo-First Interstate, NationsBank-Barnett, and First Union-CoreStates. And while these mergers set size precedents, the recently proposed mergers of Citicorp and Travelers, and NationsBank and BankAmerica, if consummated, would set a new standard for sheer size in U.S. banking organizations. National Banking Structure: The high level of merger activity since 1980, along with a large number of bank failures, is reflected in a steady decline in the number of U.S. banking organizations from 1980 through 1997 ( ). In 1980, there were over 12,000 banking organizations, defined as bank holding companies plus independent banks; banks (independent banks plus banks owned by holding companies) in total numbered nearly 14,500. By 1997, the number of organizations had fallen to about 7,100 and the number of banks to just over 9,000. The number of organizations had declined over 40 percent and the number of banks by over one-third. The trends I have just described must be placed in perspective, because taken by themselves they hide some of the key dynamics of the banking industry. shows some other important characteristics of U.S. banking. While there were about 1,450 commercial bank failures and over 7,000 bank acquisitions between 1980 and 1997, some 3,600 new banks were formed. Similarly, while over 18,000 bank branches were closed, the same period saw the opening of nearly 35,000 new branches. Perhaps even more importantly, the total number of banking offices, shown in table 3, increased sharply from about 53,000 in 1980 to over 71,000 in 1997, a 35 percent rise, and the population per banking office declined. This includes former thrift offices that were acquired by banking organizations. Fewer banking organizations clearly has not meant fewer banking offices serving the public. These trends have been accompanied by a substantial increase in the share of total banking assets controlled by the largest banking organizations. For example, the proportion of domestic banking assets accounted for by the 100 largest banking organizations went from just over one-half in 1980, to nearly three-quarters in 1997 ( ). The increase in nationwide concentration reflects, to a large degree, a response by the larger banking organizations to the removal of state and federal restrictions on geographic expansion both within and across states. The industry is moving from many separate state banking structures toward a nationwide banking structure that would have existed already had legal restrictions not stood in the way. The increased opportunities for interstate banking are allowing many banking organizations to reach for the twin goals of geographic risk diversification and new sources of "core" deposits. As I will discuss shortly, it may well be that the retail banking industry is moving toward a structure more like that of some other local market industries such as clothing and department store retailing. As in retail banking, clothing and department store customers tend to rely on stores located near their home or workplace. These stores may be entirely local or may be part of regional or national organizations. Thus, it should perhaps not be surprising that banks, now freed of barriers to geographic expansion, are taking advantage of the opportunity to operate in local markets throughout the country as have firms in other retail industries. But, it would be a mistake to think that adjustment to a new statutory environment--and the increased opportunities for geographic diversification--were the only reasons for the current volume of bank merger activity. Each merger is somewhat unique, and likely reflects more than one motivation. For example, a recent study of scale economies in banking suggests that efficiencies associated with larger size may be achieved up to a bank size of about $10-$25 billion in assets. In addition, some lines of business, such as securities underwriting and market-making, require quite large levels of activity to be viable. Increased competitive pressures caused by rapid technological change and the resulting blurring of distinctions between banks and other types of financial firms, lower barriers to entry due to deregulation, and increased globalization also contribute to merger activity. Global competition appears to be especially important for banks that specialize in corporate customers and wholesale services, especially among the very largest institutions. Today, for example, almost 40 percent of the U.S. domestic commercial and industrial bank loan market is accounted for by foreign-owned banks. More generally, greater competition has forced inefficient banks to become more efficient, accept lower profits, close up shop, or--in order to exit a market in which they cannot survive--merge with another bank. Other possible motives for mergers include the simple desire to achieve market power, or the desire by management to build empires and enhance compensation. Some mergers probably occur as an effort to prevent the acquiring bank from itself being acquired, or, alternatively, to enhance a bank's attractiveness to other buyers. Many of these factors are also motivating mergers between bank and nonbank financial firms. However, in these cases, a key causal factor is the on-going blurring of distinctions between what were, not very long ago, quite different financial services. Today, as the Board has testified on many occasions, and despite the fact that banks continue to offer a unique bundle of services for retail customers, it is increasingly difficult to differentiate between many products and services offered by commercial banks, investment banks, and insurance companies. Thus, we should not find it surprising that firms in each of these industries should seek partners in the others. Local Market Banking Structure: Given the Board's statutory responsibility to apply the antitrust laws so as to ensure competitive banking markets, it is critical to understand that nationwide concentration statistics are generally not the appropriate metric for assessing the competitive effects of mergers. Moreover, the extent to which mergers can increase national concentration is limited by the provisions in the Riegle-Neal Act of 1994 that amended the Bank Holding Company Act and established national (10 percent) and state-by-state (30 percent) deposit concentration limits for interstate bank acquisitions. States may establish a higher or lower limit, and initial entry into a state by acquisition is not subject to the Riegle-Neal statewide 30 percent limit. Beyond this, the Board has a statutory responsibility to apply the antitrust laws so as to ensure competitive local banking markets. Evidence indicates that in the vast majority of cases the relevant concern for competition analysis is competition in local banking markets. This is based partly on survey findings that indicate that households and small businesses obtain most of their financial services in a very local area. In addition, it is based on empirical research that shows deposit rates tend to be lower and some loan rates, particularly those on loans to small businesses, are higher in local markets with relatively high levels of concentration. While concentration has increased in some local markets, it has decreased in others, from 1980 through 1997, in both urban and rural markets, so that the average percentage of bank deposits accounted for by the three largest firms has remained steady or actually declined slightly, even as nationwide concentration has increased substantially ( ). Essentially similar trends are apparent when local market bank concentration is measured by the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI), defined as the sum of the squares of the market shares. Because of the importance of local banking markets, I would like to provide somewhat more detail on the implications of bank mergers for local market concentration. Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs) and non-MSA counties are often used as proxies for urban and rural banking markets. The average three-firm deposit concentration ratio for urban markets decreased by three percentage points between 1980 and 1997 (table 6). Average concentration in rural counties declined by 1.7 percentage points. Similarly, the average bank deposit-based HHI for both urban and rural markets fell between 1980 and 1997 ( ). When thrift deposits are given a 50 percent weight in these calculations, average HHIs are sharply lower than the bank-only HHIs in a given year, but the HHIs trend slightly upward since 1984. On balance, the three-firm concentration ratios and the HHI data indicate that, despite the fact that there were over 7,000 bank mergers between 1980 and 1997, local banking market concentration has remained about the same. Why haven't all of these mergers increased average local market concentration? There are a number of reasons. First, many mergers are between firms operating primarily in different local banking markets. While these mergers may increase national or state concentration, they do not tend to increase concentration in local banking markets and thus do not reduce competition. Second, as I have already pointed out, there is new entry into banking markets. In most markets, new banks can be formed fairly easily, and some key regulatory barriers, such as restrictions on interstate banking, have been all but eliminated. Third, the evidence overwhelmingly shows that banks from outside a market usually do not increase their market share after entering a new market by acquisition. Studies indicate that when a local bank is acquired by a large out-of-market bank, there is normally some loss of market share. The new owners are not able to retain all of the customers of the acquired bank. Anecdotal evidence suggests that some other banks in the market mount aggressive campaigns to lure away customers of the bank being acquired. Fourth, it is important to emphasize that small banks have been and continue to be able to retain their market share and profitability in competition with larger banks. Our staff has done repeated studies of small banks; all of these studies indicate that small banks continue to perform as well as, or better than, their large counterparts, even in the banking markets dominated by the major banks. This may be due, in part, to more personalized service. But whatever the reason, based on this experience, we expect that there will continue to be a large number of banks remaining in the future. Despite a continued high level of merger activity, studies based on historical experience suggest that in about a decade there may still be about 3,000 to 4,000 banking organizations, down from about 7,000 today. Although the top 10 or so banking organizations will almost certainly account for a larger share of banking assets than they do today, the basic size distribution of the industry will probably remain about the same. That is, there will be a few very large organizations and an increasing number of smaller organizations as we move down the size scale. It seems reasonable to expect that a large number of small, locally oriented banking organizations will remain. Moreover, size does not appear to be an important determining factor even for international competition. Only very recently have U.S. banks begun to appear, once again, among the world's twenty largest in terms of assets. Yet those U.S. banks that compete in world markets are consistently among the most profitable and best capitalized in the world, as well as being ranked as the most innovative. Finally, administration of the antitrust laws has almost surely played a role in restricting local market concentration. At a minimum, banking organizations have been deterred from proposing seriously anticompetitive mergers. And in some cases, to obtain merger approval, applicants have divested banking offices with their assets and deposits in certain local markets where the merger would have otherwise resulted in excessive concentration. Overall, then, the picture that emerges is that of a dynamic U.S. banking structure adjusting to the removal of longstanding legal restrictions on geographic expansion, technological change, and greatly increased domestic and international competition. Even as the number of banking organizations has declined, the number of banking offices has continued to increase in response to the demands of consumers, and measures of local banking concentration have remained quite stable. In such an environment, it is potentially very misleading to make broad generalizations without looking more deeply into what lies below the surface. In part for the same reasons that make generalizations difficult, the Federal Reserve devotes considerable care and substantial resources to analyzing individual merger applications. II. Federal Reserve's Application of Antitrust Standards The Federal Reserve Board is required by the Bank Holding Company Act (1956) and the Bank Merger Act (1960) to review specific statutory factors arising from a transaction when (1) a holding company acquires a bank or a nonbank firm, or merges with another holding company, or (2) the bank resulting from a merger of two banks is a state-chartered member bank. The Board must evaluate, among other things, the likely effects of such mergers on competition. This section of my statement discusses in some detail the methodology the Board uses in assessing the competitive effects of a proposed merger. Competitive Criteria: In considering the competitive effects of a proposed bank acquisition, the Board is required to apply the same competitive standards contained in the Sherman and Clayton Antitrust Acts. The Bank Holding Company (BHC) Act and the Bank Merger Act do contain a special provision, used primarily in troubled-bank cases, that permits the Board to balance public benefits from proposed mergers against potential adverse competitive effects. The law also requires that the Board consider the potential effects on competition in the relevant market when bank holding companies acquire nonbank firms, as will be discussed later. The Board's analysis of competition begins with defining the geographic areas that are likely to be affected by a merger. Under procedures established by the Board, these areas are defined by staff at the local Reserve Bank in whose District the merger would occur, with oversight by staff in Washington. In mergers where one or both parties are in two Federal Reserve Districts, the Reserve Banks cooperate, as necessary. To ensure that market definition criteria remain current, and in an effort to better understand the dynamics of the banking industry, the Board has recently sponsored several surveys, including national Surveys of Small Business Finances, a triennial national Survey of Consumer Finances, and telephone surveys in specific merger cases, to assist it in defining geographic markets in banking. These surveys are particularly useful because electronic technology and banks with widespread branch networks are becoming more prevalent. The surveys and other evidence continue to suggest that small businesses and households most often obtain their banking services in their local area. This implies using a local geographic market definition for analyzing competition. Local markets would, of course, be less important for the financial services obtained by large businesses. With this basic local market orientation of households and small businesses in mind, the staff constructs a local market index of concentration, the HHI, which is widely accepted as a useful measure of market concentration, in order to conduct a preliminary screen of a proposed merger. The HHI is calculated based on local bank and thrift deposits. The merger would generally not be regarded as anticompetitive if the resulting market share, the HHI, and the change in that index do not exceed the criteria in the Justice Department's merger guidelines for banking. However, while the HHI is an important indicator of competition, it is not a comprehensive one. In addition to statistics on market share and bank concentration, economic theory and evidence suggest that other factors, such as potential competition, the strength of the target firm, and the market environment may have important influences on bank behavior. These other factors have become increasingly important as a result of many recent procompetitive changes in the financial sector. Thus, if the resulting market share and the level and change in the HHI are within Justice Department guidelines, there is a presumption that the merger is acceptable, but if they are not, a more thorough economic analysis is required. To conduct such an analysis of competition, the Board uses information from its own major national surveys noted above, from telephone surveys of households and small businesses in the market being studied, from on-site investigations by staff, and from various standard databases with information on market income, population, deposits, and other variables. These data, along with results of general empirical research by Federal Reserve System staff, academics, and others, are used to assess the importance of various factors that may affect competition. To provide the Committee with an indication of the range of other factors the Board may consider in evaluating competition in local markets, I shall outline these factors. Potential competition, or the possibility that other firms may enter the market, may be regarded as a significant procompetitive factor. It is most relevant in markets that are attractive for entry and where barriers to entry, legal or otherwise, are low. Thus, for example, potential competition is of relatively little importance in markets where entry is unlikely for economic reasons. Thrift institution deposits are now typically accorded 50 percent weight in calculating statistical measures of the impact of a merger on market structure for the Board's analysis of competition. In some instances, however, a higher percentage may be included if thrifts in the relevant market look very much like banks, as indicated by the substantial exercise of their transactions account, commercial lending, and consumer lending powers. While the merger guidelines provide a significant allowance for nonbank competition, competition from other depository and nonbank financial institutions may be given some additional consideration if such entities clearly provide substitutes for the basic banking services used by most households and small businesses. In this context, credit unions and finance companies may be particularly important. The competitive significance of the target firm can be a factor in some cases. For example, if the bank being acquired is not a reasonably active competitor in a market, the loss of competition would not be considered to be as severe as would otherwise be the case. Adverse structural effects may be offset somewhat if the firm to be acquired is located in a declining market. This factor would apply where a weak or declining market is clearly a fundamental and long-term trend, and there are indications that exit by merger would be appropriate because exit by closing offices is not desirable and shrinkage would lead to diseconomies of scale. This factor is most likely to be relevant in rural markets. Competitive issues may be reduced in importance if the bank to be acquired has failed or is about to fail. In such a case, it may be desirable to allow some adverse competitive effects if this means that banking services will continue to be made available to local customers rather than be severely restricted or perhaps eliminated. A very high level of the HHI could raise questions about the competitive effects of a merger even if the change in the HHI is less than the Justice Department criteria. This factor would be given additional weight if there has been a clear trend toward increasing concentration in the market. The possibility of efficiency gains, especially via scale economies, is considered when appropriate, although this has generally not been a significant factor. Finally, other factors unique to a market or firm would be considered if they are relevant to the analysis of competition. These factors might include evidence on the nature and degree of competition in a market, information on pricing behavior, and the quality of services provided. Some merger applications are approved only after the applicant proposes the divestiture of offices in local markets, and where the merger cannot be justified using any of the criteria I have just discussed. We believe that such divestitures have provided a useful vehicle for eliminating the potentially anticompetitive effects of a merger in specific local markets while allowing the bulk of the merger to proceed. Remedies: Divestitures and Denials: The Board makes a concerted effort to provide the industry and other market participants with clear competition standards in order to make the regulatory process as efficient as possible. This is accomplished especially through published Board Orders on individual merger decisions. Furthermore, staff at the Reserve Banks and the Board often provide guidance to banks and bank holding companies that are considering a merger even prior to the filing of a formal application as well as after an application is filed. In this way, applicants learn very early in the process whether their application is likely to raise antitrust concerns. In fact, because this information regarding the principles applied by the Board in its competitive analysis is so readily available, applicants are able to structure proposals so that few merger applications are denied on competitive grounds. Some potential applicants choose not to file an application after being advised of the Board's policy and standards. Other potential applicants, who recognize that their application raises serious concerns about competition, choose to make divestitures of offices to remedy the competition problem. As I indicated above, divestitures have proven to be an effective way for applicants to resolve a competition problem without jeopardizing the entire deal. Indeed, the Board has approved 48 merger applications involving divestitures during the 1990s. Board denials of applications on competitive grounds are rare. Nevertheless, despite the Board's efforts to inform the industry of its antitrust policy and standards, the Board has denied four applications because of adverse competitive effects during the 1990s. Reviews of Policies and Procedures: Given the rapid pace of change in the U.S. banking and financial system, the Board and its staff review policies and procedures for assessing competition on a nearly continuous basis. Periodically, more formal reviews are conducted, the most recent of which was completed by Board staff early last year. This review essentially confirmed the continued appropriateness of our existing methodology. I would like to highlight five aspects of that review that might be of particular interest to the Committee. Since at least the mid-1960s, the cluster of products and services that constitutes commercial banking has been used, and reaffirmed by the courts, as the relevant product line for bank merger analysis. The cluster is meant to encompass the set of products and services that is purchased primarily from banks, a set that technological and other market developments have clearly changed over time. However, extensive review of available data, including our practical experience in analyzing cases, indicated that there still exists a core of such activities for both households and small businesses. Such activities certainly include federally insured deposits and, for small businesses, likely encompass certain credit products and services as well. Thus, the cluster continues to be the product line used by the Board for bank merger analysis. The staff's review also indicated very strong support for the continued use of local geographic markets for the cluster of bank services as the primary concern of competition analysis. Survey data indicate, for example, that 98 percent of households, and 92 percent of small businesses use a local depository institution. In addition, it is estimated that almost 90 percent of services consumed at depositories by households, and 95 percent of services consumed by small business, are provided by local depositories. On a closely related issue, our staff considered whether it might be appropriate to use somewhat different competition standards in urban and rural markets. This question was motivated by the fact that, since rural markets tend to be more concentrated than urban markets, it is frequently more difficult for banks in a given rural market to merge with each other than it is for banks in an urban market. However, no objective basis was discovered for treating urban and rural markets fundamentally differently in the analysis of potential competitive effects of a merger. Thus, all proposals continue to be evaluated on a case-by-case basis using common standards. Our staff also reviewed whether continued use of the Department of Justice's merger guidelines was appropriate or whether, in light of institutional and technological changes, a more liberal initial screen should be applied. While the market for banking services certainly has become more competitive since the existing guidelines were established in 1984, the current guidelines continue to provide a useful initial screen for deciding whether a proposed merger is likely to have anticompetitive effects. In particular, the more generous allowance in the guidelines for the effects of nonbank competition were deemed to remain sufficient for the vast majority of cases. Exceptions can be dealt with on an individual basis. Moreover, there is considerable virtue in having both the Federal Reserve and the Department of Justice use the same initial screen. In the end, there appears to be no substitute for a careful case-by-case analysis, of the type that I discussed above, of proposals that violate the Board's and the Department of Justice's initial guidelines. Lastly, in light of a substantial body of evidence accumulated over the 1980s, economies of scale are considered as a potential mitigating factor in our analysis of merger proposals. Many studies using data from the 1970s and 1980s indicated only small economies of scale in banking, economies that were exhausted at about $100 million in total assets. However, recent research using data from the 1990s suggests that significant scale economies may exist for much larger firms, perhaps for banks as large as $10 to $25 billion in assets. If these results hold up to additional scrutiny, we will clearly need to evaluate once again the weight given to economies of scale in competition analysis. Coordination with Department of Justice: The Federal Reserve and the Department of Justice (DOJ) coordinate their antitrust analysis of banking consolidations through a combination of formal and informal procedures. These procedures have two objectives. First, they ensure that the two agencies share information that is relevant to the competition analysis of all bank merger proposals which raise a serious competitive issue. Second, they ensure that the analysis of each agency is known to the other. A number of procedures have been developed at various stages of the application process. Largely, they entail the exchange or sharing of documents. The Department of Justice, for example, is provided a copy of all bank applications made to the Federal Reserve. The geographic markets used to conduct the competitive analysis are provided by the Federal Reserve to the DOJ. Also, the Department of Justice regularly (about every two weeks) sends the Federal Reserve and other banking agencies a document listing those mergers that the DOJ believes are not likely to have significantly adverse competitive effects. Finally, in cases involving Justice Department-required divestitures, the Department typically sends the Federal Reserve a copy of the "letter of agreement" that identifies the terms of the required divestitures. A significant amount of information is also shared on an ad hoc basis. Direct staff-to-staff communications, including conversations and meetings, play an important role in the resolution of difficult competitive issues. Communications between the staffs of the Justice Department and the Federal Reserve can be frequent and may occur without limit at any stage of the application process, including pre-application and post-approval. In the past, a range of issues has been discussed and resolved informally, including both geographic and product market definitions and divestiture requirements. Such informal interactions occur routinely in both banking and nonbanking cases and are probably the single most important means by which the Federal Reserve and the Department of Justice coordinate their competitive analyses. The Department of Justice places substantial weight on the potential effect of a merger on lending to small businesses. The Board also considers small business lending but in the context of the more general analysis of the cluster of banking services. Because of these differences in emphasis, the Board and Department may, in occasional cases, reach different conclusions regarding the competitive effects of a merger. Recent Cases: As I noted earlier, the Board has always believed that it is important to make its antitrust policy clear to the industry and other members of the public. One way it attempts to accomplish this is by providing a detailed analysis of competitive issues in its public Order on each case. In a number of recent large and complex cases, the Board has reinforced its policy and methodology for analyzing competition, and reminded applicants of the need for noticeable, and possibly increasing, "mitigators" in cases that exceed the Department of Justice screening guidelines. This was done because during the past couple of years an increasing number of applicants came very close to the Board's limits, in terms of structural effects and strength of mitigating factors, for approving bank mergers. It appeared as though some applicants had concluded that the Board had relaxed its competition standards. That conclusion is incorrect. For example, in one recent Order the Board noted, As the Board has indicated in previous cases, in a market in which the competitive effects of a proposal as measured by market indexes and market share exceed the DOJ guidelines, the Board will consider whether other factors tend to mitigate the effects of the proposal. The number and strength of factors necessary to mitigate the competitive effects of a proposal depend on the level of market concentration and size of the increase in market concentration. The Board has recently also considered cases in which Department of Justice guidelines were exceeded in a large number of local markets. In those cases as well, the Board indicated that mitigating factors should exist in each local market being affected. There, the Board stated that: In these cases, the Board believes that it is important to give increased attention to the size of the change in market concentration as measured by the HHI in highly concentrated markets, the resulting market share of the acquiror and the pro forma HHIs in these markets, the strength and nature of competitors that remain in the market, and the strength of additional positive and negative factors that may affect competition for financial services in each market. In summary, at a time when the banking industry is undergoing an unprecedented merger movement that is likely to continue for a considerable period, it is particularly important to have a public policy that will maintain a competitive banking marketplace and that is well understood by all market participants. The Board seeks to accomplish these public policy objectives in an efficient and effective manner by maintaining a relevant and up-to-date policy, cooperating closely with the Department of Justice, keeping the industry and other members of the public well informed, and providing information and guidance through staff at the Board and Reserve Banks. Nonbank Acquisitions: The ability of bank holding companies to engage in a wide range of nonbanking activities was made possible by the 1970 amendments to the Bank Holding Company Act. Permissible nonbanking activities are those that satisfy a two-part test delineated in section 4(c)(8) of the Bank Holding Act. This test first requires the Board to find that a nonbanking activity is "closely related to banking." Second, the Board must determine that the performance of the activity "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public, such as greater convenience, increased competition, or gains in efficiency, that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interest, or unsound banking practices." The Board has determined that nonbanking activities are closely related to banking if they meet any one of three criteria: (1) banks generally have in fact provided the proposed services; (2) banks generally provide services that are operationally or functionally so similar to the proposed services as to equip them particularly well to provide the proposed services; or, (3) banks generally provide services that are so integrally related to the proposed services as to require their provision in a specialized form. The competitive effects of a proposal must be reviewed as part of the "net public benefits" test that governs nonbanking acquisitions. Unlike the case in banking acquisitions, however, in every nonbanking acquisition, the Board must also weigh other possible effects--such as undue concentration of resources and the existence of unfair competition--against public benefits and find that public benefits are predominant in order to approve the proposal. Generally, the Board's competitive analysis of nonbanking acquisitions is very similar to that used in banking mergers. In particular, the economic analysis begins with determining the product market in question, and then the relevant geographic area for assessing competition. The relevant market area may be local, regional, national, or international, depending on the product under review and the exact nature of the marketplace. Then, proposed changes in market structure are examined along with other factors, such as potential competition, to determine the extent to which competition may be reduced. Over the years, nonbanking acquisitions generally have raised fewer competitive concerns than banking mergers. This is because nonbanking activities have generally been conducted in markets where industry concentration was low or moderate and where numerous competitors existed (e.g., consumer finance and mortgage banking). III. Conclusion The Federal Reserve is required by law to assess the competitive implications of proposed bank mergers and acquisitions. In order to fulfill its statutory responsibilities, the Federal Reserve devotes considerable resources to the case-by-case evaluation of merger proposals. The Board normally focuses its analysis on a proposed merger's potential impact on competitive conditions in local markets for banking services. In some cases, particularly those involving the acquisition of nonbank firms, broader geographic areas are used. The Federal Reserve's (along with the Department of Justice's) administration of the antitrust laws in banking has helped to maintain competitive banking markets in the midst of the most significant consolidation of the banking industry in U.S. history. It is the Board's intention and expectation that this will continue to be the case in the future. Footnotes First Union Corporation, Board Order dated April 13, 1998, pp. 17 and 18. NationsBank Corporation, 84 Federal Reserve Bulletin 129 (1998), p. 134. Tables - Bank Mergers and Acquisitions, 1980-1997 - Number of Large Mergers, 1980-1997 - Number of Banks, Banking Organizations, and Offices, 1980-1997 - Entry and Exit in Banking, 1980-1997 - Shares of Domestic Commercial Banking Assets Held by Largest Banking Organizations, 1980-1997 - Average Three-firm Deposit Concentration Ratio (in percent) based on Insured Commercial Banking Organizations, 1976-1997 - Average Herfindahl-Hirschman Indexes (HHI) of Metropolitan Statistical Areas and Rural (Non-MSA) Counties, 1976-1997
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced that it is seeking nominations for nine appointments to its Consumer Advisory Council. The Council, which consists of 30 members, advises the Board on the exercise of its responsibilities under the Consumer Credit Protection Act and on other matters on which the Board seeks advice. The group meets in Washington, D.C., three times a year. The nine new members will be appointed to serve three-year terms beginning in January 1999. Nominations should include the following information about nominees: past and present positions held; knowledge, interests or experience related to community reinvestment, consumer credit, or other consumer financial services; and complete address with telephone and fax numbers. Letters of nominations must be received by July 31, 1998 and should be mailed (not sent by facsimile) to Sandra F. Braunstein, Assistant Director, Division of Consumer and Community Affairs, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, D.C. 20551. The Board's notice is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced a public meeting for Thursday, June 25, 1998, in New York, New York, on the proposal by Travelers Group Inc. to acquire Citicorp, both located in New York, New York. This transaction involves a proposal to combine the second largest bank holding company in the United States with one of the largest financial conglomerates in the United States. The Board has received a number of requests to hold a public meeting in this case. The meeting will be held at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 33 Liberty Street, New York, New York, and will begin at 9:00 a.m. EDT. The purpose of the meeting is to collect information relating to factors the Board is required to consider under the Bank Holding Company Act. These factors are the effects of the proposal on the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the companies and banks involved in the proposal, competition in the relevant markets, and the convenience and needs of the communities to be served. Convenience and needs considerations include consideration of the records of performance of Travelers Group and Citicorp under the Community Reinvestment Act. The transaction also involves the proposed acquisition or retention of a number of nonbanking companies engaged in activities permissible for bank holding companies as well as a proposal to divest or otherwise conform a number of other activities that are not permissible for bank holding companies under current law. With respect to the proposal to conduct permissible nonbanking activities, the Board also must determine whether conducting the proposed nonbanking activities can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interest, or unsound banking practices. Persons wishing to testify at the meeting must submit a written request no later than 5:00 p.m. EDT, June 12, 1998, containing a brief statement of the nature of the expected testimony and the estimated time required for the presentation (together with their address, telephone number, and facsimile number if available), to Elizabeth Rodriguez Jackson, Community Affairs Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 33 Liberty Street, New York, New York 10045 (facsimile: 212/720-7841). Persons interested only in attending the meeting do not need to submit a written request to attend. On the basis of the requests to testify, the presiding officer of the public meeting will establish a schedule of appearances and prescribe all necessary procedures to ensure that the meeting proceeds in a fair and orderly manner. An agenda for the meeting, which will include the scheduled time for each person's testimony, will be provided to participants at a later date. Attached is a copy of the Notice of Public Meeting, which sets forth the procedures to be followed at the meeting. The Federal Reserve Board also announced that it will extend the period for public comment on the proposal through June 25, 1998. Travelers Group Inc. New York, New York Notice of Public Meeting Background and Public Meeting Notice On May 4, 1998, Travelers Group Inc., New York, New York ("Travelers"), requested the Board's approval under the Bank Holding Company Act (12 U.S.C. § 1841 et seq.) ("BHC Act") and related statutes to acquire Citicorp, New York, New York ("Citicorp"), and its banking and nonbanking subsidiaries. The Board hereby orders that a public meeting on the Travelers/Citicorp proposal be held in New York, New York, on Thursday, June 25, 1998. The public meeting will be held at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 33 Liberty Street, New York, New York, and will begin at 9:00 a.m. EDT. Purpose and Procedures The purpose of the public meeting is to collect information relating to factors the Board is required to consider under the BHC Act. These factors are the effects of the proposal on the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the companies and banks involved in the proposal, competition in the relevant markets, and the convenience and needs of the communities to be served. Convenience and needs considerations include consideration of the records of performance of Travelers and Citicorp under the Community Reinvestment Act, which requires the Board to take into account in its consideration of a bank acquisition proposal the institutions' record of meeting the credit needs of its entire community, including low- and moderate-income neighborhoods, consistent with the safe and sound operation of the institution. 12 U.S.C. § 2903. The transaction also involves the proposed acquisition or retention of a number of nonbanking companies engaged in activities permissible for bank holding companies as well as a proposal to divest or otherwise conform a number of other activities that are not permissible for bank holding companies under current law. With respect to the proposal to conduct permissible nonbanking activities, the Board also must determine whether conducting the proposed nonbanking activities can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interest, or unsound banking practices. Testimony at the public meeting will be presented to a panel consisting of a Presiding Officer, or his designee, and other panel members appointed by the Presiding Officer. The Presiding Officer at the meeting will be Glenn E. Loney, Deputy Director of the Board's Division of Consumer and Community Affairs. In conducting the public meeting, the Presiding Officer will have the authority and discretion to ensure that the meeting proceeds in a fair and orderly manner. In contrast to a formal administrative hearing, the rules for taking evidence in an administrative proceeding will not apply to this public meeting. Panel members may question witnesses, but no cross-examination of witnesses will be permitted. The public meeting will be transcribed and information regarding procedures for obtaining a copy of the transcript will be announced at the public meeting. All persons wishing to testify at the public meeting must submit a written request to Elizabeth Rodriguez Jackson, Community Affairs Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 33 Liberty Street, New York, New York 10045 (facsimile: 212/720-7841), not later than 5:00 p.m. EDT, June 12, 1998. The request must include the following information: (i) a brief statement of the nature of the expected testimony and the estimated time required for the presentation; (ii) address and telephone number (and facsimile number, if available) of the person testifying; and (iii) identification of any special needs, such as persons desiring translation services, persons with a physical disability who may need assistance, or persons requiring visual aids for their presentation. To the extent available, translators will be provided to persons wishing to present their views in a language other than English if this information is included in the request to testify. Persons interested only in attending the meeting do not need to submit a written request to attend. On the basis of the requests received, the Presiding Officer will prepare a schedule for persons wishing to testify. In order to ensure an opportunity for all interested commenters to present their views, the Presiding Officer may limit the time for presentation and establish the order of presentation. Persons not listed on the schedule may be permitted to speak at the .public meeting at the discretion of the Presiding Officer if time permits at the conclusion of the schedule of witnesses. Copies of testimony may, but need not, be filed with the Presiding Officer before a person's presentation. By order of the Board of Governors, effective June 4, 1998. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Secretary of the Board
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today requested comment on whether the last fifteen minutes of the Fedwire funds transfer operating day (from 6:15 p.m. to 6:30 p.m. Eastern Time) should be restricted to funds transfers sent and received by depository institutions for their own account. This would facilitate the end-of-day management of their balances held at the Federal Reserve. Comment is requested by August 12, 1998. The Fedwire funds transfer system operates from 12:30 a.m. to 6:30 p.m. Eastern Time, with the last half hour of the operating day reserved for settlement transfers. Settlement transfers are typically used by depository institutions to adjust their Federal Reserve account positions, as well as their account positions at correspondent banks. Since the early 1990's significant changes have affected depository institutions' management of reserve accounts, including reductions in reserve requirements and a decrease in reservable deposits due to the increased use of sweep accounts. Some depository institutions believe that these changes have made reserve management more difficult and that these difficulties are exacerbated by unexpected late-day funds transfers. The Board's notice is attached. |
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice and application filed by UBS AG, Zurich and Basel, and Union Bank of Switzerland, Zurich, in connection with the proposed merger of Union Bank of Switzerland and Swiss Bank Corporation, Basel, all in Switzerland. Attached is the relating to this action.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application of The Fuji Bank, Limited, Tokyo, Japan, to retain 16.8 percent of the voting shares of The Yasuda Trust and Banking Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan, and thereby retain an interest in Yasuda Bank and Trust Company (U.S.A.), New York, New York. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. The Fuji Bank, Limited Tokyo, Japan Order Approving Retention of an Interest in a Bank Holding Company The Fuji Bank, Limited ("Fuji"), a registered bank holding company, has requested the Board's approval under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act") (12 U.S.C. § 1842) to retain 16.8 percent of the voting shares of The Yasuda Trust and Banking Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan ("Yasuda"), and thereby to retain an interest in the wholly owned U.S. bank subsidiary of Yasuda, Yasuda Bank and Trust Company (U.S.A.), New York, New York ("Yasuda Bank"). Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (63 Federal Register 16,538 and 17,873 (1998)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the proposal and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 3 of the BHC Act. Fuji, with total consolidated assets of approximately $453 billion, is the third largest banking organization in Japan. In the United States, Fuji owns The Fuji Bank and Trust Company, New York, New York. Fuji also operates a branch office in New York, New York; and Chicago, Illinois; an agency office in Los Angeles and San Francisco, California; Atlanta, Georgia; and Houston, Texas; and a representative office in New York, New York; Miami, Florida; and Washington, D.C. In addition, Fuji engages through its nonbanking subsidiaries in a number of activities in the United States that are permissible under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Yasuda, with total consolidated assets of approximately $69 billion, is the 16th largest banking organization in Japan. In the United States, Yasuda operates Yasuda Bank, which has assets of approximately $201 million, and a branch office in New York, New York, which has assets of approximately $1.7 billion. Competitive Considerations The BHC Act provides that the Board may not approve a proposal submitted under section 3 of the BHC Act if the proposal would result in a monopoly or if the effect of the proposal may be substantially to lessen competition in any relevant banking market, unless the Board finds that the anticompetitive effects of the transaction are clearly outweighed in the public interest by the probable effect of the transaction in meeting the convenience and needs of the community to be served. Fuji and Yasuda compete directly in the Metropolitan New York-New Jersey banking market. Fuji controls deposits of approximately $160 million, representing less than 1 percent of the total deposits in depository institutions in the market. Yasuda controls deposits of approximately $42 million, representing less than 1 percent of the total deposits in depository institutions in the market. If Fuji and Yasuda are considered as a combined entity, the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index ("HHI") for the banking market would remain unchanged at 796. The banking market would remain unconcentrated and numerous competitors would remain in the market. Thus, any potential elimination of competition between the two entities is not expected substantially to lessen competition in the Metropolitan New York-New Jersey banking market or in any other relevant banking market. Financial, Managerial, and Other Supervisory Considerations Under section 3 of the BHC Act, the Board may not approve an application involving a foreign bank unless the bank is "subject to comprehensive supervision or regulation on a consolidated basis by the appropriate authorities in the bank's home country." The Board previously has determined in applications under the BHC Act that certain Japanese banks were subject to comprehensive supervision on a consolidated basis by their home country authorities. The Board has determined that Fuji is supervised on substantially the same terms and conditions as those other Japanese banks. In addition, Japanese banking authorities recently have taken steps intended to enhance the supervision of Japanese banks, including Fuji. These measures are part of an ongoing effort to strengthen the Japanese bank supervisory framework. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that Fuji is subject to comprehensive supervision and regulation on a consolidated basis by its home country supervisor. The BHC Act also requires the Board to determine that the foreign bank has provided adequate assurances that it will make available to the Board such information on its operations and activities and those of its affiliates that the Board deems appropriate to determine and enforce compliance with the BHC Act and the International Banking Act ("IBA") (12 U.S.C. § 3101 et seq. ). The Board has reviewed restrictions on disclosure in jurisdictions where Fuji has material operations and has communicated with relevant authorities concerning access to information. Fuji has committed that, to the extent not prohibited by applicable law, it will make available to the Board such information on the operations of Fuji and any of its affiliates that the Board deems necessary to determine and enforce compliance with the BHC Act, the IBA, and other applicable federal law. Fuji also has committed to cooperate with the Board to obtain any waivers or exemptions that may be necessary to enable Fuji to make any such information available to the Board. In light of these commitments and other facts of record, the Board has concluded that Fuji has provided adequate assurances of access to any appropriate information that the Board may request. For these reasons, and based on all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that the supervisory factors it is required to consider under section 3(c) of the BHC Act are consistent with approval. The Board also has carefully considered the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of Fuji, Yasuda, and their respective subsidiaries, and the effect the proposal would have on these factors in light of all the facts of record. Fuji has submitted information indicating that the proposal, which is incidental to a corporate restructuring in Japan, would not affect the existing U.S. operations of Fuji, and would require no funding or other support from the U.S. operations of Fuji. In addition, the Board has reviewed supervisory information from the home country authorities responsible for supervising Fuji and Yasuda concerning the proposal and the condition of the parties, confidential financial information from Fuji and Yasuda Bank, and reports of examination from the appropriate federal and state supervisors of the affected organizations assessing the financial and managerial resources of the organizations. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the organizations are consistent with approval. Factors related to the convenience and needs of the community to be served that the Board is required to consider also are consistent with approval, as are the other supervisory factors that the Board must consider under section 3 of the BHC Act. Conclusion Based on the foregoing and all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the application should be, and hereby is, approved. The Board's approval is expressly conditioned on compliance with all the commitments made by Fuji in connection with the application. The commitments and conditions relied on by the Board in reaching this decision are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its finding and decision, and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. By order of the Board of Governors, effective June 8, 1998. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Footnotes Asset data are as of March 31, 1997, and are based on exchange rates then applicable. Ranking data are as of December 31, 1996. Asset data are as of March 31, 1998. 12 U.S.C. § 1842(c)(1)(B). The Metropolitan New York-New Jersey banking market includes New York City; Nassau, Orange, Putnam, Rockland, Suffolk, Sullivan, and Westchester Counties in New York; Bergen, Essex, Hudson, Hunterdon, Middlesex, Monmouth, Morris, Ocean, Passaic, Somerset, Sussex, Union, Warren, and a portion of Mercer Counties in New Jersey; Pike County in Pennsylvania; and portions of Fairfield and Litchfield Counties in Connecticut. In this context, depository institutions include commercial banks, savings banks, and savings institutions. Market share data are as of June 30, 1996, and are based on calculations in which the deposits of thrift institutions are included at 50 percent. The Board previously has indicated that thrift institutions have become, or have the potential to become, significant competitors of commercial banks. See WM Bancorp, 76 Federal Reserve Bulletin 788 (1990); National City Corporation, 70 Federal Reserve Bulletin 743 (1984). Thus, the Board has regularly included thrift deposits in the calculation of market share on a 50-percent weighted basis. See, e.g., First Hawaiian, Inc., 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 52 (1991). Under the revised Department of Justice Merger Guidelines, 49 Federal Register 26,823) (1984), a market in which the post-merger HHI is less than 1000 is considered to be unconcentrated. The Department of Justice has informed the Board that a bank merger or acquisition generally will not be challenged (in the absence of other factors indicating anticompetitive effects) unless the post-merger HHI is at least 1800 and the merger increases the HHI by more than 200 points. The Department of Justice has stated that the higher than normal threshold for an increase in HHI when screening bank mergers and acquisitions for anticompetitive effects implicitly recognizes the competitive effects of limited-purpose and other nondepository financial entities. 12 U.S.C. § 1842(c)(3)(B). As provided in Regulation Y, the Board determines whether a foreign bank is subject to consolidated home country supervision under the standards set forth in Regulation K. See 12 CFR 225.13(a)(4). Regulation K provides that a foreign bank may be considered subject to consolidated supervision if the Board determines that the bank is supervised or regulated in such a manner that its home country supervisor receives sufficient information on the worldwide operations of the foreign bank, including the relationship of the bank and it affiliates, to assess the foreign bank's overall financial condition and compliance with law and regulation. See 12 CFR 211.24(c)(1)(ii). See The Mitsubishi Bank, Limited, 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 436 (1996). See also The Bank of Tokyo, Ltd., 81 Federal Reserve Bulletin 279 (1995). Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan and Governors Kelley, Meyer, Ferguson, and Gramlich. Absent and not voting: Vice Chair Rivlin and Governor Phillips.
Remarks by Governor Laurence H. Meyer At the Bank Administration Institute, Finance and Accounting Management Conference, Washington, D.C. June 9, 1998 Issues and Trends in Bank Regulatory Policy and Financial Modernization Legislation It is a pleasure to be here today, and I thank the Bank Administration Institute for inviting me to be a part of your discussions. When people think of the Federal Reserve, I am pretty sure that most Americans think of monetary policy, interest rates, international finance, and the Fed's macroeconomic responsibilities in all of these areas. And, of course, macroeconomics lies at the core of what any central bank does. However, as everyone at this conference appreciates, another major function of the Federal Reserve is the supervision and regulation of banks and bank holding companies. I would like to use my time this afternoon to discuss some key aspects of this side of the Fed's activities. I will begin by outlining, very briefly, some of the key trends affecting the banking and financial sector. I will then focus on what I see as the most important challenges that these trends pose for bank supervisors, and suggest some directions that I believe we should consider when thinking about how bank supervision should evolve over time. Lastly, I will discuss current legislative efforts to modernize our banking system. Key Trends Challenging Bank Supervisors Surely the most profound force transforming the financial, and for that matter other sectors of our economy, is the rapid growth of computer and telecommunications technology. In finance, a critical and complementary force is the development of intellectual "technologies" that enable financial engineers to separate risk into its various components, and price each component in an economically rational way. Implementation of financial engineering strategies typically requires massive amounts of cheap data processing; and the cheap data processing would not be useful without the formulas required to compute prices. The combination of the two has led to a virtual explosion in the number and types of financial instruments. Such products have lowered the cost and broadened the scope of financial services, making it possible for borrowers and lenders to transact directly with each other, for a wide range of financial products to be tailored for very specific purposes, and for financial risk to be managed in ever more sophisticated ways. Financial innovation has been the driving force behind a second major trend in banking -- the blurring of distinctions among what were, traditionally, very distinct forms of financial firms. One of the first such innovations, with which we are all now very familiar, was money market mutual funds. In the 1980s, banks began to challenge whether the Glass-Steagall Act prohibited combinations of commercial and investment banking. Today, both the regulators and the courts agree that Glass-Steagall does not imply a total prohibition. More recently, traditional separations of banking and insurance sales have also begun to fall, with support from the supervisors and the courts. A major result of the continued blurring of distinctions among commercial banking, investment banking, and insurance is a tremendous increase in competition for many financial services. Greatly intensified competition has also led to increasing pressure for revisions to many of the banking laws and regulations that, despite some successful efforts at relaxation or repeal, continue to exert outdated and costly restraints on the banking and financial system. Indeed, despite its often frustratingly slow pace, there seems little doubt that deregulation has been a major force for change in the banking and financial services industries. Two decades ago we still had Regulation Q, the Glass-Steagall Act was widely viewed as requiring a virtual prohibition of combinations of commercial and investment banking, and interstate banking and branching, let alone combinations of banking and insurance, were barely fantasies even at the state level. The fourth major force transforming the banking landscape is the globalization not only of banking and financial markets, but also of the real economy. The interactions of developments in both the financial and real economies have expanded cross-border asset holdings, trading, and credit flows. In response, financial intermediaries, including banks and securities firms, have increased their cross-border operations. Once again, a critical result of this rapid evolution has been a substantial increase in competition both at home and abroad. The final significant trend I will highlight is the on-going consolidation of the U.S. banking industry. I think that it is fair to say that the American banking system is currently in the midst of the most significant consolidation in its history. In 1980 there were about 14,400 banks in the U.S. organized into about 12,300 banking organizations. By the end of 1997, the number of banks had fallen to just under 9,100, and the number of banking organizations to not quite 7,200. This 42 percent decline in the number of banking organizations was due in part, but only in part, to the large number of bank failures in the late 1980s and early 1990s. A more important factor was mergers among healthy banks. Since the early 1980s, it has not been unusual to see 400 or more mergers among healthy banks each year. While mergers have occurred, and continue to occur, among banks of all sizes, I would emphasize three aspects of the current bank merger movement. First is the high incidence of "megamergers," or mergers among very large banking organizations. Several mergers of the last few years have been either the largest at the time, or among the largest bank mergers in U.S. history. And, of course, that trend continues. Second, despite all of the merger activity, a large number of medium to small banks remain in the United States. Moreover, by most measures of performance these small banks are more than a match for their larger brethren for many bank products and services. When a megamerger is announced it is not uncommon to read in the press how small banks in the affected markets are looking to take advantage of the business opportunities created thereby. Research seems to support their optimism. Lastly, while the overall number of banking organizations has fallen since 1980, this does not mean that new, or de novo, entry has not occurred. From 1980 through 1997 some 3,600 new banks were formed in the United States. In large part because of the continued viability of smaller banks, while the national concentration of banking assets has increased substantially since 1980, measures of local market banking concentration have remained essentially unchanged. Indeed, the stability of local market concentration in the face of such a large consolidation of the banking industry is remarkable, and bodes well for the competitive vitality of local banking markets. While the reasons for bank mergers are varied, the bottom line is that the United States is well on its way to developing a truly national banking structure for the first time in its history. We are not quite there yet, but I do not think it will take too many more years. Future Directions in Bank Supervision What do all of these changes mean for how we supervise and regulate banks? Analysis of Competition Clearly, as the banking industry consolidates we need to maintain competitive markets. Competitive markets are our best assurance that consumers receive the highest quality products at the lowest possible prices. As I discussed earlier, there are many reasons to believe that in recent years competition has increased greatly in markets for a large number of financial products and services. This is true for many products purchased in local, regional and national markets. However, in some cases we still observe potential competitive problems with a proposed bank merger. Fortunately, the antitrust laws, as written into the banking statutes, give us the means to maintain competition in such situations. These laws require that the Board approve only those mergers that are not expected to substantially harm competition. Over the past year or so, quite a few applicants have pushed very hard at the Board's frontier for approving merger applications. In response, the Board has occasionally felt compelled to remind applicants, especially those proposing a merger that would affect a large number of local markets, that substantial changes in market concentrations will receive careful review. Moreover, when mergers would exceed the screening guidelines, "mitigating" factors must be present. By mitigating factors I mean conditions that tend to create a more competitive market than is suggested by market concentration alone. The greater the deviation from the screening guidelines, the more powerful and convincing the mitigating factors must be. I have personally been particularly concerned with cases where a large number of local markets are affected. In such cases, even if the adverse effect is fairly small in each of several local markets, it seems to me that the cumulative, or total, adverse effect might be significant. When a large number of markets are affected adversely, I believe that we should be especially careful to assure ourselves that there are substantial mitigating factors. In addition, when a merger would cause a large change in concentration in a market that is, or becomes, highly concentrated, I think we need to give special attention to the impact on competition. Assessing Safety and Soundness Technological change, financial innovation, the acquisition of new powers by banking organizations, the increasing geographic scope of banks, and the globalization of financial markets all challenge our ability to examine and assess the safety and soundness of individual banking firms. One way that examiners are adapting to this changed world is to focus much of their attention on the information and risk management systems of banks. The key question they ask is: How effectively are these systems measuring and controlling an institution's rapidly changing risk profile? The emphasis on risk management is most critical at our largest, most sophisticated, and most internationally active banks. Many of these banks use advanced economic and statistical models to evaluate their market and credit risks. These models are used for a variety of purposes, including allocating capital on a risk adjusted basis and pricing loans and credit guarantees. The development by some banks of increasingly accurate models for measuring, managing, and pricing risk has called into question the continuing usefulness of one of the foundations of bank supervision -- the so-called risk-based capital standards, or the Basle Accord. The Basle Accord capital standards were adopted in 1988 by most of the world's industrialized nations in an effort to encourage stronger capital at riskier banks, to include off-balance sheet exposures in the assessment of capital adequacy, and to establish more consistent capital standards across nations. The Accord was a major advance in 1988, and has proved to be very useful since then. But in recent years calls for reform have begun to grow. I will outline briefly one of the key problems we are currently facing with the Basle Accord. The Basle Accord capital standards divide bank on- and off-balance-sheet assets into four risk buckets, and then apply a different capital weight to each bucket. These weights increase roughly with the riskiness of the assets in a given bucket. However, the relationship is rough. Perhaps most troublesome, the same risk weight is applied to all loans. Thus, for example, a loan to a very risky "junk bond" company gets the same weight as a loan to a "triple A" rated firm. This aspect of the Accord clearly gives banks an incentive to find ways to avoid the regulatory capital standard for loans that their internal models say need less capital than is required by the Basle Accord. Conversely, banks should want to keep loans which their models say require more capital than does the Basle standard. And, guess what, banks have been doing just that. This so-called "regulatory arbitrage" may not be all bad, but it surely causes some serious problems as well. For one thing, it makes reported capital ratios--a key measure of bank soundness used by supervisors and investors--less meaningful for government supervisors and private analysts. Finding ways around this problem is a high priority at the Federal Reserve. The arbitraging of regulatory capital requirements is but one of a host of similar conflicts between banks and bank supervisory rules and regulations. Indeed, one can view much of the long history of bank supervision and regulation as something of a contest between supervisors who want to deter excessive risk taking and banks who seek ways around sometimes inefficient, or just plain uneconomic, regulations. This long history leads me to seek supervisory strategies that are, in the economist's jargon, incentive compatible. By incentive compatible, I mean supervisory policies and procedures that give banks strong internal incentives to manage their risks prudently and minimize the exploitation of moral hazard. Put differently, we need to design strategies that encourage banks, in their own self-interest, to work with us, not against us. When designing supervisory policy, we should always remember that the first line of defense against excessive risk-taking by banks is the market itself. Market discipline can be, and often is, highly effective at deterring excessive risk. Indeed, a primary goal of many of the bank regulatory reforms implemented in the wake of the banking and thrift crises of the 1980s and early 1990s was either to increase market discipline or to make supervisors behave more like the market would behave. Market discipline was increased, for example, by raising capital standards and by mandating greater public disclosure by a bank of its financial condition. Prompt corrective action rules that require supervisors to impose increasingly severe penalties on a bank as its financial condition deteriorates, and the adoption of risk-based deposit insurance premiums are examples of encouraging supervisors to act like the market. The reforms of the early 1990s were a good start. But I believe that there may well be more that we can do. Such comments may sound out of place today. Times are good, and almost everyone seems quite satisfied with the current deposit insurance system. But good times may be precisely when we should develop ideas for an even more effective system. The crucible of a crisis is not always the best time to think up reforms -- witness the error we made in passing the Glass-Steagall Act, an error we have yet to correct after 65 years! Indeed, it is in part for this very reason that the Board continues to urge Congress to pass financial modernization legislation. So, in the spirit of being forward looking, let me attempt to give you the flavor of one idea that seems worth considering. It may be possible to increase market discipline by requiring large, internationally active banks to issue a minimum amount of certain types of subordinated debt to the public. An appealing aspect of this approach is that subordinated debt holders, so long as they are not bank "insiders," face only downside risk, and thus their risk preferences are very close to those of the FDIC. Subordinated debt holders would therefore be expected to impose market discipline on the bank that is quite consistent with what bank supervisors are trying to do, including encouraging banks to disclose more information about their financial condition. Observed risk premiums on subordinated debt could perhaps be used to help the FDIC set more accurate risk-based deposit insurance premiums, and such debt would provide an extra cushion of protection for taxpayers. An additional benefit of having subordinated debt traded on the open market is that price movements would provide a clear signal of the market's evaluation of the bank's financial condition that, even if it were not used to help price deposit insurance, could serve as an early warning aid to supervisors. Subordinated debt is not, however, without its problems. For example, the risk preferences of such creditors are aligned with those of the FDIC only when the bank is clearly solvent. At or near insolvency, subordinated debt holders may be willing to "bet the bank" in order to increase the chances that they will not suffer a loss. The fact that the bank closure decision is still in the supervisor's hands is another complicating factor. In addition, it is unclear just how deep and liquid a market in bank subordinated debt would be, although limiting any requirements to the largest banks would ease this concern. For example, at the end of last year only one-half percent of banks with less than $50 million in assets issued subordinated debt, but 83 percent of banks with total assets of $10 billion or more did so. However, it appears that much of existing bank subordinated debt is held by the bank's parent holding company, not independent third parties. Thus, the question of how deep and liquid a market might evolve remains. For these and other reasons, an operationally feasible program for mandatory subordinated debt would require a considerable amount of careful thought. Still, in my judgment it is thought that might prove very worthwhile. The Need For Financial Modernization Technology and globalization are changing markets all over the world, but perhaps none have been more affected than the financial markets. Yet in the United States much of our legal framework has essentially not changed since the 1930s. The resultant pressure on financial institutions to be able to compete has thus been reflected in the search for loopholes and in efforts by regulatory authorities to find ways within their charter to permit new activities. The process is not only inefficient, but creates new inequities, institutions that may be producing unintended risks, and the misallocation of resources. That is why my colleagues and I are such strong supporters of H.R. 10, The Financial Modernization Act of 1998, which the House passed last month and the Senate Banking Committee will be discussing next week. This bill brings our financial institutions into the 21st century in a framework that minimizes risks and inequities. The task it sets for itself is not easy. Each set of our financial institutions--and their regulators--have special privileges and advantages that they wish to maintain and limits and restraints that they wish to shed. Balancing these realities results in provisions in the bill that no one--including me--can say that they like completely. But the balancing in H.R. 10 is, I think, the best that is possible; indeed, in many respects it is so balanced that most adjustments to address the concerns of one set of institutions would probably eliminate the support of another set of institutions. What is critical, it seems to me, is that the bill not only does a fine balancing job, but it is in the public interest, something that I am sorry to say that all too frequently we lose sight of. Let me share with you the specific reasons why I think this is a bill that deserves support. First and foremost is that the bill would finally let financial institutions get into each other's businesses, and thus widen the scope and range over which institutions can compete for the public's business. Mind you, this is not a statement that says financial supermarkets and/or large institutions will be better or more successful than specialized and/or smaller institutions. But the benefit is that the public, not regulators, will decide which will prosper as competitors all bend their efforts to serve the consumer. That is the bottom line. It's the reason why there should be financial modernization. But the structure that the bill establishes is consistent both with efficient resource allocation and with minimizing risk to the stability of the economy and the taxpayer. Let's take a closer look at that structure. The most critical element is that H.R. 10 would permit banks to conduct in their own subsidiaries (so-called operating subsidiaries or "op subs") only the same activities that they may already conduct in the bank and financial agency activities, which by their nature require minimal funding and create minimal risk. These limitations, it seems to me, are crucial for several reasons. Banks have a lower cost of funds than other financial entities because of the safety net--the name we give the collection of deposit insurance, access to the discount window, and access to the payments system. This subsidy is provided by the government in order to buy systemic stability, but it has a cost: increased risk taking by banks, reduced market discipline, and consequently the need for more onerous bank supervision in order to balance the resultant moral hazard. The last thing we should want is to extend that subsidy over a wider range of activities, which is, I believe, exactly what would happen if bank op subs could engage in wider nonbank financial activities. Not only would that increase the moral hazard--and the need for bank-like supervision--but it would also unbalance the competitive playing field between bank subs and independent firms engaging in the same business, a strange result for legislation whose ultimate purpose is to increase the competition for financial services. The subsidy that is so integral to the op sub would surely induce banks and other financial institutions to organize in a form that would maximize their use of that subsidy. Indeed, stockholders would have every reason to be critical of management that did not avail itself of the opportunity to raise low cost funds. The profits of bank subsidiaries would surely benefit the bank parent since GAAP accounting, economic and legal reality, and common sense all call for consolidation. But losses, too, would consolidate into the bank parent and such losses would fall directly on the safety net, and ultimately the taxpayer. These safety and soundness and safety net risks ultimately would bring with them the need to regulate op subs the way banks are regulated, creating inefficiencies and reductions in innovation, let alone conflicts with functional regulators. The legislation I support would require that organizations that conduct both banking and other financial businesses organize in a holding company form where the bank and the other activities are both subs of the holding company. Profits and losses of the business lines accrue to the holding company and thus do not directly benefit nor endanger the bank, the safety net, or the taxpayer. The safety net subsidy is not directly available to the holding company affiliates and competition is thus more balanced. Moreover, traditional regulators like the SEC and the state insurance commissioners still regulate the entities engaged in nonbank activities as if they were independent firms. Functional regulation is desirable not only for competitive equity, but is a political necessity and a practical reality in the process of balancing that is required to move financial regulation. In principle, functional regulation could also be applied to op subs, but the safety net, I submit, would soon create regulatory conflict with that structure. Importantly, the bill passed by the House would prohibit commercial affiliations with banks. There is no doubt that it is becoming increasingly difficult to draw a bright line that separates financial services from nonfinancial businesses; it will only become more difficult to do so. But, the truth is that we are not sure enough of the implications of combining banking and commerce--potential conflicts of interest, concentration of power, and safety net and stability concerns--to move forward in this area. Better, I think, to digest financial reform before moving in an area that will be very difficult to reverse. The bill, by the way, would shut down new unitary thrifts that can affiliate with non-financial firms, but grandfathers the rights of the over 700 existing unitary thrift holding companies to acquire or be acquired by commercial enterprises. I would hope the Senate would instead freeze such activities in place until the banking and commerce issue is addressed directly; the fact that the House did not simply reinforces my point on how hard it is to reverse such powers once gained. Finally, I support H.R. 10 because the holding company framework would keep the Federal Reserve--the central bank of the United States--as the umbrella supervisor. I believe that the Fed has an important role to play in banking supervision in order to carry out its responsibilities for monetary policy, economic stabilization, and crisis management. I cannot grasp how we could possibly understand what is happening in banking markets, what innovations are occurring and their implications, and the nature and quality of the risk exposures and controls so critical for crisis management and policy formulation without the hands-on practical exposure that comes from supervision. An umbrella supervisor is needed for complex organizations in order to assure that the entire organization and its policies and controls are well managed and consistent with financial stability. At least for the large organizations, I believe that supervisor should be the Federal Reserve so that we can play our role as a central bank and international crisis manager. Many people are surprised to hear that the Fed directly supervises only 5 of the largest 25 banks --the state members. Our window into banking is through our umbrella supervision of bank holding companies. Unfortunately, but understandably, the view that the Fed wants new activities to be in a bank holding company is often construed as a "turf" issue. I believe that there are two separable arguments. I would prefer the holding company--for reasons I have discussed--even if the Fed were not the umbrella supervisor. But I also think that we have to be involved in bank supervision--again for the reasons I have discussed. Who should be involved in what activities, and who should supervise the resultant organization and its component parts are genuine and important policy issues that should be debated and decided by the Congress. To simply dismiss them as turf issues misses the point, I think, and chokes off that debate. Conclusion In conclusion, I hope that my remarks have helped you to better understand the forces affecting our banking and financial system. Equally important, I hope that I have given you a good feel for the challenges these forces have created for bank supervision, how we are meeting these challenges today, and how we may deal with them in the future. Even more importantly, I hope that I have convinced you to support enthusiastically H.R. 10! In all seriousness, it really is time that we modernized our financial system and got on with the business of serving consumers and maintaining a healthy, stable, and competitive banking system.
Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan An update on economic conditions in the United States Before the Joint Economic Committee, U.S. Congress June 10, 1998 Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee, I am pleased to have the opportunity to present an update on economic conditions in the United States. Such an assessment cannot be made in isolation but rather depends critically on what is happening in the rest of the world and how those developments affect the performance of the American economy. In my previous appearance before this Committee last October, my remarks focused mainly on the turbulence that was then evident in world financial markets and, in particular, on the problems that had emerged in a number of Asian economies. The tentative assessment offered then was that the economies of Asia were in for some trying times but that the situation did not seem likely to threaten the expansion of this country's economy. That assessment, I believe, still is essentially correct, although uncertainties about the degree of restraint that will be coming from abroad remain substantial. Earlier this year, the situations in most of the Asian countries seemed to be stabilizing in some respects, but, as the events of the past few weeks have demonstrated, the restoration of normally functioning economies will not necessarily go smoothly. In some cases, the adjustments that are needed to improve external balances and to correct existing misallocations of resources have been accompanied by sharp increases in inflation, rising unemployment, abrupt cutbacks in living standards, and increases in uncertainty and insecurity. The heightened social and political pressures that can develop in such circumstances not only introduce added complications into economic policymaking but also make it even more difficult to foresee how the processes of adjustment will play out across the afflicted economies. That the American economy would be affected to some degree by spillover from the problems in Asia was never in doubt, even though the timing and magnitude of the impact have been difficult to predict with much confidence. Many months ago, businesses in this country began anticipating a worsening of our trade balance with the Asian countries, and incoming economic data have since confirmed those expectations. Meanwhile, other influences on trade--such as the strength of demand growth in the United States and a dollar that has been strong against a wide array of currencies--have persisted. In total, U.S. exports of goods and services turned down in real terms in the first quarter of 1998, the first such decline in four years, and real imports of goods and services continued to rise very rapidly. The combined effect of these changes exerted a drag of 2-1/2 percentage points on the annual growth rate of real GDP last quarter. Weaknesses in Asia appear to account for approximately one-half of that deterioration. Not only have export volumes been affected, but producers in both industry and agriculture also are having to adjust to the lower product prices that have come with slower economic growth abroad and the increase in the competitiveness of foreign producers induced largely by depreciations of their currencies. But even with substantial drag from the external sector, the U.S. economy has continued to expand at a robust pace. In the first quarter, real GDP grew even faster than it had in 1997. Employment has continued to increase rapidly this year, and the unemployment rate has fallen further, reaching its lowest level since 1970. Incomes have continued to climb, and gains in household and business expenditures have been exceptionally strong. Although the data on hours worked suggest that growth of the economy has likely slowed this quarter from the first quarter's torrid pace, the degree of slowdown remains in question. Evidence to date of a moderation in underlying domestic spending still is sparse. The strength of domestic spending has been fueled, in part, by conditions in financial markets. Although real short-term interest rates have been rising, equity prices have moved still higher, credit has been readily available at slender margins over Treasury interest rates, and nominal long-term interest rates have remained near the lowest levels of recent decades. Rapid growth of money this year is a further indication that financial conditions are accommodating strong domestic spending, although we still are uncertain how reliable that relationship will prove to be over time. In short, our economy is still enjoying a virtuous cycle, in which, in the context of subdued inflation and generally supportive credit conditions, rising equity values are providing impetus for spending and, in turn, the expansion of output, employment, and productivity-enhancing capital investment. The hopes for accelerated productivity growth have been bolstering expectations of future corporate earnings and thereby fueling still further increases in equity values. The essential precondition for the emergence, and persistence, of this virtuous cycle is arguably the decline in the rate of inflation to near price stability. Continued low product price inflation and expectations that it will persist have brought increasing stability to financial markets and fostered perceptions that the degree of risk in the financial outlook has been moving ever lower. These perceptions, in turn, have reduced the extra compensation that investors require for making loans to, or taking ownership positions in, private firms. To a considerable extent, investors seem to be expecting that low inflation and stronger productivity growth will allow the extraordinary growth of profits to be extended into the distant future. Indeed, expectations of per share earnings growth over the longer term have been undergoing continuous upward revision by security analysts since 1994. These rising expectations have, in turn, driven stock prices sharply higher and credit spreads lower, perhaps to levels that will be difficult to sustain unless economic conditions remain exceptionally favorable--more so than might be anticipated from historical relationships. In any event, primarily because of the rise in stock prices, about $12 trillion has been added to the value of household assets since the end of 1994. Probably only a few percent of these largely unrealized capital gains have been transformed into the purchase of goods and services in consumer markets. But that increment to spending, combined with the sharp increase in equipment investment, which has stemmed from the low cost of both equity and debt relative to expected profits on capital, has propelled the economy forward. The current economic performance, with its combination of strong growth and low inflation, is as impressive as any I have witnessed in my near half-century of daily observation of the American economy. The consequences for the American worker have been dramatic and, for the most part, highly favorable. A great many chronically underemployed people have been given the opportunity to work, and many others have been able to upgrade their skills as a result of work experience, extensive increases in on-the-job training, or increased enrollment in technical programs. Welfare recipients appear to have been absorbed into the work force in significant numbers. Government finances have improved as well. The taxes paid on huge realized capital gains and other incomes related to the stock market, coupled with taxes on markedly higher corporate profits, have joined with restraint on spending to produce a unified federal budget surplus for the first time in nearly three decades. April's budget surplus of $125 billion was the largest monthly surplus on record. Widespread improvement also has been evident in the financial positions of state and local governments. The fact that economic performance strengthened as inflation subsided should not have been surprising, given that risk premiums and economic disincentives to invest in productive capital diminish as product prices become more stable. But the extent to which strong growth and high resource utilization have been joined with low inflation over an extended period is nevertheless extraordinary. Indeed, the broadest measures of price change indicate that the inflation rate moved down further in the first quarter of this year, even as the economy strengthened. Although declining oil prices contributed to this result, pricing leverage in the goods-producing sector more generally was held in check by rising industrial capacity, reduced demand in Asia that, among other things, has led to a softening of commodity prices, and a strong dollar that has contributed to bargain prices on many imports. Some elements in this mix clearly were transitory, and the very recent price data suggest that consumer price inflation has moved up in the second quarter. But, even so, the rate of rise remains quite moderate overall. At this point, at least, the adverse wage-price interactions that played so central a role in pushing inflation higher in many past business expansions--eventually bringing those expansions to an end--do not appear to have gained a significant toe-hold in the current expansion. There are many reasons why the wage-price interactions have been so well-contained in this expansion. For one thing, increases in hourly compensation have been slower to pick up than in most other recent expansions, although, to be sure, wages have started to accelerate in the past couple of years as the labor market has become tighter and tighter. In the first few years of the expansion, the subdued rate of rise in hourly compensation seemed to be, in part, a reflection of greater concerns among workers about job security. We now seem to have moved beyond that period of especially acute concern, though the flux of technology may still leave many workers with fears of job skill obsolescence and a willingness to trade wage gains for job security. This may explain why, despite the recent acceleration of wages, the resulting level of compensation has fallen short of what the experience of previous expansions would have led us to anticipate given the current degree of labor market tightness. In the past couple of years, of course, workers have not had to press especially hard for nominal pay gains to realize sizable increases in their real wages. In contrast to the pattern that developed in several previous business expansions, when workers required substantial increases in pay just to cover increases in the cost of living, consumer prices have been generally well-behaved in the current expansion. Changes this past year in prices of both goods and services have been among the smallest of recent decades. In addition, the rate of rise in the cost of benefits that employers provide to workers has been remarkably subdued over the past few years, although a gradual upward tilt has become evident of late. A variety of factors--including the strength of the economy and rising equity values, which have reduced the need for payments into unemployment trust funds and pension plans, and the restructuring of the health care sector--have been working to keep benefit costs in check in this expansion. But, in the medical area at least, the most recent developments suggest that the favorable trend may have run its course. The slowing of price increases for medical services seems to have come to a halt, at least for a time, and, with the cost-saving shift to managed care having been largely completed, the potential for businesses to achieve further savings in that regard appears to be rather limited at this point. There have been a few striking instances this past year of employers boosting outlays for health benefits by substantial amounts. A couple of years ago--almost at the same time that increases in total hourly compensation began trending up in nominal terms--evidence of a long-awaited pickup in the growth of labor productivity began to show through more strongly in the data; and this accelerated increase in output per hour has enabled firms to meet workers' real wage demands while holding the line on price increases. Gains in productivity usually vary with the strength of the economy, and the favorable results that we have observed during the past two years or so, when the economy has been growing more rapidly, surely overstate the degree of pickup that can be sustained. But evidence continues to mount that the trend has picked up, even if the extent of that improvement is as yet unclear. Signs of a major technological transformation of the economy are all around us, and the benefits are evident not only in high-tech industries but also in production processes that have long been part of our industrial economy. Notwithstanding a reasonably optimistic interpretation of the recent productivity numbers, it would not be prudent to assume that rising productivity, by itself, can ensure a non-inflationary future. Certainly wage increases, per se, are not inflationary. To be avoided are those that exceed productivity growth, thereby creating pressure for inflationary price increases that can eventually undermine economic growth and employment. Because the level of productivity is tied to an important degree to the physical stock of capital, which turns over only gradually, increases in the trend growth of productivity probably also occur rather gradually. By contrast, the potential for abrupt acceleration of nominal hourly compensation is surely greater. Still, a strong signal of inflation pressures building because of compensation increases markedly in excess of productivity gains has not yet clearly emerged in this expansion. Among nonfinancial corporations, our most reliable source of consolidated costs, trends in costs seem to have accelerated from their lows, but the rates of increase in both unit labor costs and total unit costs are still quite low. Nonetheless, as I have noted in previous appearances before Congress, I remain concerned that economic growth will run into constraints as the reservoir of unemployed people available to work is drawn down. The annual increase in the working-age population (from 16 to 64 years of age), including immigrants, has been approximately 1 percent a year in recent years. Yet employment, measured by the count of persons who are working rather than by the count of jobs, has been rising 2 percent a year since 1995 despite the acceleration in the growth of output per hour. The gap between employment growth and population growth, amounting to about 1.2 million a year on average, has been made up, in part, by a decline in the number of individuals who are counted as unemployed--those persons who are actively seeking work--of approximately 700,000 a year, on average, since the end of 1995. The remainder of the gap has reflected a rise in labor force participation that can be traced to a decline of more than 500,000 a year in the number of individuals (age 16 to 64) wanting a job but not actively seeking one. Presumably, many of the persons who once were in this group have more recently become active and successful job-seekers as the economy has strengthened, thereby preventing a still sharper drop in the official unemployment rate. In May, the number of persons aged 16 to 64 who wanted to work but who did not have jobs was 9.7 million on a seasonally adjusted basis, slightly more than 5-1/2 percent of the working-age population. This percentage is a record low for the series, which first became available in 1970. The gap between the growth in employment and that of the working-age population will inevitably close. What is crucial to sustaining this unprecedented period of prosperity is whether that closing occurs in a disruptive or gradual, balanced manner. The effects of the crisis in Asia will almost certainly damp net exports further, potentially moderating the growth of domestic production and hence employment. The strength of domestic spending that has been been bolstering output growth and the demand for labor also could ebb if recent indications of a narrowing in domestic profit margins were to prove to be the forerunner of a reassessment of the expected rates of return on plant and equipment. Reduced prospects for the return to capital would not only affect investment directly but could also affect consumption as stock prices adjusted to a less optimistic view of earnings prospects. Finally, the clearly unsustainable rise of inventories that has been evident in recent quarters will be slowing at some point, perhaps abruptly. An easing of the demand for labor would be an expected consequence of a slowdown in either final sales or inventory accumulation. Of course, the demand for labor that is consistent with a particular rate of output growth also could be lowered if productivity were to continue to accelerate. And, on the supply side of the labor market, faster growth of the labor force could emerge as the result of delayed retirements or increased immigration. If developments such as these do not bring labor demand into line with its sustainable supply, tighter economic policy may be necessary to help guard against a buildup of pressures that could derail the current prosperity. Fortunately, fiscal policy has been moving toward restraint to some degree, although recent budgetary discussions do not appear to be focused on extending that tendency. Monetary policy might need to tighten if demand were to continue to exhibit few signs of abating noticeably, thereby threatening to place still further strains on our labor markets. We at the Federal Reserve, recognizing the powerful forces of productivity growth and global restraint on inflation, have not perceived to date the need to tighten policy in response to strong demand, beyond what has occurred through falling inflation's upward pressure on the real federal funds rate and the modest increase in the nominal rate that we initiated in March of 1997. But, we are monitoring the evolving forces very closely to determine whether the recent acceleration of costs, albeit moderate, is likely to prove transitory or the start of a more worrisome pattern that may well require a response. In summary, Mr. Chairman, our economy has remained strong this year despite evidence of substantial drag from Asia, and, at the same time, inflation has remained low. As I have indicated, this set of circumstances is not what historical relationships would have led us to expect at this point in the business expansion, and while it is possible that we have, in a sense, moved "beyond history," we also have to be alert to the possibility that less favorable historical relationships will eventually reassert themselves. That is why we are remaining watchful for signs of potential inflationary imbalances, even as the economy continues to perform more impressively than it has in a very long time.
Statement Submitted by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Application of the Commodity Exchange Act to transactions in over-the-counter derivatives Before the Subcommittee on Risk Management and Specialty Crops of the Committee on Agriculture, U.S. House of Representatives June 10, 1998 The Board appreciates the opportunity to submit its views on issues relating to the potential application of the Commodity Exchange Act (CEA) to over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives transactions. The Board has been participating actively in discussions of these issues for the last ten years. As the Subcommittee is aware, the markets for OTC derivatives have grown enormously during this period and are now large and globally significant. For this reason, the legal and regulatory framework for these markets is unquestionably important. The Board is deeply concerned about any legal or regulatory development that calls into question the enforceability of a significant volume of such transactions. A particular concern for many years has been the potential application of the CEA to OTC derivatives. Because the CEA generally requires instruments covered by the Act to be traded on an exchange, if OTC derivatives were covered, they might be illegal and unenforceable. The Futures Trading Practices Act (FTPA) of 1992 tried to address this concern by authorizing the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) to exempt OTC derivatives from most provisions of the CEA, to the extent that the Act might apply. Nonetheless, concerns have persisted that the CEA could jeopardize the enforceability of certain OTC derivatives transactions. These concerns have been heightened by the CFTC's recent concept release on regulation of OTC derivatives. In particular, the underlying premise of the release is that such transactions are subject to the CEA, unless clearly and explicitly excluded or exempted. This marks an important departure from precedent. Neither Congress nor the CFTC has to date made a determination that OTC derivatives are subject to the CEA. Indeed, in early 1993, when the Commission used the FTPA authority to exempt many OTC transactions from most provisions of the CEA, it stated explicitly that its action should not be construed as reflecting any determination that the instruments covered by the exemption were subject to the Act. The reason the Board has been keenly interested in these issues is because of the potential consequences if significant volumes of OTC derivatives were determined to be illegal and unenforceable under the CEA. In those circumstances, the potential losses to counterparties, including those large U.S. banks that are leading derivatives dealers, could be so large as to pose a threat to the financial condition of the counterparties themselves and to provide a significant shock to the financial system as a whole. The Board is also dismayed by the prospect that legal uncertainties or unnecessary regulatory burdens could undermine the position of U.S. institutions in what are intensely competitive global markets. We see no social benefits and clear social costs from pushing OTC derivatives activity offshore. Some may characterize the issues under consideration as nothing more than regulatory turf fights. We believe this misses the point. The issues under consideration really are not so much issues of which government agency should regulate these transactions as they are issues of whether government regulation is necessary and, if so, what types of regulations are appropriate. Moreover, as we have indicated, considerably more is at stake--the safety and soundness of banks, the competitiveness of U.S. markets and institutions, and possibly even the stability of the financial system--than would be the case if the issues were limited solely or even primarily to regulatory turf. Potential Application of the CEA to OTC Derivatives Governor Phillips presented the Board's views on the potential application of the CEA to OTC derivatives in testimony to this Subcommittee in April 1997. Since then the Board's views have not changed. Indeed, subsequent developments have reinforced our earlier position. The Board believes that application of the CEA to institutional transactions in OTC derivatives is unnecessary to achieve public policy objectives with respect to these transactions. The public policy objectives of the CEA are to ensure the integrity of commodity markets, especially to deter market manipulation, and to protect market participants from losses resulting from fraud or the insolvency of contract counterparties. In the case of institutional OTC derivatives transactions, private market discipline appears to achieve these objectives quite effectively and efficiently. Counterparties to privately negotiated transactions have limited their activity to contracts that are very difficult to manipulate. The vast majority of privately negotiated contracts are settled in cash rather than through delivery. Cash settlement typically is based on a rate or price in a highly liquid market with a very large or virtually unlimited deliverable supply, for example, LIBOR or the spot dollar-yen exchange rate. Furthermore, the costs of default or of failing to deliver typically are limited to actual damages. Thus, attempts to corner a market, even if successful, could not induce sellers in privately negotiated transactions to pay significantly higher prices to offset their contracts or to purchase the underlying assets. Most important, prices established in privately negotiated transactions are not used directly or indiscriminately as the basis for pricing other transactions, so any price distortions would not affect other buyers or sellers of the underlying asset. In these respects, privately negotiated contracts have different characteristics than exchange-traded contracts generally, and agricultural futures in particular. Institutional counterparties to privately negotiated contracts also have demonstrated their ability to protect themselves from losses from fraud and counterparty insolvencies. They have insisted that dealers have financial strength sufficient to warrant a credit rating of A or higher. Consequently, dealers are established institutions with substantial assets and significant investments in their reputations. When such dealers have engaged in deceptive practices, institutions that have been victimized have been able to obtain redress by going to court or directly negotiating a settlement with the dealer. The threat of legal damage awards provides dealers with incentives to avoid misconduct. A far more powerful incentive, however, is the fear of loss of the dealer's good reputation, without which it cannot compete effectively, regardless of its financial strength or financial engineering capabilities. Institutional counterparties to privately negotiated transactions also have demonstrated their ability to manage credit risks quite effectively through careful evaluation of counterparties, the setting of internal credit limits, and the judicious use of netting agreements and collateral. Although an October 1997 report by the General Accounting Office suggested that there have been substantial losses to end-users of OTC derivatives, a careful inspection of the report's data reveals that the vast majority of those losses were in investments in mortgage-backed securities and structured notes, for which federal sales practices regulations either were in place or have since been implemented. Indeed, we feel the most revealing data in the GAO's report were the results of its survey of end-users. When asked if they were satisfied with derivatives dealers' sales practices, 85 percent of users of plain vanilla derivatives and 79 percent of users of more complex derivatives indicated satisfaction. The great majority of the remainder responded neutrally rather than indicating that they were dissatisfied. In the Board's view, these results call into question the need for additional government regulation of sales practices of OTC derivatives dealers. In the future, counterparties to OTC derivatives transactions may seek to establish new facilities for centralized clearing of such transactions. Such facilities potentially could make management of counterparty credit risks and liquidity risks even more effective. At the same time, however, clearing facilities often concentrate and mutualize risk. The Board believes that if counterparties were to choose to develop such facilities, some type of government oversight generally may be appropriate to supplement the private self-regulation that the counterparties would provide. However, it is not obvious that regulation of such clearing facilities under the CEA would be the best approach. For example, the Board sees no reason why a clearing agency regulated by the Securities and Exchange Commission should not be allowed to clear OTC derivatives transactions, especially if it already clears the instruments underlying the derivatives. More generally, the Board believes that in many circumstances, regulations of OTC clearing might best be conducted by the SEC, or by one of the federal banking agencies, rather than by the CFTC. Furthermore, if a clearing facility is located abroad and regulated effectively by a home country regulator, U.S. regulators should rely primarily on the home country regulator to address U.S. public policy concerns, rather than attempting to force the clearing facility to conform to the rules of multiple jurisdictions, which may well conflict. In general, even in those cases in which regulation of OTC derivatives may be necessary, the Board sees serious problems with applying the CEA to such transactions. By far the most significant problem is the uncertainty created by the Act's exchange trading requirement. To be sure, there are some specific exclusions of OTC transactions from the Act, and CFTC policy statements and exemptions have been intended to create legal certainty for other OTC transactions. Experience has repeatedly demonstrated, however, that these exclusions and exemptions have not provided legal certainty for OTC derivatives. In every case, the exclusions and exemptions include terms or conditions that are ambiguous or that, even if seemingly unambiguous, have been made the sport of litigators. The CFTC's recent issuance of a concept release on regulation of OTC derivatives has made matters worse by presuming that such transactions are covered unless specifically excluded or exempted and by underscoring that, whatever the terms of various existing policy statements and exemptions, these can be altered or reinterpreted by the Commission. As things stand, some interpret the language of the existing exclusions and exemptions in ways that, if accepted by the courts, could call into question the enforceability of at least some, and perhaps a significant share of, outstanding OTC transactions. In the Board's view, the potential that such interpretations might be accepted places the financial system at risk and therefore is an unacceptable state of affairs. The Board continues to believe that the only way to achieve legal certainty is through a broad statutory exclusion of institutional OTC derivatives transactions, perhaps using the definitions of a "swap agreement" and an "eligible swap participant" that the CFTC currently uses in its exemption. While the legal uncertainty associated with the potential application of the CEA for OTC derivatives is the Board's most serious concern, it is also troubled by the potential implications of a provision of the CEA that provides the CFTC with exclusive jurisdiction over instruments subject to the Act. Recently, the CFTC has claimed that this provision may impose restrictions on the SEC's ability to impose regulations, including capital regulations on the activities of a new class of broker-dealers, on instruments or transactions that the CFTC asserts are subject to the CEA. Banking regulators apply capital requirements to a wide variety of instruments that either are unquestionably subject to the CEA (futures traded on U.S. commodity exchanges) or that the CFTC has asserted are subject to the Act (many OTC derivatives). The Board cannot believe that Congress intended the exclusivity provision of the CEA to preclude other federal regulators from imposing safety and soundness regulations on activities of institutions over which they have authority, even if those activities involve transactions subject to the CEA. Need for Legislation The Board believes that the issues relating to government regulation of OTC derivatives, including the potential application of the CEA to those transactions, deserve further study and ultimately should be revisited by Congress. In the interim, however, Congress should do as much as possible to remove the legal clouds hanging over the OTC derivatives markets. Accordingly, the Board supports the proposal for immediate but temporary legislation that was recently transmitted to Speaker Gingrich by Chairman Greenspan, Secretary Rubin, and Chairman Levitt. The proposal calls for the President's Working Group on Financial Markets to study the markets for OTC derivatives and for hybrid debt instruments (whose potential regulation under the CEA raises broadly similar issues and concerns), to make recommendations for changes to statutes and regulations, and to submit a report to Congress containing its results and recommendations within one year. Such a study by the Working Group undoubtedly would produce a thorough airing of the issues that would be quite useful to Congress in deciding how best to resolve the existing legal and regulatory uncertainties. The proposal would enhance legal certainty in two ways. First, it includes a standstill provision that would temporarily eliminate the risk that changes in CFTC regulations, policies, or interpretations could raise new questions about the enforceability of any OTC derivatives transaction (or hybrid debt instrument) that was exempt from the CEA under the CFTC's existing exemptions as of January 1, 1998. This standstill provision would also temporarily preclude the CFTC from unilaterally imposing a new, comprehensive regulatory regime for the OTC derivatives markets without the explicit consent of Congress and before Congress has had a chance to consider carefully the potential ramifications. Second, the proposal would remove the legal cloud over certain securities-indexed transactions (including equity swaps and equity-indexed hybrid debt instruments). These securities-indexed transactions are subject to additional legal uncertainty because of a provision that prohibits the CFTC from exempting such transactions from the CEA to the extent that they might be considered to be covered. The proposal would, in effect, extend the CFTC's existing exemption for OTC derivatives to cover these securities-indexed transactions, thereby reducing legal uncertainty. Summary In summary, the Board believes that application of the CEA to institutional transactions in OTC derivatives would be inappropriate. It is unnecessary to achieve public policy objectives with respect to such transactions. Moreover, if the CEA is applied to such transactions, as assumed by the CFTC in its recent concept release, it would call into question the legal enforceability of at least some, and perhaps many, of those transactions. This threat undermines the competitiveness of U.S. firms and markets and could place the stability of the financial system at risk. For these reasons, the Board supports the proposal for immediate but temporary legislation that was recently transmitted to Congress.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today requested public comment on an interpretation and two proposed rules exempting certain transactions between an insured depository institution and its affiliates under section 23A of the Federal Reserve Act. Comment is requested by July 21, 1998. The proposed interpretation would expand the ability of an insured depository institution to purchase securities from its section 20 affiliate outside the quantitative limits of section 23A if the assets are actively traded at a price that can be verified from independent and reliable resources. The proposed rules would exempt from the quantitative and collateral requirements of section 23A certain loans made by an insured depository institution to customers who use the proceeds to purchase securities through or from the institution's registered broker-dealer affiliate. The Board's notices are attached. | |
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board is currently sponsoring a statistical study of household finances that will provide policymakers with information on the economic condition of a broad array of American families. The study, which is undertaken every three years as part of a Survey of Consumer Finances, is being conducted for the Board by the National Opinion Research Center (NORC) at the University of Chicago through December of this year. Participants in the study are chosen at random using a scientific sampling procedure in 100 areas across the United States. A representative of NORC contacts each potential participant personally to explain the project and request time for an interview. Names and addresses of each participant are confidential. Participation in the study is completely voluntary and summary results will be published by the Board in the Federal Reserve Bulletin after all data have been assessed and analyzed.
Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan The effects of mergers Before the Committee on the Judiciary, U. S. Senate June 16, 1998 It is my pleasure to appear today to discuss the current merger wave that is affecting a wide range of industries in the American economy. This nation has always viewed concentrations of power, whether in government or the private sector, as a threat to individual political freedoms and the equality of opportunity. In the public sector we seek democratic institutions and a rule of law to tether excessive political power. In the private sector we encourage competition as the perceived most effective way to contain the undue concentration of power. Such power is presumed to thwart individual initiative and to prevent the efficient allocation of resources, which would interfere with the creation of wealth and its wide distribution. The acceleration of megamergers in recent months across a broad range of industries has once again stirred these latent concerns. Waves of mergers are, of course, not new. The current one is the fifth in this country during the past century. Previous waves occurred at the turn of the century, in the late 1920s, the late 1960s, and, most recently, in the early 1980s. The first two almost certainly did produce significant increases in economic concentration in manufacturing as industrialization accelerated with the shift of resources out of agriculture into many new budding industries. The more recent merger waves, however, do not appear to have materially altered industry structure, perhaps owing, in large part, to the increased adaptability of our more mature and competitive industrialized economy. Other countries have also experienced merger waves in recent decades with no perceptible increase in concentration overall. The effects of the present merger wave on concentration have yet to be determined, but there is little reason to expect their influence will differ substantially from the merger wave of the early 1980s, which produced at most a slight increase in manufacturing concentration. To be sure, recent bank mergers have led to a substantial rise in national concentration measures. Nonetheless, they have had little or no evident impact on average concentration measured at the more relevant local market level. This stability of local market concentration owes, in part, to the dynamic nature of American banking, with substantial entry of new firms as well as exit of others. In any event, on balance, while the average number of competitors within local banking markets has not materially changed in recent years, they tend to be the same competitors in an increasing number of markets. Beyond banking, useful studies on the effects of mergers on concentration in other nonmanufacturing segments of our economy are regrettably few. Evidence concerning the effects of mergers on economic efficiency is mixed. While some studies find no evidence of profit and efficiency improvements following mergers, others indicate that, on average, mergers have led to significant productivity gains. In the banking industry, the data suggest that while some mergers have engendered improved operations, others have not. Thus, there are no clear-cut findings that suggest bank mergers uniformly lead to efficiency gains. However, the evidence suggests that there are considerable differences in the cost efficiencies of banks within all bank size classes, implying that there is substantial potential for many banks to improve the efficiency of their operations, perhaps through mergers. Numerous empirical studies, nonetheless, have found a statistically significant positive relationship between market concentration and profits which, upon closer examination, appears to derive from a link between market share and profits. Economists have differed in their interpretations of this finding. While one group argues that high levels of concentration allow firms to exercise market power, resulting in above normal profitability, another group argues that high concentration levels and high profits are both the consequence of greater efficiency. Studies of the relationship between concentration and prices tend to support the market power interpretation, but the magnitudes of the positive, statistically significant coefficients relating prices to concentration measures tend to be fairly small. Some empirical studies also suggest that high concentration and presumed lack of competitive pressure may also be associated with the failure of firms to produce efficiently. More generally, it is concern over the lack of the leveling force of competition in highly concentrated markets that has fostered the fear of bigness. But, unless a relationship between bigness and market concentration can be more firmly rooted in anticompetitive behavior, bigness, per se, does not appear to be an issue for national economic policy. Rather, it appears that bigness should be primarily the concern of shareholders whose returns could be muted by large company inefficiencies, and their customers who may face bureaucratic inflexibility. There is an evident general consensus in this country that competition, in the abstract, is good for the consumer, for economic growth, and standards of living. This notion is buttressed by studies that suggest the more open to competitive forces, the greater the growth of an economy. Much more immediately and directly, the areas of greatest growth in output and productivity in this country--Silicon Valley and its counterparts around the country--are extremely competitive judging from the turnover of business and the evidence of a high degree of what Joseph Schumpeter many decades ago called creative destruction. Many new products emerge with great fanfare and soaring stock prices only to flare out when confronted with a still newer competitive innovation. There are, nonetheless, differences at the margin (some would go further) of what constitutes appropriate competitive behavior and what the role of government in this country should be in enforcing it. At root, what differences exist stem from varying views of precisely how our economy functions and which activities are wealth producing and which are not. The notion of what we mean by competition is not altogether without dispute. Most would agree that producers try to emphasize their new products or the comparative advantages of existing products. Where they sense that improved quality will enhance sales more than costs, they will direct resources to quality improvement and try to differentiate their product, often through brand name advertising. All seek, or at least hope, to achieve market dominance. Where they cannot differentiate their product from others because they choose to produce, for example, electrolytic copper or any other so-called commodity, they will endeavor to improve their market share and spread overhead through innovative improvements in service. Other producers may turn to mergers and acquisitions to increase market share. Acquirers may seek to enhance efficiency, but they may also seek to increase their market power, and hence their profits, through practices that are often considered less than sportsmanlike, to use an analogy to another prominent arena of competition. Where producers cannot achieve a profitable market niche, some, but fortunately few, will seek political protection from markets through subsidies, tariffs, quotas, or outright government franchised monopolies. Through skill, perseverance, luck, or political connections, competitors have always pressed for market dominance. It is free, open markets that act to thwart achievement of such dominance, and in the process direct the competitive drive, which seeks economic survival, towards the improvement of products, greater productivity, and the amassing and distribution of wealth. Adam Smith's invisible hand does apparently work. To be sure, markets do not always work fully to the standards of our abstract notions of perfection, that in turn rest on particular notions of the way human beings do, or should, behave in the market place. There appears to be general agreement among economists that the test of success of economic activity is whether, by directing an economy's scarce resources to their most productive purposes, it makes consumers as well off as is possible. Moreover, it is generally agreed that the chances of achieving these goals are greatest if prices are determined in competitive markets and reflect, to the fullest extent that is feasible, the costs in real resources of producing goods and services. While relatively straightforward to state in theory, how such a standard should be applied in practice is often subject to dispute. The focus of much debate in recent years is just what constitutes a "market failure," or the tendency for market prices not to reflect appropriately all relevant production costs. In addition, what constitutes the interest of consumers in the abstract is, of course, by no means self-evident in a large number of cases. As a result of certain transactions, some consumers will benefit, others will not. Moreover, conditions can differ with respect to whether it is the short- or long-term interest of consumers that is at stake. Any notion of market failure, of course, presupposes a concept of market perfection. In that sense, perhaps the only market that achieves this standard of unequivocal benefit to consumers is the outcome of an auction market with very tight bid-ask spreads. Such markets represent a very small share of bilateral transactions. In one sense, markets generally are always in some state of imperfection in that businesses never fully exploit, perhaps can never fully exploit, all opportunities for profitable, productive, investment. Consumers do not always seek out the lowest prices or the best quality, owing to the costs of searching across sellers. Rationally acting individuals may choose not to exert the additional effort that they perceive will only marginally enhance their state of well-being. Then, of course, people do not always act rationally. In addition, market effectiveness is clearly a function of the degree of market participants' state of knowledge. The critical signals that make markets function--product and asset prices, interest rates, bid-ask spreads, etc.--depend on market participants' perceptions of the state of demand and supply and future prospects, to the extent they are discernible. There is inevitably considerable asymmetry of information among producers and consumers, and buyers and sellers. Moreover, any voluntary transaction comprises not only a good or a service but a representation, explicit or otherwise, of the nature of the product being transferred. Misrepresentation to induce an exchange is theft, in that the transaction was not voluntary. Laws against fraud are demonstrably a necessary fixture of any free market economy. But what information is a seller obligated to convey to a buyer in an exchange? Misrepresenting a lead brick for a gold one is unambiguous. But are producers required to divulge information about potential new products that would make obsolete an offered product and depreciate its value? More generally, how far does protection of intellectual property rights go in protecting what is, or what is not, divulgable to a counterparty to a transaction? Clearly, this dilemma is only one of many such conundrums resulting from the awesome complexity of the operations of free markets. In this case, too heavy a hand of government regulation will surely stifle innovation and wealth creation. Too little will infringe the legal property rights of counterparties. Still more difficult is the relevance of the effects on third parties from the actions of two individuals acting voluntarily, with or without conspiratorial intent, in their mutual interest through exchange. In the most general sense, all bilateral transactions, to a greater or lesser extent, affect the markets with which third parties deal for good or ill. Some actions open new markets for unrelated third parties. Other actions increase competitive pressure. Indeed, that is an inevitable consequence of the division of labor in a society. But it is almost impossible in the vast majority of cases to judge with any confidence that one act creates wealth or another destroys it. Nonetheless, while certain aggressive, competitive behaviors may, as the evidence suggests, enhance wealth creation, our society has, in addition to taking actions against presumed failings in the marketplace, chosen to set noneconomic limits to competitive behavior. In effect, we have established a set of Marquis of Queensberry rules for the marketplace, i.e., noneconomic criteria for the types of behavior that are judged tolerable in business relationships. We may in the process, of course, be losing some wealth creation, but the value of market civility, at various times in our history, appears to have tempered our drive for maximum efficiency. Nonetheless, that markets, however faulted, are a productive means to coordinate human behavior for most remains beyond doubt. Markets enforce a degree of trust among participants that may not be so prevalent in other aspects of life. People cannot be untruthful without cost in a market context where credibility has distinct commercial value. A reputation for an inferior product might not be damaging in a centrally planned economy, but has heavy consequences in markets where choice is available. But above all, by constructing institutions that enable the value preferences of consumers to be reflected in prices and other market signals, a society can produce far greater wealth than any of the nonmarket alternatives. One of those essential institutions is a rule of law that protects property rights, both real and intellectual, against force or fraud, enforces contracts, and adjudicates the bankrupt. More controversial are the laws that endeavor to improve the workings of the marketplace, the Sherman and Clayton Acts being the most prominent. While no one, I presume, is against improving markets, the issue is clearly what constitutes improvement and by what means, if any, it can be achieved. How this issue has been addressed since the passage of the Sherman Antitrust Act of 1890 has ebbed and flowed with evolving theories and empirical evidence about how markets function, and the degree of acceptance in our society of free markets to determine the distributions of income and wealth. In the 1970s and 1980s, there was a significant shift in emphasis from a relatively deterministic antitrust enforcement policy to one based on the belief (under the aegis of the so-called Chicago School) that those market imperfections that are not the result of government subsidies, quotas or franchises, would be assuaged by heightened competition. Antitrust initiatives were not seen as a generally successful remedy. More recently, limited avenues for antitrust policy are perceived by policymakers to enhance market efficiencies. That markets, on occasion, can be shown to be behaving in a manner presumed inferior to some presubscribed optimum is not a difficult task. For example, suboptimal product or operational standards are seen by some to persist because, once in place, they are difficult to dislodge. Often cited is the word processor keyboard whose key placement still reflects the manual typewriter's need to prevent its keys from sticking, rather than convenience to the typist. A more recent example pointed to by some is the universal adoption of VHS-based VCR technology. The more general proposition is that the success of competing technologies depends more on the relative size of their initial adoptions than on the inherent superiority of one over the other (what economists term "path dependence"). I should point out, however, that these examples, and the more general proposition, are not without challenges. To demonstrate that a particular antitrust remedy will improve the functioning of a market is also often fraught with difficulties. For implicit in any remedy is a forecast of how markets, products, and companies will develop. Forecasting how technology, in particular, will evolve has been especially daunting. The problem is that the various synergies of existing technologies that account for much of our innovation have been exceptionally difficult to discern in advance. For example, according to Charles Townes, a Nobel Prize winner for his work on the laser, the attorneys for Bell Labs initially refused, in the 1960s, to patent the laser because they believed it had no applications in the field of telecommunications. Only in the 1980s, after extensive improvements in fiber optics technology, did the laser's importance for telecommunications become apparent. Moreover, almost by definition, antitrust remedies are applied mainly to firms dominant in their industries. Yet the evidence of sustained dominance where markets are generally open are few. There has been a tendency for one firm to dominate in the early development of many of our industries where economies of scale enabled significant reductions in unit costs and hence prices. U.S. Steel, General Motors, and IBM are only the more prominent cases of market share erosion after early virtual dominance of their industries was achieved. One wonders how long the Standard Oil Trust's near monopoly of refining would have prevailed, even without the landmark antitrust breakup in 1911, as upstart competitors Royal Dutch Shell, British Petroleum, Gulf, and the Texas Company (Texaco) undercut Standard. I am not saying that dominant positions in industries cannot be maintained for extended periods, but I suspect in free competitive markets that it is possible only if dominance is maintained through cost efficiencies and low prices that competitors have difficulty matching. By the measure of what benefits consumers, such enterprises should not be discouraged. Natural monopolies are an exception, but technology is increasingly reducing the areas of our economy where such monopolies can prevail. Banking and other regulated industries are of course a further exception. The possibility of economies of scale leading to very large firms relative to any one nation's economy illustrates and emphasizes the importance of international free trade policies in maintaining domestic competition. In some industries, free trade may be essentially the only way to maintain truly competitive markets to the benefit of consumers in all of the nations involved. Nevertheless, it is also interesting to note that some, such as Professor Michael Porter at Harvard, have found that the most successful exporters have evolved out of domestically competitive industries. In any event, we have come a long way in attitudes about market power and antitrust enforcement from the days, more than a half-century ago, when a Federal Appeals Court opined in the Alcoa case, that "we can think of no more effective exclusion [of competitors] than progressively to embrace each new opportunity as it opened, and to face every newcomer with new capacity already geared into a great organization, having the advantage of experience, trade connections and the elite of personnel." If competitors are excluded because of a company's excellence in addressing consumer needs, should such activity be constrained by law? Such a standard, if generally applied to business initiatives, would have chilled the type of competitive aggressiveness that brings efficiencies and innovation to the marketplace. Fortunately, that principle was subsequently abandoned by the Supreme Court. More importantly, antitrust actions of recent years have sought to enhance efficiencies and innovations. I leave it to others to judge their degree of success. But the regulatory climate in antitrust, indeed throughout government, has moved in a more market-oriented direction. I believe that is good for consumers and the nation. In conclusion, the United States is currently experiencing its fifth major corporate consolidation of this century. When trying to understand and deciding how to react to this development, I would hope that we appropriately account for the complexity and dynamism of modern free markets. Foremost on the agenda of policy makers, in my judgment, should be to enhance conditions in our market system that will foster the competition and innovation so vital to a prosperous economy.
Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan H.R. 10, the Financial Services Act of 1998 Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate June 17, 1998 It is a pleasure to appear before this Committee to present the views of the Federal Reserve on the need to enact legislation to modernize the U.S. financial system and to express the Board's strong support for H.R. 10, which achieves this objective. I. The Need for Financial Reform U.S. financial institutions are today among the most innovative and efficient providers of financial services in the world. They compete, however, in a marketplace that is undergoing major and fundamental changes driven by a revolution in technology, by dramatic innovations in the capital markets, and by the globalization of the financial markets and the financial services industry. The Federal Reserve believes that it is essential that the nation act promptly to modernize the rules that govern our financial institutions in order to ensure their continued competitiveness and to foster their ability to innovate, to operate efficiently and to provide the best and broadest possible services to consumers as well as to maintain this nation's role as the preeminent world financial center. We believe that it is important for Congress to set the rules for this industry, which is so important to our nation's health and prosperity. Only Congress has the ability to fashion rules that are comprehensive and equitable to all participants and that guard the public interest. That is why the Federal Reserve strongly supports H.R. 10 and urges the Senate to consider and pass this legislation as soon as feasible. The market will continue to force change whether or not Congress acts. The strength and viability of our financial institutions, the effectiveness of our regulatory structure, and the role and status of our financial services industry in the international system are in play as a result of the aforementioned market forces as well as regulatory actions. Without Congressional action, changes will occur through exploitation of loopholes and marginal interpretations of the law that courts feel obliged to sanction. This type of response to market forces leads to inefficiencies, expansion of the federal safety net, potentially increased risk exposure to the federal deposit insurance funds, and a system that will undermine the competitiveness and innovative edge of major segments of the financial services industry. Delay in acting on financial modernization legislation would only limit Congress's options as these developments proliferate and complicate, increase the difficulty of enacting protections included in H.R. 10 to protect safety and soundness and the public interest, and deny to consumers the benefits that immediate changes in our outdated banking laws will surely bring. Of course, financial modernization involves complicated and sometimes divisive issues because it requires easing rules and opening options for some while increasing competition for others, redrawing lines that create new limits, and applying some pre-existing regulatory structures to new institutions. However, these issues are not new to the Senate. The Senate Banking Committee has on three previous occasions led the way in developing financial modernization legislation, and the full Senate has twice followed this Committee's recommendation in adopting such legislation. (A summary of these financial modernization proposals is provided at .) In 1991, the Committee passed S. 543, which repealed the Glass-Steagall Act and allowed banks to affiliate with securities firms using the holding company structure to ensure safety and soundness, a level competitive playing field, and protection of the taxpayer. H.R. 10 uses that same holding company framework from S. 543, but expands the range of permissible financial affiliations to include insurance underwriting and merchant banking. Senate action at this time to enact H.R. 10 would be an historic achievement that would establish a sound and much-needed framework for launching our financial services industry into the 21st century. There has been much--perhaps too much--arguing over details contained in H.R. 10. H.R. 10 is a comprehensive approach to the issues of financial modernization, and it is fundamentally a sound bill. No legislation that endeavors to address financial modernization will be considered ideal by all, but time will allow its rough spots to be worked out. What is most important is that for the first time there is an extraordinary amount of agreement on nearly all of the key principles in the bill. There is no disagreement--and there has been no disagreement for many years--that the Glass-Steagall Act must be repealed. There is now finally no disagreement that insurance companies and banks should be permitted to affiliate, and virtual unanimity that banks should be permitted to sell insurance. There is no disagreement that financial holding companies should be permitted to engage in a broad range of other activities that are financial in nature, including merchant banking. And, there is no disagreement that new affiliations must be permitted on a level playing field and in a manner that permits a realistic two-way street between banking organizations that seek to affiliate with insurance and securities firms, and between insurance and securities firms that seek to acquire banks. Moreover, there is no disagreement that financial modernization must not place insurance and securities firms that choose to remain independent at a disadvantage in competing against those firms that choose to affiliate with banks. In addition, there is strong agreement that new affiliations must be permitted within a framework that maintains the safety and soundness of our financial system in general and the banking system in particular without imposing unnecessary regulatory burden or intrusion. That means strong functional regulation and reasonable, but not bank-like, umbrella oversight of financial holding companies. A consensus has also developed that banking and commerce should not be mixed at this time beyond the limited level needed to allow a realistic two-way street for financial firms that are predominantly securities and insurance companies to acquire banks. There is also agreement that the new law must provide regulators with adequate means to protect the consumer and assure that consumers are carefully informed about the differences between products that are backed by federal deposit insurance and those that are not. These are the fundamental principles embodied in H.R. 10, save one. There are some details surrounding these aforementioned principles that are still under discussion. These surrounding details are important, but not so important that they should be allowed to defeat the consensus that has developed around these principles themselves. It would be a disservice to the public and the nation if, in the fruitless search for a bill that pleases everyone, the benefits of this vital legislation are lost or delayed. There is, however, as I indicated, one fundamental principle embodied in H.R. 10 upon which there is disagreement between the Federal Reserve and the current Treasury Department, although there is agreement among the Federal Reserve and many in the affected industries as well as earlier Treasury Departments. That is the considered decision of the House to use the holding company structure, and not the universal bank, as the appropriate structure to allow the new securities and insurance affiliations. That decision, which is fundamental to the way in which the financial services industry will develop, is critical because it provides better protection for our banking and financial system without damaging the national or state bank charters or limiting in any way the benefits of financial modernization. Importantly, that decision also prevents the spread of the safety net and the accompanying moral hazard to the securities and insurance industries and assures a level playing field within the financial services industry and thus full, open and fair competition as we enter the next century. The other route towards universal banking for national banks will, in our view, lead to greater risk for the deposit insurance funds and the taxpayer. It will also inevitably lead to a weakening of the competitive strength of our financial services industry as independent securities, insurance and other financial services providers operate at a disadvantage to those owned by banks. It is for these reasons that the Federal Reserve, SEC, many state functional regulators and many in the affected industries support the holding company framework and have opposed the universal bank approach. In virtually every other industry, Congress would not be asked to address issues such as these, which are associated with technological and market developments; the market would force the necessary institutional adjustments. Why is it so different for the financial system? I believe the difference reflects the painful experience that has taught us that developments in our financial system--especially, but not solely in our banking system--can have profound effects on the stability of our whole economy, rather than the limited impact we perceive from difficulties in individual nonfinancial industries. Moreover, as a society we have made the choice to create a safety net for depository institutions, not only to protect the public's deposits, but also to minimize the impact of adverse developments in financial markets on our economy. Although we have clearly been successful in doing so, the safety net has predictably created a moral hazard: the banks determine the level of risk-taking and receive the gains therefrom, but do not bear the full cost of that risk; the remainder is borne by the government. Since the sovereign credit of the United States ultimately guarantees the stability of the banking system and the claims of insured depositors, bank creditors do not apply the same self-interest monitoring of banks to protect their own position as they would without discount window access and deposit insurance. Instead, this moral hazard requires that the guarantor, the U.S. government, supervise and regulate entities with access to the safety net to protect its own, that is the taxpayers' interest--the cost of making good on the guarantee. Put another way, the safety net requires that the government replace with law, regulation, and supervision much of the disciplinary role that the market plays for other businesses. Our experience in the 1980's with insured thrift institutions illustrates the necessity of avoiding expanding risks to the deposit insurance funds and lax supervisory policies and rules. But this necessity has an obvious downside: these same rules limit innovative responses and the ability to take the risks so necessary for economic growth. The last thing we should want, therefore, is to widen or spread this unintended, but nevertheless corrosive dimension of the safety net to other financial and business entities and markets. It is clear that to do so would not only spread a subsidy to new forms of risk-taking, but ultimately require the expansion of bank-like supervision as well. In our judgment, the holding company approach upon which H.R. 10 is premised avoids this pitfall; the universal bank approach does not. While financial modernization represents a much needed reform, we should not forget that this modernization will, by itself, introduce dramatic changes in our financial services industry. We feel confident that the risks of this type of reform are manageable within the holding company framework set out in H.R. 10. We believe that the magnitude of the reform to our financial system represented by allowing new and broad affiliations counsels that this is not the time to experiment with these broad new affiliations through operating subsidiaries, an approach that has failed the taxpayer in other contexts and has other serious consequences. Instead, we believe the Congress is best advised to retain the existing holding company structure, which achieves the full benefits sought by financial modernization and has a proven track record of protecting safety and soundness, insulating the federal safety net, and providing competitive equality among companies that choose to affiliate with banks and those that choose to remain independent. There are two final points I want to make since they appear to drive Treasury's opposition to H.R. 10. First, as I will discuss in more detail later, H.R. 10 would not diminish--but would in fact enhance--the national bank charter. Second, H.R. 10 would not diminish the ability of the Executive Branch to continue to play its meaningful role in the development of banking or economic policy. Currently, the Executive Branch influences such policy primarily through its supervision of national banks and federal savings associations. H.R. 10 would not alter the Executive Branch's supervisory authority for national banks or federal savings associations, nor would it result in any reduction in the predominant and growing share of this nation's banking assets controlled by national banks and federal savings associations. Furthermore, Congress for sound public policy reasons has purposefully apportioned responsibility for this nation's financial institutions among the elected Executive Branch and independent regulatory agencies. H.R. 10 retains this balance and the Federal Reserve does not believe it would be appropriate to alter this balance in favor of increased Executive control of financial institution policy. Such action would be contrary to the deliberate steps that Congress has taken to ensure independence in the regulation of this nation's financial institutions, both banking and nonbanking. II. The Financial Services Act of 1998 (H.R. 10) Although H.R. 10 is almost 300 pages in length, its objective is simple and can be stated concisely--H.R. 10 removes outdated restrictions that currently limit the ability of U.S. financial service providers, including banks, insurance companies and securities firms, to affiliate with each other and enter each other's markets. This objective--permitting the affiliation of financial service providers and thereby allowing open and free competition in the financial services industry--is supported by the banking, insurance, and securities industries as well as the three federal banking agencies, the Treasury Department, and the Securities and Exchange Commission. For the most part, the remaining provisions of H.R. 10 are designed to implement and complement this change and to ensure that these new affiliations occur in a manner that is consistent with the safety and soundness of the banking and financial system and the protection of investors and other consumers of financial services. H.R. 10 requires that these new affiliations occur within a holding company structure, which the Federal Reserve believes is sound policy because it best protects the federal deposit insurance funds by limiting the additional risks permitted to insured depository institutions. Arguably of even greater importance, the holding company structure limits the spread of the federal safety net and its related subsidy and moral hazard to entities or activities beyond the insured depository institutions it was intended originally to support. H.R. 10 builds on the protection afforded by the holding company structure by relying on strong functional regulation of the securities, insurance, and banking components of the holding company. It also provides flexibility to authorize restrictions on transactions between depository institutions and their newly authorized affiliates when necessary to protect the safety and soundness of affiliated depository institutions and the Federal deposit insurance funds. H.R. 10 grants access to these new affiliations only to those organizations that have and maintain well-capitalized and well-managed subsidiary depository institutions. H.R. 10 also includes provisions designed to ensure that these new affiliations occur in a manner that is consistent with the protection of consumers. For example, the bill requires that the federal banking agencies issue consumer protection regulations governing the retail sale of securities and insurance products by depository institutions. And, H.R. 10 emphasizes the obligation of depository institutions to help meet the credit needs of their entire community by limiting the new affiliations to only depository institutions that have at least a satisfactory performance record under the Community Reinvestment Act. 1. Umbrella Supervision and Functionally Regulated Entities H.R. 10 for the first time would permit broad affiliations among financial service providers that are currently supervised by different agencies. As a result, H.R. 10 builds on the principle of functional regulation and includes important provisions that encourage and facilitate cooperation among the functional regulators. It also reduces overlap between the various regulators and clearly allocates responsibility and accountability for supervising the different parts of new financial holding companies. At the same time, H.R. 10 retains a meaningful, albeit streamlined, level of umbrella oversight of the entire organization to assure that some agency has a complete view of, and accountability for, new financial holding companies and can serve a facilitating role in relationships among functional regulators. The Federal Reserve believes that H.R. 10 has constructed a good balance that provides the various regulators, including the umbrella supervisor, with the tools needed to supervise financial holding companies adequately. In addition, H.R. 10 is helpful in enhancing the ability of the relevant state and federal supervisory agencies to share information on a confidential basis. The focus of H.R. 10 on functional regulation is perhaps best illustrated through an example. Under H.R. 10, responsibility would be allocated for supervising a new financial holding company comprised of an insurance company, a securities firm, several financial companies such as a mortgage lender and a financial data processing company, and an insured bank. H.R. 10 contemplates that responsibility for supervising and regulating the insurance company, securities firm and insured bank would, as under current law, rest, respectively, with the relevant state insurance authorities, with the Securities and Exchange Commission and the securities self-regulating organizations, and with the appropriate state and federal bank supervisory agencies. Each of these agencies would retain the full authority that it currently has to examine firms under its jurisdiction and to interpret and enforce the law applicable to the type of company that the agency is charged with supervising. The Federal Reserve, as umbrella supervisor, would be required to the fullest extent possible to rely on regulatory reports required and examinations conducted by, using our example, the state insurance commissioner, the SEC (and appropriate securities self regulatory agencies) and the appropriate state or federal banking agency. In a problem bank situation, the Federal Reserve also would be prohibited from requiring that the insurance company or securities firm provide financial resources to the bank if the functional regulator determines that such action would have a materially adverse effect on the financial condition of the insurance company or securities firm. Instead, the Federal Reserve could order divestiture of the bank or affiliate in order to recapitalize the bank. At the same time, H.R. 10 preserves the important authority of the umbrella supervisor to apply consolidated capital standards to the financial holding company, to examine the holding company and--under specified circumstances--any subsidiary that poses a material risk to the insured bank, and to enforce compliance by the organization with the Federal banking laws. This assures that, while the functional regulators are supervising various parts of the organization, someone is overseeing the organization as a whole as well as subsidiaries that are not subject to other functional regulation. 2. Enhanced Functional Regulation of Financial Products Consistent with the bill's emphasis on functional regulation, H.R. 10 also would repeal the blanket exemptions provided banks from the definitions of "broker" and "dealer" in the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, requiring banks to register with the SEC if their securities activities fall outside specified categories of transactions. These categories are broad and would permit banks to continue engaging in securities activities in connection with their traditional trust, custody, safekeeping and derivatives operations and in a limited amount of retail securities transactions without registering as a broker or dealer. The bill also establishes procedures for determining which functional regulator would have primary responsibility for supervising the provision of new or hybrid financial products that may be developed in the future. In the securities area, for example, H.R. 10 would authorize banks, to the extent consistent with applicable banking law, to offer and sell new or hybrid products that are developed in the future unless the SEC determines, after a formal rulemaking process and after consultation with the Federal banking agencies, that the new or hybrid product is a security for purposes of the securities laws. If the SEC makes such a determination, the bill would require that the product be sold by an SEC-registered entity, such as a subsidiary of the bank, subject to functional regulation as a security product. The bill establishes a similar, although more complex, procedure for determining whether future products that are classified as insurance by a state may be underwritten by a bank within the framework of bank regulation or only by a functionally regulated insurance underwriting affiliate. This process seeks to ensure that banks will continue to have the ability to provide any product banks are providing today. In addition, it assures that banks may, as principal, provide any new form of a traditional banking product that may in the future be characterized as insurance by state law unless the product is treated as insurance for purposes of the federal Internal Revenue Code. There is also a procedure to resolve disputes between insurance and banking regulators over future products with final decisions by the courts "without unequal deference" to either the relevant Federal or State regulators and after reviewing the history of the regulation of the product. Although any attempt to devise rules for the classification and regulation of future products is bound to encounter difficulties, and improvements could be made in some marginal provisions, the substantive provisions of H.R. 10 governing the division of regulatory responsibility for future products are carefully balanced in our judgment. 3. Competitive Flexibility Importantly, H.R. 10 provides banking organizations--both large and small--substantial flexibility in determining how to respond to the market forces so rapidly changing the industry. Many large banking organizations that meet applicable criteria may elect to affiliate with full-service insurance and securities underwriting firms and thereby become comprehensive providers or "manufacturers" of financial products. Similarly, small banking organizations would remain free to engage in currently authorized activities or to expand into newly authorized principal activities at the pace most consistent with the organization's competitive strategy. Small banking organizations also would be free to focus their efforts in an area where they have a demonstrable competitive advantage--the sale of any type of financial product as agent. One of the areas of great interest to banks--and one likely to increase consumer options and benefits greatly--is insurance sales. Importantly, H.R. 10 would expand the insurance sales opportunities for banks by authorizing subsidiaries of national banks to sell virtually any type of insurance product, whether underwritten by an affiliate or a third party, from any location on a nationwide basis. National banks also would retain their current ability to sell insurance as agent in any place with a population of 5,000 or less. One detail in this area that we do not support is the provision in H.R. 10 that requires a national bank, for the next 5 years, to expand its insurance activities in additional states only by buying an existing insurance agency. H.R. 10 would also provide depository institutions important protections against state laws that might conflict with the ability of these institutions to sell financial products as authorized by Federal law. Some confusion and controversy, however, have arisen in this area, particularly as to whether H.R. 10 would scale back the Supreme Court's decision in the Barnett case concerning the ability of states to regulate the sale by national banks of insurance as agent. It is my understanding that H.R. 10, in fact, seeks to codify the Barnett decision by incorporating the phraseology used by the Supreme Court and a specific citation to the Supreme Court's opinion in Barnett into a new Federal statute that would preempt any state law that "prevents or significantly interferes" with the ability of any national bank or other depository institution to engage in insurance sales activities authorized by Federal law. H.R. 10 does provide that a state law will not be preempted under the Barnett standard if the law is no more restrictive than an existing Illinois statute that governs insurance sales by banks. This statute, among other things, requires the licensing of agents and the disclosure that insurance products sold by the bank are not guaranteed or insured by the FDIC. This provision also prohibits the tying of insurance products to credit products, the payment of commissions to unlicensed persons, and the unauthorized disclosure of customer information. The statute's requirements are not onerous and the Comptroller of the Currency has recognized that the statute's requirements do not on their face conflict with the Barnett decision. In short, the controversy in this area appears to stem largely from confusion concerning the bill's intent, which can be addressed through clarifying amendments designed to make plain that the bill does not scale back, and is fully consistent with, the Barnett decision. III. Enhancements to the National Bank Charter There has been some concern that H.R. 10 may damage the national bank charter. The Federal Reserve believes that it is important that the national bank charter not be impaired or diminished in view of its significance to the nation's financial system. On the other hand, we do not believe the national bank charter should be fundamentally transformed and enlarged into a universal bank charter by allowing national banks directly or indirectly to engage in underwriting life and property and casualty insurance, underwriting and dealing in securities, merchant banking and direct equity investing, or real estate investment and development. For the reasons laid out in this testimony, we believe such an expansion of the national bank charter would be a mistake for bank safety and soundness, the deposit insurance funds and safety net, the financial services industry (consumers and businesses alike) and the taxpayer. In the Federal Reserve's view, the concern about H.R. 10's effect on the national bank charter appears based on a misunderstanding of the bill. Our review of H.R. 10 indicates that it preserves the existing benefits of the national bank charter and includes significant provisions that actually enhance the powers of national banks. First, H.R. 10 does not reduce the current powers of national banks to conduct banking activities or indeed limit the present activities conducted by national banks. In fact, H.R. 10 contains several provisions that specifically preserve these powers. Moreover, there is nothing in H.R. 10 that limits the authority of the OCC to authorize new powers for national banks as within the business of banking or incidental to a banking business under the National Bank Act other than those activities prohibited for national banks and future, as yet unauthorized, insurance underwriting activities. As I mentioned earlier, H.R. 10 contains, as has every prior version of financial modernization legislation for the past 15 years including the recent Treasury proposal, provisions that encourage all banks to conduct securities activities through an affiliate or, where authorized, a subsidiary of the bank, rather than in the bank. These provisions, however, include significant exceptions that allow banks to continue to conduct in the bank securities activities that are part of or incidental to traditional banking services or that are conducted in limited numbers. And, as in the Treasury's recent modernization proposal, the provisions of H.R. 10 apply equally to all national and state banks. Second, H.R. 10 improves the national bank charter. H.R. 10 empowers national banks to conduct any financial activity as agent through an operating subsidiary. Under this provision, national banks may, through a subsidiary, sell any type of insurance at any location (including in cities with a population over 5,000). This provision also allows a subsidiary of a national bank to sell any financial product as agent, and to engage in any financial agency activity that is permitted for a financial holding company. Such activity, as best we can judge, because it is rarely asset intensive and hence requires minimal equity, transfers little subsidy to the bank subsidiary. H.R. 10 also authorizes national banks for the first time to underwrite any type of municipal security, including municipal revenue bonds, directly or through a subsidiary. At the same time, H.R. 10 removes the current advantage that state banks have over national banks in the securities area. H.R. 10 prohibits state banks from engaging in underwriting or dealing in securities, either directly or through an operating subsidiary, to the same extent that a national bank is prohibited from underwriting and dealing in securities. H.R. 10 would clarify that national banks should not in the future underwrite life or property and casualty insurance beyond that currently permissible for national banks. State banks are already prohibited by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act of 1991 from commencing insurance underwriting activities or making equity investments. Thus, under H.R. 10, the only financial activity of which we are aware that state banks in some states could conduct, either directly or in an operating subsidiary, that national banks cannot is real estate investment and development. Treasury's recent bill, however, would wisely, in our view, also have prohibited that activity to national banks and their subsidiaries. As I explained earlier, H.R. 10 also includes provisions that guarantee national banks the right to affiliate--through holding companies--with securities firms, insurance companies and other financial services providers, and to sell and market the products of those affiliates notwithstanding any state law. In addition, H.R. 10 preserves the rule of law established in Barnett. Together, these provisions allow national banks to remain strong and vibrant competitors. H.R. 10 also does nothing to encourage national banks to convert to state charters. Nor does H.R. 10 tarnish in any way the appeal that many see in the national bank charter, particularly as a vehicle for conducting interstate branching. Indeed, nearly 90 percent of all interstate branches are operated by national banks, which operate under one set of rules and with one regulator at all their locations--the OCC. The heart of the concern about H.R. 10's applicability to national banks does not appear to be that it fails to enhance the national bank charter, but that it fails to enhance the national bank charter enough for some. However, the record does not demonstrate that the national bank charter is in decline. In fact, the opposite is true. In the postwar years, national banks have controlled more than 50 percent of total bank assets. In fact, the share of assets controlled by national banks rose sharply last year and early in 1998, reflecting the increased attractiveness of the national charter as interstate branching has been authorized, and assets held by national banks are at the highest level this decade and near the postwar high relative to state banks. provides additional data on the relative strength of the national bank charter. In any event, the issue that is facing Congress is not whether we need to provide an edge to a particular type of bank charter. The record is replete with evidence that what is really needed is reform of the laws that prevent the affiliation of banks of all types with securities firms, insurance companies and other financial services providers, and thereby allow the financial services industry to adjust to a rapidly changing market. That is the deficiency that H.R. 10 is designed to address and does address very well. If the future finds, contrary to the past and present, that further adjustments are needed to the national bank charter to allow it to remain competitive and viable, those concerns can and should be addressed more clearly once an actual deficiency is shown. IV. Operating Subsidiaries vs. Holding Companies One area where some have argued that H.R. 10 does not go far enough is in authorizing national banks to own so-called operating subsidiaries, which are subsidiaries of the bank that engage in activities that national banks are forbidden by Federal law to conduct directly. This is not a detail or a technical issue, but one that we believe is critical to determining the shape, soundness and competitive fairness of our financial system as it develops into the 21st century, and will have profound ramifications for our Federal safety net. There are two reasons why the Board believes that it is not wise or necessary to expand the ability of banks to engage in new principal activities through operating subsidiaries that are prohibited to the bank. These are (1) extension of the safety net subsidy to activities beyond what Congress originally intended and resultant harm to the vibrancy of competition in our financial services industry, and (2) the safety and soundness implications for banks and risk exposure of the deposit insurance funds. Extension of the Safety Net. In my introductory remarks, I noted that a major reason the Congress is called upon to involve itself in a legislative response to technical innovation in financial markets is the safety net. Institutions covered by it receive a subsidy because insured depositors correctly perceive their risk exposure as virtually zero. These depositors--and other creditors who benefit from the stability brought to the banking system by the safety net--are willing therefore to provide funds to banks at much lower rates than are available to competing institutions. Moreover, the insured creditors--and many of the uninsured ones as well--do not feel the necessity to monitor their credit exposure because of the government guarantee and the other implications of the safety net. As a result, the government is required to monitor the risk-taking--to put itself in the shoes of the creditors--in order to protect the taxpayers and maintain financial market stability. The existence of this subsidy is clear in debt ratings--which are virtually always higher at banks than at their parent holding company. It is clear in the higher capital ratios required of nonbanking financial firms, even those that receive the same debt rating as banks. It is clear in the tendency for banking organizations, when geographic restrictions were eased, to shift back to the bank and its subsidiaries those activities that, while authorized for banks, had been conducted in holding companies. Bank holding companies, the owners of most banks, have no doubt also gained by the higher debt ratings and lower cost of capital that comes from having as their major asset an entity--the bank--with access to the safety net. But holding companies also own nonsubsidized entities that have no direct access to the safety net. Accordingly, both bank holding companies and their non-bank subsidiaries have a higher cost of capital than banks that cannot be credibly explained by the holding companies' responsibilities to their insured depository institutions. Moreover, any benefit that holding companies might currently be experiencing from ownership of an insured bank can be expected to decline as the holding company's ability to expand its affiliations causes the insured bank to become a smaller part of the total organization. Virtually all nonbank subsidiaries of bank holding companies, with the exception of Section 20 securities affiliates, were historically put in the holding company, not because the holding company could conduct broader activities than the bank, but for other reasons, such as geographic restrictions on the bank. As these restrictions have been eased over the last decade, the share of consolidated assets of bank holding companies associated with nonbank activities--other than Section 20s, whose purpose is to conduct a business that is not permissible for the bank itself--has declined by about 50 percent. Bank holding companies tell us that the primary reason for shifting back to banks those operations that can be shifted is to obtain cheaper funding and avoid limitations on funding transactions contained in sections 23A and B of the Federal Reserve Act. Activities that have stayed in holding company subsidiaries, we are told, remain there for tax reasons, inertia, and established names separate from the bank. In time, inertia will fade. It is critical that the subsidy implicit in the federal safety net be limited to those activities that a bank can conduct directly. The Federal Reserve is concerned that operating subsidiaries would be a funnel for transferring the sovereign credit subsidy directly from the bank to finance any new principal activities authorized by either the Congress or by OCC regulatory action--imparting a competitive advantage to such entities. We approve of new principal activities, but we believe they should be financed competitively in the marketplace. Moreover, we do not believe that it is possible to bring to bear the separation of an operating subsidiary from its parent bank that one can introduce between a bank and its sister affiliates. Rules can be devised to limit the aggregate equity investment made by banks in their subsidiaries. But one cannot eliminate the fact that the equity invested in subsidiaries is funded by the sum of insured deposits and other bank borrowings that directly benefit from the subsidy of the safety net. Thus, inevitably, a bank subsidiary must have lower costs of capital than an independent entity and even a subsidiary of the bank's parent. Indeed, one would expect that a rational banking organization would, as much as possible, shift its nonbank activity from the bank holding company structure to the bank subsidiary structure. Such a shift from affiliates to bank subsidiaries would increase the subsidy and the competitive advantage of the entire banking organization relative to its nonbank competitors. I am aware that these are often viewed as only highly technical issues, and hence ones that are in the end, of lesser significance. I do not think so. The issue of the use of the sovereign credit is central to how our financial system will allocate credit, and hence real resources, the kinds of risk it takes, and the degree of supervision it requires. If the use of the sovereign credit is to be extended, that decision ought to be made by Congress in full recognition of the consequences of the subsidy on the financial system. But, it should not, in the name of some technical change, or in search of some minor efficiency, inadvertently expand significantly the use of the sovereign credit. This issue would not be so important were we not in the process of addressing what must surely be a watershed in the revamping of our financial structure. But we are at such a watershed, and the Federal Reserve believes that we must avoid inadvertently extending the safety net and its associated subsidy without a thorough understanding of the implications of such an extension on the competitive balance and systemic risks of our financial system. The safety net subsidy is difficult to measure and several observers have doubted its existence net of regulatory costs. Subsidy values--net or gross--vary from bank to bank; riskier banks clearly get a larger subsidy from the safety net than safer banks. In addition, the value of the subsidy varies over time. In good times, such as now, markets demand a low risk premium and it is difficult to discern the safety net subsidy. But, when markets turn weak, financial asset holders demand to be compensated by higher yields for holding claims on riskier entities. It is at this time that subsidy values are the most noticeable, as spreads open up between bank and nonbank claims. What was it worth in the late 1980s and early 1990s for a bank with a troubled loan portfolio to have deposit liabilities guaranteed by the FDIC, to be assured that it could turn illiquid to liquid assets at once through the Federal Reserve discount window, and to tell its customers that payment transfers would be settled on a riskless Federal Reserve Bank? For many, it was worth not basis points but percentage points. For some, it meant the difference between survival and failure. The Federal Reserve has no doubt that the costs of regulation are large, too large in our judgment and we wish to reduce the degree of regulatory burden. But no bank has turned in its charter in order to operate without the cost of banking regulation, which would require that it operate also without deposit insurance or access to the discount window or payments system. To do so would require both higher deposit and other funding costs and higher capital. It is also instructive that there are no private deposit insurers competing with the FDIC. For the same product offered by the FDIC, private insurers would have to charge premiums far higher than those of government insurance, and still not be able to match the certainty of unlimited payments in the event of default, the hallmark of a government insurer backed by the sovereign credit of the United States. The Federal Reserve has a similar status with respect to the availability of the discount window and riskless final settlement during a period of national economic stress. Providing such services is out of the reach of all private institutions. The markets place substantial values on these safety net subsidies, clearly in excess of the cost of regulation. To repeat, were it otherwise, some banks would be dropping their charters. Safety and Soundness. Even if there were no subsidy issue, engaging in principal activities in an operating subsidiary exposes the bank--and hence the safety net--to greater risks. I am not arguing that the new financial activities that financial modernization would permit to banking organizations are unusually risky. But they do present additional risk as principal and any losses associated with these activities would have to be absorbed. If such losses were suffered by a bank holding company subsidiary, the loss would be consolidated into the holding company parent--an entity without direct access to the safety net. In contrast, if the loss occurred at a subsidiary of a bank, the loss would fall directly on the bank parent, increasing the risk exposure of the deposit insurance funds and the safety net. This difference is neither small nor technical. It lies at the heart of the matter. The Treasury, as you know, has proposed and supported new principal activities in the operating subsidiary. It argues that potential losses in the operating subsidiary could be capped in such a way as to eliminate the exposure of the safety net. Under the Treasury plan, investment by a bank in its operating sub must be deducted from the regulatory capital of the bank, after which the bank's regulatory capital position must still be deemed "well-capitalized." Moreover, the bank would be prohibited from making good any of the debts of the failed subsidiary. I should note that it is necessary that all of these prohibitions be statutory, since generally accepted accounting principles--GAAP--require that the subsidiaries' operations be consolidated with its parent and that courts determine if a parent is responsible for the claims on its failed subsidiaries. I should further note that what may be viewed as a regulatory matter as excess capital--the maximum amount that is to be invested in the subsidiary under this proposal--may or may not be excess in an economic or real sense. Regulatory accounting principles--RAP--are not often designed to reflect economic realities, as we saw last in the S&L crisis of the 1980s. Moreover, as I understand it, the RAP capital deduction for purposes of computing the level of a bank's investment in its operating subsidiaries would not be mirrored by a capital deduction for other regulatory purposes--like loans-to- one-borrower or dividend limit purposes. And, I can assure you it will not be deducted for the GAAP bank statements that uninsured creditors and large loan customers will insist on reviewing before they conduct business with the bank. Thus, a capital deduction may matter for the regulators for some purposes, but it is not the way the market will view the organization. In addition to being inconsistent with sound accounting standards (GAAP), the proposed deduction treatment also runs counter to the way that banks manage their subsidiaries, the way regulators have supervised subsidiaries and the way financial markets are likely to perceive the bank as a whole. Historically, both bank management and supervisors have considered subsidiaries of the bank to be an integral part of the bank (in fact they have been treated as departments of the bank) whose operations, if material, could have a significant impact on the bank's risk profile. Bank managers have invariably sought to support their subsidiaries in the past, and supervisors have carefully examined the operations of material subsidiaries in view of the difficulty in insulating the parent bank from problems in its subsidiaries. Even if statutory barriers are erected that attempt to limit the impact of subsidiary losses on the parent bank, substantial losses in a subsidiary will likely erode the market's confidence in the management and health of the bank. This would be a critical development in the case of a bank whose stability--and whose level of risk to the federal deposit insurance funds--depends in large measure on its reputation and standing in the financial markets. A law may endeavor to mandate accounting and regulatory treatment, but it is not so easy to alter perceptions of counter-parties or the reality of financial markets. It is worth noting that a dividend payment by a bank to its holding company results in a real decline in bank capital. This is a genuine constraint on the subsidy transfer from banks to their holding company affiliates and helps explain the reality that bank dividends historically have not chronically exceeded the dividends paid out by holding company parents plus debt service. The use of bank dividends to fund holding company expansion would, of course, incorporate a modest safety net subsidy since bank earnings are higher than they otherwise would be because of the safety net. But the capital constraint--plus the supervisor's natural tendency to guard against significant capital reductions--has limited such transfers. It is unlikely that a capital adjustment for regulatory purposes that is in conflict with GAAP would be as effective a constraint on the investments that a bank may make in its subsidiary. Moreover, losses in, for example, securities dealing or fire and casualty insurance underwriting conducted in an operating subsidiary could occur so rapidly that they could overwhelm the bank parent before actions could be taken by the regulator. Put differently, losses in an operating subsidiary can easily far exceed a bank's original equity investment long before the supervisor has any such knowledge. The resulting bank safety and soundness concerns are only deepened by the extent to which past retained earnings of the operating subsidiary would have strengthened the capital of the parent bank--an ostensible reason for operating subsidiaries. Such a buildup in capital could be used to support other bank activities, and then eliminated by subsequent losses in the operating subsidiary, leaving the bank in an undercapitalized position. The argument that operating subsidiaries are desirable because of the organizational flexibility they provide to bank management seems less than compelling. Having two options is better than one. But there is no real choice here. From the purview of banking organization profitability, the operating subsidiary is far superior to a holding company affiliate because of the funding advantage gained from access to the safety net. Hence, if profitability is the gauge, there is no increase in managerial flexibility. Rational management will always select the operating subsidiary. Some observers have argued that operating subsidiaries should be allowed to conduct broad activities as principal in the U.S. because Edge Corporations, which are Congressionally authorized corporations chartered to conduct a banking business outside the U.S. and are largely owned by banks, have conducted a broader range of activities as principal outside the U.S. without damage to banks. As an initial matter, it is important to realize that there are only a handful of banks that engage to any significant extent through Edge Corporations in activities not permissible to their parent bank, and these engage primarily in various securities activities. Importantly, Congress authorized the Edge Corporation as a means to allow our banks to be competitive abroad. In order to do so, Edge Corporations had to be able to conduct outside the U.S. activities that are somewhat broader than those permitted domestically, provided the activities are usual in connection with the conduct of banking in the country in which the Edge Corporation operated. The Edge Corporation, therefore, conducts broader activities not because Congress believed that it was, as a general matter, prudent to permit subsidiaries of banks to conduct broad powers. Instead, Edge Corporations may conduct broader activities because they must be allowed to be as competitive as possible in the arena in which they compete--which is in foreign markets where the rules governing the activities of banks and other financial service providers differ from the rules in the U.S. This same principle--allowing competitive equity--argues against authorizing operating subsidiaries to conduct broad activities within the U.S. As discussed above, the universal bank approach would allow banks and their subsidiaries a competitive advantage over U.S. securities and insurance firms that remain independent of banks--thereby inevitably impairing their competitive strength. Thus, given the structure of the financial services industry inside the U.S., the principle of competitive equity that gave rise to the Edge Corporation as a vehicle for conducting a banking business outside the U.S. argues against a similar vehicle within the U.S. Others have concluded that the Federal Reserve's objection to operating subsidiaries is solely jurisdictional--solely turf. If by such comments, these critics believe that our concern is simply to maintain our status or prerogatives, they are mistaken. This has certainly not been our approach to bank powers. The Board was an early and strong supporter of interstate banking, knowing that it would induce shifts from state to national bank charters, reducing the Federal Reserve's supervisory role. Interstate banking was right for the economy, and we supported it. Operating subsidiaries are not, and that is why we oppose them. V. H.R. 10 and the Community Reinvestment Act It has also been argued that H.R. 10 damages the Community Reinvestment Act. The Board believes that this argument is incorrect. In fact, enactment of H.R. 10 would strengthen the CRA in very material ways. The Board believes that the CRA has played an important role in encouraging banks to identify lending markets that may be underserved and to develop credit products and services in response to identified needs of their communities. H.R. 10 provides a compelling incentive for financial holding companies to continue these efforts by requiring as a prerequisite to the expanded powers and affiliations authorized by the bill that all of the subsidiary depository institutions have at least a "satisfactory" CRA rating. Moreover, H.R. 10 adds teeth to the CRA. Currently, the CRA is enforced through the application process. But there is no current requirement that a depository institution divest a bank once a merger is approved if the bank fails to maintain adequate CRA performance levels after the merger. H.R. 10, however, requires that satisfactory CRA ratings be maintained as a condition for continued affiliation with companies authorized under the bill. Thus, a financial holding company has a strong incentive to assure that its depository institution subsidiaries continue to meet their CRA obligations. H.R. 10 also would expand the CRA to wholesale financial institutions, a new form of depository institution authorized by the bill. There exists some confusion, however, as to whether the CRA would be further benefitted if banks were permitted to engage, either directly or through a subsidiary, in securities and insurance activities as principal. The CRA by its terms requires that the Federal banking agencies assess the record of depository institutions in meeting the credit needs of their entire community, including low- and moderate-income communities. While the CRA relates to the lending activities of depository institutions, it does not apply to securities or insurance underwriting activities--whether conducted by a bank, a subsidiary of a bank, or an affiliate of a bank. Accordingly, authorizing a bank to directly or indirectly conduct the securities and insurance underwriting activities authorized by H.R. 10 for financial holding companies would not increase a bank's obligations under the CRA, although it would expose the bank and its CRA-related lending activities to the earnings fluctuations and possible losses associated with such principal activities. Under H.R. 10, banks would remain free to develop and offer the type of innovative or targeted lending products, either directly or through a subsidiary, that are designed to meet the identified credit needs of their communities and that are relevant to the bank's CRA assessment. Moreover, if a banking organization elected to engage in CRA-related activities through a holding company subsidiary, the organization would remain free under the CRA regulations issued by all of the Federal banking agencies to have the activities of the holding company subsidiary count towards the CRA performance of an affiliated bank. VI. Commerce and Banking Last year, the Board, in testimony before the House Banking and Commerce Committees, recommended caution about authorizing banking and commerce affiliations. We noted that technology was already in the process of eroding any bright line between commerce and banking. Nonetheless, we concluded that the free and open legal association of banking and commerce would be a profound and surely irreversible structural change that should best wait while we absorbed the significant changes called for by financial modernization. Recent events have, if anything, strengthened our view on the desirability for caution in this area. The Asia crisis has highlighted some of the risks that can arise if relationships between banks and commercial firms are too close. It is not so much that U.S. entities would face structures like those in Indonesia, Thailand, or Korea. Rather it is the experience that interactions of complex structures can make it extremely difficult to monitor, analyze, and manage financial exposures. In short, the Board would prefer more experience with financial change as a prelude to considering further and more profound structural changes. We thus support the H.R. 10 provisions on commerce and banking. H.R. 10, as passed by the House, prohibits the affiliation of banking and commerce, with three exceptions. Companies, such as securities and insurance firms, that engage predominantly in financial activities and that acquire an insured depository institution may continue to own commercial firms but must divest them within ten years (with the possibility of a further five year extension.) Financial holding companies that own only uninsured wholesale financial institutions also are permitted to retain limited grandfathered investments made as of the date of enactment of the bill, but are not required to divest them at the end of a specified period. Unitary thrift holding companies--holding companies with only one thrift subsidiary--now may be affiliated with commercial entities. Only a few are, but H.R. 10 would grandfather the ability of all unitary thrift holding companies to establish commercial affiliations. For securities firms and insurance companies that acquire banks, however, H.R. 10 would not permit new commercial affiliations. In light of the dangers of mixing banking and commerce, the Board supports elimination of the unitary thrift loophole, which currently allows any type of commercial firm to control a federally insured depository institution. Failure to close this loophole now would allow the conflicts inherent in banking and commerce combinations to further develop in our economy and complicate efforts to create a fair and level playing field for all financial service providers. Accordingly, the Federal Reserve strongly supports the provisions of H.R. 10 that would prohibit new unitary thrift holding companies from having nonfinancial affiliations on a prospective basis. However, H.R. 10 would also permit existing unitary thrift holding companies to retain their current commercial affiliations, to expand those commercial affiliations, and to sell those rights to do so. Equity and fairness do not justify providing these grandfathered organizations such unique economic benefits. The Board, therefore, strongly supports an amendment to H.R. 10 that would at least prohibit or significantly restrict the ability of grandfathered unitary thrift holding companies to transfer their legislatively created grandfather rights to another commercial organization through mergers or acquisitions. VII. Conclusion The markets are demanding that we change outdated statutory limitations that stand in the way of more efficiently and effectively delivering financial services to the public. Many of these changes will occur even if Congress does not act, but only Congress can establish the ground rules designed to assure the maximum net public benefits and a fair and level playing field for all participants and to assure the continued primacy of U.S. financial markets. The Senate has an historic opportunity to modernize our financial system by passing a bill that creates an unusually desirable framework. The Federal Reserve urges the Committee to establish a wider scope for the delivery of financial services through the holding company vehicle. This is the best way to minimize the spread of the safety net subsidy and its resulting competitive inequities, to minimize risks for depository entities and their insurance funds, and to facilitate a safe and sound banking and financial system that is able to serve the American public and maintain the leadership role of the American financial system in the global economy. Attachments Summaries of Prior Financial Modernization Legislation Considered and Passed by the Senate Banking Committee Since 1984 Executive Summary of H.R. 10 National Bank Market Shares Footnotes For the Committee's assistance, Attachment 2 to this testimony provides an executive summary of H.R. 10.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the scheduling of an additional day, June 26, and a time change, for the public meeting in New York City on the proposal by Travelers Group Inc. to acquire Citicorp, both located in New York, New York. The Board, on June 4, announced a public meeting for June 25, beginning at 9:00 a.m at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 33 Liberty Street, New York, New York. Today, the Presiding Officer extended the meeting to a second day, June 26, and scheduled the meetings on both days to begin at 8:00 a.m. EDT. Additional information about the public meeting was contained in the issued by the Board on June 4, 1998.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced that it has adopted a revised Policy Statement on Privately Operated Multilateral Settlement Systems. The statement updates and integrates the Board's risk management policies for Privately Operated Large-Dollar Multilateral Netting Systems and Private Small-Dollar Clearing and Settlement Systems into a single, comprehensive policy statement. The revised policy statement is effective January 4, 1999. The policy statement will apply to privately operated multilateral settlement systems that are expected to settle transactions with an aggregate gross value of $5 billion or more on any day during a rolling twelve month period. The policy statement will apply to systems or arrangements for the settlement of checks, automated clearing house (ACH) transfers, credit, debit, and other card transactions, large-value interbank transfers, or foreign exchange contracts involving the U.S. dollar. However, only a few of these systems currently settle transactions with a gross daily aggregate value in excess of $5 billion, and thus will be subject to the requirements of the policy at this time. The systems that are covered by the policy statement will be required to address the credit, liquidity, operational, and legal risks associated with their settlement activities using an analytical and flexible approach to risks and risk management. In addition, a few of these systems may be required to meet the Lamfalussy Minimum Standards based on the Board's determination, for example, that such systems settle a high proportion of large-value interbank or other financial market transactions, generate very large liquidity exposures that have potentially systemic consequences, or generate systemic credit exposures relative to participants' financial capacity. In general, such systems are already subject to the Board's policy on Privately Operated Large-Dollar Multilateral Netting Systems, which is being integrated into the revised policy statement. The revised policy statement is not intended to alter the Board's policy with respect to these large-dollar systems. Further, the revised policy statement is not intended to alter approvals by the Board for specific clearinghouses to use the Federal Reserve Banks' Fedwire-based net settlement service. The revised policy statement is attached. |
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice of Société Générale, Paris, France, to acquire Cowen & Co. and Cowen Incorporated, both of New York, New York, and thereby engage in underwriting and dealing, to a limited extent, in all types of debt and equity securities (except ownership interests in open-end investment companies) and certain other nonbanking activities. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Société Générale Paris, France Order Approving Notice to Engage in Nonbanking Activities Société Générale ("SoGen"), a foreign bank subject to the provisions of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8)) and section 225.24(a) of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.24(a)) to acquire Cowen & Co. and Cowen Incorporated, both of New York, New York (together "Cowen"), and thereby engage in the following nonbanking activities: underwriting and dealing in, to a limited extent, all types of debt and equity securities that a state member bank may not underwrite and deal in ("bank-ineligible securities"), except ownership interests in open-end investment companies; making loans or other extensions of credit, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(1) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(1)); activities related to extending credit, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(2) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(2)); providing fiduciary services, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(5) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(5)); providing financial and investment advisory services, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(6) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(6)); providing agency transactional services for customer investments, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(7) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(7)); underwriting and dealing in government obligations and money market instruments ("bank-eligible securities"), pursuant to section 225.28(b)(8)(i) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(8)(i)); investing and trading activities, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(8)(ii) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(8))(ii)); providing cash management services; providing certain administrative services for open-end investment companies ("mutual funds"); and acting as general partner for certain private investment limited partnerships that invest in assets in which a bank holding company is permitted to invest. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (63 Federal Register 17,874 (1998)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the notice and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. SoGen, with total consolidated assets of approximately $413 billion, is the third largest banking organization in France and the 15th largest banking organization in the world. In the United States, SoGen operates branches in New York, New York, Chicago, Illinois, and Los Angeles, California; an agency in Dallas, Texas; and representative offices in San Francisco, California, Atlanta, Georgia, and Houston, Texas. SoGen also engages through subsidiaries in a broad range of nonbanking activities in the United States. Cowen, with total consolidated assets of $3.7 billion, engages in a broad range of securities underwriting and dealing, brokerage, investment advisory, and other activities. SoGen plans to transfer the business of Cowen to Société Générale Securities Corporation, New York, New York ("SGSC"), a subsidiary of SoGen that engages in a wide range of securities-related activities, including securities underwriting and dealing. After consummation of the proposal, SGSC will change its name to SG Cowen Securities Corporation, New York, New York ("SG Cowen"). SG Cowen would continue to engage in most of the current activities of SGSC and the permissible activities of Cowen. SGSC is currently and, after consummation of the proposal, SG Cowen will continue to be registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") as a broker-dealer under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. § 78a et seq. ) ("1934 Act") and a member of the National Association of Securities Dealers, Inc. ("NASD"). Accordingly, SGSC is and SG Cowen will be subject to the recordkeeping and reporting obligations, fiduciary standards, and other requirements of the 1934 Act, the SEC, and the NASD. Underwriting and Dealing in Bank-Ineligible Securities The Board previously has determined that -- subject to the framework of prudential limitations established in previous decisions to address the potential for conflicts of interests, unsound banking practices, or other adverse effects -- the proposed underwriting and dealing activities involving bank-ineligible securities are so closely related to banking as to be proper incidents thereto within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. The Board also has determined that underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities is consistent with section 20 of the Glass-Steagall Act (12 U.S.C. § 377), provided that the company engaged in the activity derives no more than 25 percent of its gross revenues from underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities. SoGen has committed that SG Cowen will conduct its underwriting and dealing activities using the methods and procedures and subject to the prudential limitations established by the Board in the Section 20 Orders and other previous cases. SoGen also has committed that Company will conduct its bank-ineligible securities underwriting and dealing activities subject to the Board's revenue restriction. As a condition of this order, SoGen is required to conduct its bank-ineligible securities activities subject to the revenue restrictions and Operating Standards established for section 20 subsidiaries ("Operating Standards"). Mutual Fund Activities The Board previously has determined that providing administrative services to mutual funds is closely related to banking within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. SoGen proposes to provide investment advisory, brokerage, and administrative services through SG Cowen that previously have been approved by the Board, and SoGen has committed that the proposed activities will be conducted in compliance with Regulation Y and subject to the prudential and other limitations established by the Board. Cowen provides administrative, advisory, brokerage, and other services to mutual funds. SoGen proposes that SG Cowen would continue to provide these services to the funds. However, SoGen has committed that distribution activities of mutual funds would be the responsibility of an independent distributor, which would enter into contractual agreements with the mutual funds to serve as "principal underwriter." The independent distributor also would be responsible for supervising sales as the principal underwriter for purposes of the federal securities laws. SoGen also proposes to have certain director and officer interlocks with the funds. In particular, SoGen proposes that up to 25 percent of the directors of a mutual fund would be employees, officers, or directors of SoGen or one of its subsidiaries, including SG Cowen. SoGen proposes that one of these directors may serve as chairman of the board of the fund. In addition, SoGen seeks to have up to three directors, officers, or employees of SoGen or its subsidiaries, including SG Cowen, serve as senior officers of the fund and have other SoGen personnel serve as junior-level officers of the fund. The Board previously has authorized a bank holding company and its nonbank subsidiaries to have limited director and officer interlocks with mutual funds that the bank holding company advises and administers. In each of these cases, the Board found that the funds would be controlled by their independent directors. The Board noted that the independent directors would be responsible for the selection and review of the investment adviser, the underwriter, and the other major service contractors of the fund. In this case, SoGen's personnel would not comprise more than 25 percent of any fund's board of directors. Accordingly, all of the funds to which SoGen provides advisory and administrative services would have boards of directors in which 75 percent of the directors are unaffiliated with SoGen, and the funds would be controlled by those independent directors. In addition, any director of a fund who also serves as a director, officer, or employee of SoGen would be an "interested person" under the 1940 Act and, therefore, would be required to abstain from voting on investment advisory and other major contracts of the fund. The director and officer interlocks proposed by SoGen would not appear to affect the independence of the other directors on the boards of directors for the funds. The independent members of the boards of directors would continue to have authority to review brokerage, advisory, administrative and other major contracts and would retain authority to change the distributor of fund shares. Based on the foregoing, the Board concludes that control of the mutual funds would rest with the independent members of the boards of directors of the funds and that the proposed director and officer interlocks would not compromise the independence of the boards of the funds or permit SoGen to control the funds. Other Activities Approved by Regulation or Order The Board previously has determined that making loans or other extensions of credit and engaging in activities related to extending credit, providing fiduciary services, providing financial and investment advisory services, providing agency transactional services for customer investments, underwriting and dealing in bank-eligible securities, engaging in investing and trading activities, providing cash management services, and acting as general partner to private investment limited partnerships that make investments that a bank holding company may make are all closely related to banking within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. SoGen has committed that it will conduct these activities in accordance with the limitations set forth in Regulation Y and the Board's orders and interpretations relating to each of the activities. Other Considerations In order to approve the proposal, the Board also must determine that the proposed activities are a proper incident to banking, that is, that the proposed transaction "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public . . . that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices." As part of its evaluation of these factors, the Board considers the financial and managerial resources of the notificant, its subsidiaries, and any company to be acquired, and the effect the transaction would have on such resources. SoGen's capital ratios satisfy applicable risk-based standards under the Basle Accord and are considered equivalent to the capital levels that would be required of a United States banking organization. The Board also has reviewed the capitalization of SGSC and Cowen in accordance with the standards set forth in the Section 20 Orders and finds the capitalization of each to be consistent with approval. This determination is based on all the facts of record, including projections of the volume of SG Cowen's underwriting and dealing activities in bank-ineligible securities. The Board also has reviewed other aspects of the financial condition and resources of SoGen, Cowen, and their respective subsidiaries, including the effect of the proposal on the financial condition and resources of these entities. The Board also has reviewed the managerial resources of each of the entities involved in this proposal in light of examination reports and other supervisory information. In connection with the proposal, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York has reviewed the policies and procedures of SoGen, SGSC, and Cowen to ensure compliance with this order and the Section 20 Orders, including computer, audit, and accounting systems, internal risk management controls, and the necessary operational and managerial infrastructure. On the basis of this review and the Board's supervisory experience with SoGen and SGSC, the commitments provided in this case, and the proposed managerial and risk management systems of SG Cowen, the Board has determined that financial and managerial considerations are consistent with approval. The Board also has carefully considered the competitive effects of the proposal. SoGen represents that SGSC and Cowen offer largely complementary services with few overlaps. To the extent that SGSC and Cowen offer different types of products and services, the proposed acquisition would result in no loss of competition. In those markets where the product offerings of SGSC and SoGen's other subsidiaries and Cowen do overlap, there are numerous existing and potential competitors. As a result, consummation of the proposal would have a de minimis effect on competition for these services, and the Board has concluded that the proposal would not result in a significantly adverse effect on competition in any relevant market. Under the framework established in this and prior decisions, consummation of the proposal is not likely to result in any significantly adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices that outweigh the public benefits of the proposal. The Board expects that the proposal would enable SoGen to compete more effectively, particularly in underwriting activities, by increasing efficiencies and enabling SoGen to offer a broader range of products and services to its customers. Accordingly, based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the balance of public benefits that it must consider under the proper incident to banking standard of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act is favorable and consistent with approval of the proposal. Conclusion Based on the foregoing and all other facts of record, the Board has determined that the notice should be, and hereby is, approved. This determination is subject to all the terms and conditions discussed in this order, including the Board's reservation of authority to establish additional limitations to ensure that SoGen's activities are consistent with safety and soundness, conflicts of interests, and other relevant considerations under the BHC Act. Underwriting and dealing in any manner other than as approved in this order and the Section 20 Orders, as modified by the Modification Orders, is not within the scope of the Board's approval and is not authorized for SG Cowen. The Board's determination also is subject to all the terms and conditions set forth in Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.25(c) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.7 and 225.25(c)), and to require such modification or termination of the activities of a bank holding company or any of its subsidiaries as the Board finds necessary to ensure compliance with, and to prevent evasion of, the provisions of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders issued thereunder. The Board's decision is specifically conditioned on compliance with all the commitments made in connection with the notice and related correspondence, the conditions established in this order, and the Board's regulations and other orders noted above. The commitments and conditions relied on by the Board in reaching this decision are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The proposal shall not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective June 22, 1998. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Appendix List of Administrative Services Maintaining and preserving the records of mutual funds, including financial and corporate records. Computing net asset value, dividends, performance data, and financial information regarding mutual funds. Furnishing statistical and research data to mutual funds. Preparing and filing with the SEC and state securities regulators registration statements, notices, reports, and other materials required to be filed under applicable laws. Preparing reports and other informational materials regarding mutual funds, including prospectuses, proxies, and other shareholder communications. Providing legal and other regulatory advice to mutual funds. Providing office facilities and clerical support for mutual funds. Developing and implementing procedures for monitoring compliance with regulatory requirements and compliance with mutual funds' investment objectives, policies, and restrictions as established by the boards of directors of the funds. Providing routine accounting services to mutual funds and liaison with outside auditors. Preparing and filing tax returns, and monitoring tax compliance. Reviewing and arranging for payment of expenses for mutual funds. Providing communication and coordination services with regard to mutual funds' investment advisers, transfer agent, custodian, distributor, and other service organizations that render distribution, recordkeeping, or shareholder communication services. Reviewing and providing advice to the distributor, mutual funds, and investment advisors regarding sales literature and marketing plans for the mutual funds. Providing information to the distributor's personnel concerning performance and administration of mutual funds. Providing marketing support with respect to sales of mutual funds through financial intermediaries. Participating in seminars, meetings, and conference designed to present information concerning mutual funds. Assisting in the development of additional mutual funds. Providing reports to the board of directors of mutual funds. Providing telephone shareholder services through a toll-free number. Footnotes As a foreign bank operating branches and an agency in the United States, SoGen is subject to certain provisions of the BHC Act by operation of section 8(a) of the International Banking Act of 1978 (12 U.S.C. § 3106(a)) ("IBA"). Asset and foreign ranking data are as of December 31, 1997, and are based on foreign exchange conversion rates as of that date. World ranking data are as of December 31, 1996. Cowen currently engages in certain insurance and real estate activities and controls certain limited partnerships that have investments that are not permissible for bank holding companies. SoGen has committed to conform the activities, investments, and relationships of Cowen to those permissible for bank holding companies within two years of acquiring Cowen. SoGen controls SGSC pursuant to the "grandfather" provisions of section 8(c) of the IBA (12 U.S.C. § 3106(c)). On consummation of the proposal, SoGen's grandfather rights relating to SGSC would end. See Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, et al., 76 Federal Reserve Bulletin 158 (1990); J.P. Morgan & Co. Incorporated, et al., 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 192 (1989), aff'd sub nom. Securities Industries Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 900 F.2d 360 (D.C. Cir. 1990); Citicorp, et al., 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 473 (1987), aff'd sub nom. Securities Industry Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 839 F.2d 47 (2d Cir.), cert. denied, 486 U.S. 1059 (1988); as modified by Review of Restrictions on Director, Officer and Employee Interlocks, Cross-Marketing Activities, and the Purchase and Sale of Financial Assets Between a Section 20 Subsidiary and an Affiliated Bank or Thrift, 61 Federal Register 57,679 (1996); Amendments to Restrictions in the Board's Section 20 Orders, 62 Federal Register 45,295 (1997); and Clarification to the Board's Section 20 Orders, 63 Federal Register 14,803 (1998) (collectively, "Section 20 Orders"). Compliance with the revenue limitation shall be calculated in accordance with the method stated in the Section 20 Orders, as modified by the Order Approving Modifications to the Section 20 Orders, 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 751 (1989), and 10 Percent Revenue Limit on Bank-Ineligible Activities of Subsidiaries of Bank Holding Companies Engaged in Underwriting and Dealing in Securities, 61 Federal Register 48,953 (1996) (collectively, "Modification Orders"). SoGen has requested that SG Cowen be permitted to calculate compliance with the revenue limitation on an annualized basis during the first year after consummation of the proposed acquisition. The Board believes that allowing SG Cowen to calculate compliance with the revenue limitation on an annualized basis during the first year of its operations and thereafter on a rolling quarterly average basis is consistent with the Section 20 Orders. See Dauphin Deposit Corporation, 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 672 (1991). 12 C.F.R. 225.200. SG Cowen may provide services that are necessary incidents to the proposed underwriting and dealing activities. Unless SG Cowen receives specific approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act to conduct the activities independently, any revenues from the incidental activities must be treated as ineligible revenues subject to the Board's revenue limitation. See, e.g., Bankers Trust New York Corporation, 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin 780 (1997) ("BTNY") ; Commerzbank AG, 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin 679 (1997). See, e.g., BTNY. The administrative services that SoGen would provide to mutual funds through SG Cowen and other SoGen subsidiaries include computing the fund's financial data, maintaining and preserving the records of the fund, providing office facilities and clerical support for the fund, and preparing and filing tax returns for the funds. The services are listed in the Appendix. The Board previously has determined that the Glass-Steagall Act does not prohibit a bank holding company from providing advisory and administrative services to a mutual fund. See 12 C.F.R. 225.125. Although SoGen does not own a member bank, SoGen is subject to the limitations applicable to domestic banking organizations under the principle of national treatment. See, e.g., Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, et al., 76 Federal Reserve Bulletin 158 (1990). As defined under the Investment Company Act of 1940 ("1940 Act"), a principal underwriter is any underwriter who, as principal, purchases from a mutual fund any security for distribution, or who as agent for such fund sells or has the right to sell the fund's securities to a dealer and/or to the public. 15 U.S.C. § 80a-2(a)(29). An independent distributor would enter into any sales agreements with brokers or other financial intermediaries to sell shares of mutual funds. The independent distributor also would have legal responsibility under the rules of the NASD for the form and use of all advertising and sales literature and also would be responsible for filing these materials with the NASD or the SEC. Senior officers include the president, secretary, treasurer, and vice presidents with policy-making functions. Junior officers include assistant secretaries, assistant treasurers, or assistant vice-presidents of the funds. Junior officers are fund employees who have no authority or responsibility to make policy. See, e.g., BTNY; Lloyds TSB Group plc, 84 Federal Reserve Bulletin 116 (1998); BankAmerica Corporation, 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin 913 (1997); The Governor and Company of the Bank of Ireland, 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 1129 (1996). Under the 1940 Act, at least 40 percent of the board of directors of a mutual fund must be individuals who are not affiliated with the mutual fund, investment adviser, or any other major contractor to the fund. The 1940 Act and related regulatory provisions require that independent directors annually review and approve the mutual fund's investment advisory contract and any plan of distribution or related agreement. See 12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(1), (2), (5), (6), (7), (8)(i), (8)(ii); Sovran Financial Corporation, 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 225 (1987); Dresdner Bank AG, 84 Federal Reserve Bulletin 361 (1998). See 12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8). See 12 C.F.R. 225.26(b); see also The Fuji Bank, Limited, 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 94 (1989); Bayerische Vereinsbank AG, 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 155 (1987). Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Phillips, Meyer, and Gramlich. Absent and not voting: Governors Kelley and Ferguson.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of an Order of Prohibition against Faisal Saud Al-Fulaij, a former institution-affiliated party of Credit and Commerce American Holdings, N.V., formerly the parent bank holding company over the First American banking organization. Under the terms of the Order, Faisal Saud Al-Fulaij is permanently barred from any future participation in banking in the United States. The Order results from the Boardï¿½s 1991 charges against BCCI and numerous individuals associated with BCCI.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve is issuing additional guidance to assist bank examiners in their evaluations of the quality of banking organizations' credit risk management processes. The guidance is the result of an intensive study conducted by Federal Reserve supervision staff to assess the current state of bank lending terms and standards for domestic commercial and industrial loans. The study compared loans made in late 1995 with loans made in late 1997 and involved several hundred loans from across the country. The study identified noteworthy and measurable easing in bank lending terms and to some extent, bank lending standards. However, the overall quality of loans did not deteriorate significantly over the two year period. The guidance to examiners indicates that this is a critical time for banks to maintain their lending discipline and it highlights particular areas of concern, including the need for formal forward-looking analysis in the loan approval process. The study along with the supervisory letter (SR 98-18) detailing examiner guidance are attached.