For immediate release The Basle Committee on Banking Supervision (Basle Committee) has issued a paper entitled Framework for the Evaluation of Internal Control Systems as part of its ongoing work to improve risk management standards in banks. The paper describes elements that are essential to a sound internal control system and lists fourteen principles for use by supervisory authorities when evaluating banks' internal controls. The internal control framework described in the paper is in the context of international banking organizations and it is consistent with the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO) document, Internal Control-Integrated Framework. The paper is being distributed to supervisory authorities around the world, to banks and to other interested parties. Comments to the Basle Committee are invited by March 30, 1998. The Basle Committee's paper is attached. The Basle Committee's press release and paper can also be obtained from the Internet (http://www.bis.org) or from the Basle Committee Secretariat at the Bank of International Settlements. |
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced that it has settled the administrative proceedings against Clark M. Clifford and Robert A. Altman, with their consent, brought by the Board in connection with the Bank of Credit and Commerce International affair. Copies of the Board’s action against Clifford and Altman and the amended notice initiating proceedings against them are attached. Clifford and Altman served as directors of Credit and Commerce American Holdings, N.V., Netherlands Antilles, formerly a bank holding company, and its subsidiary, First American Bankshares, Inc., Washington, D.C., and as counsel to BCCI. Without admitting any of the Board’s allegations in its amended notice, Clifford and Altman have agreed to pay approximately $5 million in compensation by transferring their interest in the majority of their shares of CCAH for the ultimate benefit of the innocent depositors and creditors of BCCI. As part of the settlement, Altman has also agreed not to participate in the banking industry without the prior approval of the Board. The Board dismissed its prohibition action against Clifford because of his advanced age and ill health.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today requested additional comment on possible streamlining and reform of the Truth in Lending Act (TILA) and the Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act (RESPA) for home-secured loans. Comments are requested by March 9. The Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act of 1996 directed the Board and the Department of Housing and Urban Development to submit legislative recommendations to the Congress on how to simplify and improve consumer disclosures under TILA and RESPA, if the disclosures could not be simplified by regulation. In March 1997, the Board determined that regulatory changes alone would be inadequate to achieve the goals of the Congress and invited public comment on legislative changes to harmonize the two Acts. The Board is now reopening the comment period to obtain additional views on matters such as the timing, content, and reliability of disclosures by inviting certain individuals to participate in focus groups. Comment from other interested parties is also welcomed. The Board's notice is attached. FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM 12 CFR Part 226 [Regulation Z; Docket No. R-0954] Truth in Lending; Extension of Comment Period AGENCY : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. ACTION : Request for comments; extension of comment period. SUMMARY : The Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act of 1996 directs the Board and the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), where possible, to simplify and improve consumer disclosures required under the Truth in Lending Act (TILA) and the Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act (RESPA) and to provide a single format satisfying the requirements of those laws. If legislation is necessary to accomplish these goals, the agencies are to submit legislative recommendations to the Congress. In December 1996, the agencies published for comment an advance notice of proposed rulemaking. After consideration of the comments and further review, the Board determined that regulatory changes alone would be inadequate to achieve the goals of the Congress and that legislative changes are necessary to harmonize TILA and RESPA. In April 1997, the Board published a notice to invite additional public comments on possible legislative action. In the next few months, the Board and HUD will report to the Congress on potential legislative changes. In order to obtain additional comments from individual consumers, the Board has reopened and extended the public comment period. EFFECTIVE DATE : Comments must be submitted on or before March 9, 1998. ADDRESSES : Comments should refer to Docket No. R-0954 and may be mailed to William W. Wiles, Secretary, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 20th Street and Constitution Avenue, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20551. Comments may also be delivered to Room B-2222 of the Eccles Building between 8:45 a.m. and 5:15 p.m. weekdays, or to the guard station in the Eccles Building courtyard on 20th Street N.W. (between Constitution Avenue and C Street) at any time. Comments may be inspected in Room MP-500 of the Martin Building between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. weekdays, except as provided in section 12 CFR 261.8 of the Board's Rules Regarding Availability of Information. FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT : Michael L. Hentrel, Natalie E. Taylor, Staff Attorneys, or James A. Michaels, Senior Attorney, Division of Consumer and Community Affairs, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, at (202) 452-3667; for users of Telecommunications Device for the Deaf (TDD) only, Diane Jenkins, at (202) 452-3544. SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION : Section 2101 of the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act of 1996 (Pub. L. 104-208, 110 Stat. 3009) directs the Board and HUD to simplify and improve the disclosures given in a home mortgage transaction subject to TILA and RESPA, and to create a single disclosure that will satisfy the requirements of both statutes, if possible. If legislation is necessary to develop a single simplified disclosure, the Board and HUD are directed to submit legislative recommendations to the Congress. The statutes impose numerous requirements and serve various purposes. TILA seeks to promote the informed use of consumer credit by requiring standardized disclosures about credit terms and costs. The disclosures are intended to focus consumers' attention on certain aspects of their transaction and to assist them in comparison shopping. TILA establishes additional disclosure requirements for home-secured loans, and in some cases permits consumers to rescind such loans. RESPA contains both disclosure and price-related provisions. It requires that certain disclosures be given at various points in most mortgage transactions to ensure that consumers receive timely and useful information about the costs associated with the transaction. It also prohibits kickbacks and referral fees among settlement service providers. On December 31, 1996 (61 FR 69055), the Board and HUD jointly published for comment an advance notice of proposed rulemaking on the issue of simplifying and combining the disclosure requirements of RESPA and TILA. The Board and HUD received more than 80 comment letters, primarily from creditors and their representatives. After reviewing the comments, and upon further analysis in consultation with HUD, the Board decided not to propose any changes to Regulation Z. The Board determined that harmonizing TILA and RESPA to any significant degree required changes that could only come about through legislative action. As a result, the Board published a notice inviting additional public comment on possible legislative action on April 2, 1997 (62 FR 15624). The Board and HUD received more than 160 comment letters from consumers and industry representatives. The Board is extending the comment period until March 9, 1998, in order to obtain views from consumers on matters such as the timing, content, and reliability of disclosures; the Board will do so by inviting certain first time homebuyers and previous home purchasers to participate in focus groups. The comment period is being extended primarily for the purpose of conducting these focus group interviews. Other members of the public may submit comments during this period, but they are encouraged to submit them as soon as possible. This extension will not delay the Board in providing its report to the Congress. By order of the Secretary of the Board, acting pursuant to delegated authority for Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January 30, 1998. (signed) William W. Wiles William W. Wiles Secretary of the Board
For immediate release
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of a Cease and Desist Order against the Towne Bank, Perrysburg, Ohio. The Order was issued jointly with the Ohio Division of Financial Institutions. A copy of the order is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of an Order of Prohibition against Michael A. Lindahl, a former officer and institution-affiliated party of the Heartland Bank, Croton, Ohio, a state member bank. Mr. Lindahl, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order as a result of his alleged participation in fraudulent nominee loan transactions and unauthorized use of a customerï¿½s assets. A copy of the order is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of an Order of Prohibition against Stephen R. Koury, a former employee and institution-affiliated party of First Western Trust Services Company, New Castle, Pennsylvania, a nonbank subsidiary of First Western Bancorp, Inc., New Castle, Pennsylvania, a registered bank holding company. Mr. Koury, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order as a result of his alleged participation in violations of law in connection with his misappropriation of Trust Servicesï¿½s customer and company funds. A copy of the order is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the proposal of Shore Financial Corporation ("Shore Financial") to become a bank holding company by acquiring Shore Bank ("Bank"), both of Onley, Virginia, to merge Shore Financial's subsidiary federal savings bank into Bank, and for Bank to become a member of the Federal Reserve System. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Shore Financial Corporation Onley, Virginia Order Approving Formation of a Bank Holding Company, Merger of a Savings Association into a Bank, and Membership in the Federal Reserve System Shore Financial Corporation ("Shore Financial") has applied under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act") (12 U.S.C. § 1842) for the Board's approval to become a bank holding company by acquiring all the voting shares of Shore Bank, Onley, Virginia ("Bank"), a de novo state chartered bank. Bank also has applied under section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. § 321) to become a state member bank and to continue to operate branches in Virginia and Maryland at locations at which Bank's predecessor currently operates branches. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (62 Federal Register 66,371 (1997)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the application and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in the BHC Act, the Bank Merger Act, and the Federal Reserve Act. Shore Financial, with total consolidated assets of approximately $111 million, operates Thrift, which has branches in Virginia and Maryland. Shore is the 95th largest insured depository institution in Virginia, controlling deposits of approximately $79 million, representing less than 1 percent of total deposits in insured depository institutions in the state ("state deposits"), and is the 142d largest insured depository institution in Maryland, controlling deposits of approximately $8 million, representing less than 1 percent of Maryland state deposits. As noted, the proposal represents a reorganization of subsidiaries owned by Shore Financial, and Bank would continue the current operations of Thrift. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposal would not have a significantly adverse effect on competition in any relevant banking market. The Board also has considered the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of Shore Financial and Bank in light of all the facts of record, including supervisory reports of examination assessing the financial and managerial resources of the organization and financial information provided by Shore Financial. The Board notes that Shore Financial is in satisfactory financial condition and would remain so after consummation of the proposal. Reports of examination assessing the managerial resources of Shore Financial and its subsidiaries indicate this factor is consistent with approval. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that considerations related to the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of Shore Financial and Bank are consistent with approval under the BHC Act. Convenience and Needs Considerations The Board has carefully considered the effect of the proposal on the convenience and needs of the community to be served in light of all the facts of record, including comments maintaining that Thrift does not adequately serve the credit needs of commercial farmers in its assessment area and requesting the Board to require Bank to increase its agricultural lending. The Board has long held that consideration of the convenience and needs factor includes a review of the records of the relevant depository institutions under the Community Reinvestment Act (12 U.S.C. § 2901 et seq. ) ("CRA"). As provided in the CRA, the Board has evaluated the convenience and needs factor in light of examinations of the CRA performance records of the relevant institutions by their primary federal supervisors. An institution's most recent CRA performance evaluation is a particularly important consideration in the application process because it represents a detailed, on-site evaluation of the institution's overall record of performance under the CRA by its primary federal supervisor. Thrift is a small saving association that is primarily engaged in residential mortgage lending. Thrift received an "outstanding" rating from the Office of Thrift Supervision at its most recent CRA performance examination as of February 1996 (the "1996 Examination"). Examiners characterized Thrift as having a strong record of lending within its assessment area (approximately 98 percent of its loans), a high loan-to-deposit ratio (92.5 percent), and an excellent dispersion of loans throughout all the communities within its assessment area. The 1996 Examination found Thrift's overall lending program to be particularly noteworthy because its assessment area was one of the poorest areas in Virginia in terms of average family income and had recently experienced little population increase. The examination also included a review of selected loan files and found no evidence of illegal discrimination. Although residential mortgage lending constituted Thrift's primary lending activity, examiners also commended Thrift's additional emphasis on small business lending. In 1995, Thrift originated 61 small business loans totalling approximately $1.7 million. In evaluating the commenter's allegations that Thrift has not engaged in sufficient agricultural lending, the Board notes that the CRA provides banks with substantial flexibility in developing specific CRA-related policies and programs and does not require a bank to engage in any particular type of lending. Shore Financial states, moreover, that Thrift had more than $3 million in agricultural loans outstanding as of December 1997, and maintains that the service of two farmers on its eight-member board of directors reflects its commitment to helping meet the credit needs of all its communities, including the farming community. The Board has carefully considered the entire record in its review of the convenience and needs factor under the BHC Act. Based on all the facts of record, including information provided by the commenter, the response of Shore Financial, and the relevant reports of examination, the Board concludes that considerations relating to convenience and needs, including the CRA performance records of the relevant institutions, are consistent with approval. The Board also has considered the other supervisory factors it is required to consider under section 3 of the BHC Act as well as the factors it is required to consider under section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act for Bank to become a member of the Federal Reserve System and to operate branches and under other provisions of law. The Board finds these factors to be consistent with approval. Conclusion Based on the foregoing and all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the applications should be, and hereby are, approved. The Board's approval of the proposal is specifically conditioned on compliance by Shore Financial with all the commitments made in connection with this application. For purposes of this action, the commitments and conditions relied on in reaching this decision are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The proposal shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day following the effective date of this order, or later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective February 9, 1998. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Appendix Branches to Be Established by Shore Bank Virginia: 21220 North Bayside Drive, Cheriton 6350 Maddox Boulevard, Chincoteague 4071 Lankford Highway, Exmore Maryland: 100 West Main Street, Salisbury 1503 South Salisbury Boulevard, Salisbury Footnotes Shore Financial's wholly owned subsidiary federal savings bank, Shore Bank, Onley, Virginia ("Thrift"), would merge with and into Bank, with Bank as the surviving institution. Bank has requested the Board's approval for the merger under section 18(c) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act ("FDI Act") (12 U.S.C. § 1828(c)) ("Bank Merger Act") and section 5(d)(3) of the FDI Act (12 U.S.C. § 1815(d)(3)). The locations of the branches are described in the Appendix. Asset data are as of September 30, 1997, and deposit data are as of June 30, 1996. In this context, insured depository institutions include commercial banks, savings banks, and savings institutions. The Statement of the Federal Financial Supervisory Agencies Regarding the Community Reinvestment Act provides that a CRA examination is an important and often controlling factor in the consideration of an institution's CRA record and that reports of these examinations will be given great weight in the applications process. See 54 Federal Register 13,742 and 13,745 (1989). Bank is authorized to operate its branches under the laws of Virginia and Maryland, and under section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act. See Va. Code Ann. §§ 6.1-39.3 and 6.1-44.3 (Michie 1996); Md. Code Ann., Fin. Inst. § 5-1003 (1996). The Board has reviewed the merger of Bank and Thrift under the Bank Merger Act and section 5(d)(3) of the FDI Act. With respect to the specific factors the Board must review under section 5(d)(3), the record in this case shows that (1) the transaction would not result in the transfer of any federally insured deposits from one federal deposit insurance fund to the other; (2) Bank, on consummation of the proposal, will meet all applicable capital standards; and (3) the proposal would comply with the interstate banking provisions of the BHC Act if Thrift were a state bank that Bank was applying to acquire directly. See 12 U.S.C. § 1815(d)(3). The commenter has requested that the Board hold a public hearing on the application to consider the views of other farmers. Section 3(b) of the BHC Act does not require the Board to hold a public hearing on an application unless the appropriate supervisory authority for the bank to be acquired makes a timely written recommendation of denial. The Board has not received such a recommendation from the Office of Thrift Supervision or any state supervisory authority. In addition, neither the Federal Reserve Act nor the Bank Merger Act requires a public hearing on an application. Under its rules, the Board also may, in its discretion, hold a public hearing or meeting on an application to acquire a bank if a hearing is necessary or appropriate to clarify factual issues related to the application and to provide an opportunity for testimony, if appropriate. 12 C.F.R. 225.16(e). The Board has carefully considered the commenter's request for a hearing in light of all the facts of record. In the Board's view, the commenter has had ample opportunity to submit his views, and has submitted written comments that have been carefully considered by the Board in action on the application. The commenter's request fails to demonstrate why his written presentation does not adequately present his evidence, allegations, or views. The commenter also fails to indicate the matters that may be presented by others and why a public meeting or hearing is necessary for the proper presentation or consideration of their views. After careful review of all the facts of record, moreover, the Board has concluded that commenter disputes the weight that should be accorded to, and the conclusions that the Board should draw from, the facts of record, but does not identify disputed issues of fact that are material to the Board's decision. For these reasons, and based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that a public hearing or meeting is not required or warranted in this case. Accordingly, the request for a hearing or meeting on the proposal is hereby denied. Voting for this action: Vice Chair Rivlin and Governors Kelley, Phillips, Meyer, Ferguson, and Gramlich. Absent and not voting: Chairman Greenspan.
For immediate release North Fork Bancorporation, Inc. Melville, New York Order Approving the Acquisition of a Savings Association By order of the Board of Governors, effective February 9, 1998. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application by National City Corporation, Cleveland, Ohio, to merge with First of America Bank Corporation, Kalamazoo, Michigan ("First of America"), and thereby acquire First of America's bank and nonbank subsidiaries. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. National City Corporation Cleveland, Ohio Order Approving the Merger of Bank Holding Companies By order of the Board of Governors, effective February 11, 1998. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Appendix A Nonbank Subsidiaries of First of America to be Acquired by National City First of America Community Development Corporation, Kalamazoo, Michigan, and thereby engage in community development activities pursuant to section 225.28(b)(12) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(12)); SunAmerica Affordable Housing Partners, Carson City, Nevada, and engage in thereby engage in community development activities pursuant to section 225.28(b)(12) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(12)); First of America Insurance Company, Kalamazoo, Michigan, and thereby engage in credit insurance activities pursuant to section 225.28(b)(11) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(11); First of America Trust Company, Oak Brook, Illinois, and thereby engage in trust company functions and investment advisory activities pursuant to sections 225.28(b)(5) and (6) or Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(5) and (6)); New England Trust Company, Providence, Rhode Island, and thereby engage in trust company functions and investment advisory activities pursuant to sections 225.28(b)(5) and (6) or Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(5) and (6)); and First of America Securities, Inc., Kalamazoo, Michigan, and thereby engage in lending, investment advisory, securities brokerage, and other transactional activities pursuant to sections 225.28(b)(1), (6), (7i), and (8) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(1), (6), (7i), and (8)), and underwriting and dealing in, to a limited extent, municipal revenue bonds, 1-4 family mortgage-related securities, consumer receivable-related securities, and commercial paper. Appendix B Banking markets in which consummation of the proposal would not exceed the DOJ Guidelines: Fort Wayne Banking Market: The Fort Wayne banking market is approximated by Allen, De Kalb and Whitley Counties; Preble, Root, and Union Townships in Adams County; Union and Jefferson Townships in Wells County; Jackson and Union Townships in Huntington County; Noble, Green, and Swan Townships in Noble County, all in Indiana, and Carryall Township in Paulding County and Hicksville Township in Defiance County, both in Ohio. After consummation of the proposal, National City would control less than 1 percent of market deposits and would remain the 20th largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would not increase. Gary-Hammond Banking Market: The Gary-Hammond banking market is approximated by Lake County; Porter County, except for Pine Township; and New Durham, Clinton, Cass, Dewey, and Prairie Townships in La Porte County, all in Indiana. After consummation of the proposal, National City would control approximately 2.9 percent of market deposits and would remain the tenth largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would not increase. Indianapolis Banking Market: The Indianapolis banking market is approximated by Boone, Hamilton, Hancock, Hendricks, Johnson, Marion, Morgan, and Shelby Counties, and Green Township in Madison County, all in Indiana. After consummation of the proposal, National City would control approximately 21.8 percent of market deposits and would become the second largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase by 133 points to 1685. Kokomo Banking Market: The Kokomo banking market is approximated by Howard County; Prairie and Liberty Townships in Tipton County; Tipton, Deer Creek, and Jackson Townships in Cass County; and Deer Creek and Clay Townships in Miami County, all in Indiana. After consummation of the proposal, National City would control approximately 19.7 percent of market deposits and would remain the third largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase by 57 points to 2000. Toledo Banking Market: The Toledo banking market is approximated by Lucas County, Wood County, excluding the City of Fostoria; the eastern half of Swan Creek Township and the southeastern quadrant of Fulton Township in Fulton County; Clay, Allen, Harris, Benton Townships in Ottawa County; and Woodfield Township in Sandusky County, all in Ohio; and Whiteford, Bedford, and Erie Townships in Monroe County, Michigan. After consummation of the proposal, National City would control approximately 14.1 percent of market deposits and would become the 21st largest depository institution in the market. The HHI would increase by 5 points to 1202. Footnotes National City and First of America also have requested approval of options to purchase up to 19.9 percent of the voting stock of the other institution if certain events occur. The options would expire on consummation of the proposal. Asset and ranking data are as of September 30, 1997. State deposit and ranking data are as of June 30, 1997, and, as discussed in the order, take into account National City's commitment to divest certain deposits. Market data are as of June 30, 1996. In this context, depository institutions include commercial banks, savings banks, and savings associations. Pub. L. No. 103-328, 108 Stat. 2338 (1994). A bank holding company's home state is that state in which the operations of the bank holding company's banking subsidiaries were principally conducted on July 1, 1966, or the date on which the company became a bank holding company, whichever is later. 12 U.S.C. § 1841(o)(4)(C). See 12 U.S.C. §§ 1842(d)(1)(A) and (B) and 1842(d)(2)(A) and (B). National City is adequately capitalized and adequately managed, as defined by the Riegle-Neal Act. FOA-Illinois has been in existence and continuously operated for at least the minimum period required under Illinois law. See 205 Ill. Comp. Stat. 10/3.071 and 3.09 (Lexis through 1997 Reg. Sess.). Indiana and Michigan have no minimum age requirement. On consummation of the proposal, National City would control less than 10 percent of the total amount of deposits of insured depository institutions in the United States and less than 30 percent of the total amount of deposits of insured depository institutions in Indiana, Illinois, and Michigan. All other requirements of section 3(d) of the BHC Act also would be met on consummation of the proposal. National City has entered into a binding contract to sell its only branch in the Peru, Indiana, banking market ("Peru banking market") to an out-of-market banking organization. In this light, concentration in this banking market would not increase as a result of the proposal. Under the guidelines, 49 Federal Register 26,823 (June 29, 1984), a market in which the post-merger Herfindahl-Hirschman Index ("HHI") is above 1800 is considered highly concentrated. The U.S. Department of Justice ("Justice Department") has informed the Board that a bank merger or acquisition generally will not be challenged (in the absence of other factors indicating anticompetitive effects) unless the post-merger HHI is at least 1800 and the merger increases the HHI by more than 200 points. The Justice Department has stated that the higher than normal HHI thresholds for screening bank mergers for anticompetitive effects implicitly recognize the competitive effect of limited-purpose lenders and other non-depository financial entities. The Anderson banking market is an area in Indiana that is approximated by Madison County except for Greene Township; Salem Township in Delaware County; Falls Creek Township in Henry County; and Madison Township in Tipton County. National City has committed to execute sales agreements with an out-of-market commercial banking organization prior to consummation of the acquisition of First of America and to complete the divestitures within 180 days of consummation of the acquisition. National City also has committed that, in the event it is unsuccessful in completing any divestiture within 180 days of consummation of the proposal, including the sale of National City's branch in the Peru banking market, National City will transfer the unsold branch(es) to an independent trustee that is acceptable to the Board and that will be instructed to sell the branches promptly. BankAmerica Corporation, 78 Federal Reserve Bulletin 338 (1992); United New Mexico Financial Corporation, 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 484 (1991). National City has further committed that, prior to consummation, it will submit to the Board an executed trust agreement acceptable to the Board stating the terms of these divestitures. Market share data before consummation are based on calculations in which the deposits of thrift institutions are included at 50 percent. The Board previously has indicated that thrift institutions have become, or have the potential to become, significant competitors of commercial banks. See Midwest Financial Group, 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 386 (1989); National City Corporation, 743 (1984). Thus, the Board has regularly included thrift deposits in the calculation of market share on a 50-percent weighted basis. See, e.g. , First Hawaiian, Inc. , 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 52 (1991). The Board previously has indicated that, when analyzing the competitive effects of a proposal, it may consider the competitiveness of savings associations at a level greater than 50 percent of the savings associations's deposits if appropriate. See Banknorth Group, Inc. , 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 703 (1989). In the Anderson banking market, the two savings associations maintain 5.9 percent and 6.3 percent, respectively, of their assets in commercial loans, compared to the national average for thrifts of 1.7 percent. In addition, informal interviews with employees of the savings associations showed that each savings association maintained separate commercial lending departments with at least eight commercial lending officers and each planned to increase its staff. The institutions also offered customers a variety of business products and services. The Statement of the Federal Financial Supervisory Agencies Regarding the Community Reinvestment Act ("Agency CRA Statement") provides that a CRA examination is an important and often controlling factor in the consideration of an institution's CRA record and that reports of these examinations will be given great weight in the applications process. See 54 Federal Register 13,742 and 13,745 (1989). National City Bank also participates in the City of Cleveland Microloan program which offers "start-up" assistance for small businesses. FOA-Illinois divided its service communities into five regions: Metro-Chicago, Northern, Eastern, Southern and Western. The Metro-Chicago and Northern regions include the majority of the counties of the Chicago Metropolitan Statistical Area. When FOA-Illinois delineated its service communities, a bank could use any one of the following methods for delineation: (1) the existing boundaries, such as those of standard metropolitan statistical areas or counties in which the bank's office or offices are located, and adjacent areas, if appropriate; (2) the local areas around each office or group of offices where it makes a substantial portion of its loans and all other areas equidistant from its offices; or (3) any other reasonable delineation that meets the purpose of the CRA and does not exclude LMI neighborhoods. See, e.g. , 12 C.F.R. 228.3(b) (1996). Examiners also noted that in 1995, FOA-Illinois originated 33 percent of its loans in its Metro-Chicago region in LMI areas. See 12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(1), (5), (6), (7)(i), (8), (11), and (12). See First of America Corporation , 80 Federal Reserve Bulletin 1120 (1994). See National City Corporation, 81 Federal Reserve Bulletin 807 (1995); National City Corporation, 80 Federal Reserve Bulletin 346 (1994), (together, "National City Orders"). See Citicorp, 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 473 (1987), aff'd sub nom. Securities Industry Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 839 F.2d 47 (2d Cir. 1988), cert. denied, 486 U.S. 1059 (1988); as modified by Review of Restrictions on Director, Officer and Employee Interlocks, Cross-Marketing Activities, and the Purchase and Sale of Financial Assets Between a Section 20 Subsidiary and an Affiliated Bank or Thrift, 61 Federal Register 57,679 (1996), and Amendments to Restrictions in the Board's Section 20 Orders, 62 Federal Register 45,295 (1997), (collectively, the "Section 20 Orders"). Compliance with the revenue limitation shall be calculated in accordance with the method stated in the Section 20 Orders, as modified by the Order Approving Modifications to the Section 20 Orders, 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 751 (1989), and 10 Percent Revenue Limit on Bank-Ineligible Activities of Subsidiaries of Bank Holding Companies Engaged in Underwriting and Dealing in Securities, 61 Federal Register 48,953 (1996), and Revenue Limit on Bank-Ineligible Activities of Subsidiaries of Bank Holding Companies Engaged in Underwriting and Dealing in Securities, 61 Federal Register 68,750 (1996), (collectively, "Modification Orders"). See 12 C.F.R. 225.200; National City Orders. See 12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8). See 12 C.F.R. 225.26; see also The Fuji Bank, Limited, 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 94 (1989); Bayerische Vereinsbank AG, 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 155 (1987). Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Phillips, Meyer, Ferguson, and Gramlich.
Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan The current Asian crisis and the dynamics of international finance Before the Committee on Foreign Relations, U.S. Senate February 12, 1998 The global financial system has been evolving rapidly in recent years. New technology has radically reduced the costs of borrowing and lending across traditional national borders, facilitating the development of new instruments and drawing in new players. One result has been a massive increase in capital flows. Information is transmitted instantaneously around the world, and huge shifts in the supply and demand for funds naturally follow. This burgeoning global system has been demonstrated to be a highly efficient structure that has significantly facilitated cross-border trade in goods and services and, accordingly, has made a substantial contribution to standards of living worldwide. Its efficiency exposes and punishes underlying economic weakness swiftly and decisively. Regrettably, it also appears to have facilitated the transmission of financial disturbances far more effectively than ever before. As I testified three years ago, the then emerging Mexican crisis was the first such episode associated with our new high-tech international financial system. The current Asian crisis is the second. We do not as yet fully understand the new system's dynamics. We are learning fast, and need to update and modify our institutions and practices to reduce the risks inherent in the new regime. Meanwhile, we have to confront the current crisis with the institutions and techniques we have. Many argue that the current crisis should be allowed to run its course without support from the International Monetary Fund or the bilateral financial backing of other nations. They assert that allowing this crisis to play out, while doubtless having additional negative effects on growth in Asia, and engendering greater spill-overs onto the rest of the world, is not likely to have a large or lasting impact on the United States and the world economy. They may well be correct in their judgment. There is, however, a small but not negligible probability that the upset in East Asia could have unexpectedly negative effects on Japan, Latin America, and eastern and central Europe that, in turn, could have repercussions elsewhere, including the United States. Thus, while the probability of such an outcome may be small, its consequences, in my judgment, should not be left solely to chance. We have observed that global financial markets, as currently organized, do not always achieve an appropriate equilibrium, or at least require time to stabilize. Opponents of IMF support also argue that the substantial financial backing, by cushioning the losses of imprudent investors, could exacerbate moral hazard. Moral hazard arises when someone can reap the rewards from their actions when events go well but do not suffer the full consequences when they go badly. Such a reward structure, obviously, could encourage excessive risk-taking. There has doubtless been some of that type of inappropriate risk-taking attributable to expectations of IMF bailouts, though arguably it has been the expectation of governments' support of their financial systems that has been the more obvious culprit. In any event, the expectation of broad bailouts, at least in the Asian case, has turned out to have been an illusion. Many investors in Asian economies have to date suffered substantial losses. Asian equity losses, excluding Japanese companies, since June 1997, worldwide, are estimated to have exceeded $700 billion, at the end of January, of which more than $30 billion has been lost by U.S. investors. Substantial further losses have been recorded in bonds and real estate. Moreover, the policy conditionality, associated principally with IMF lending, which dictates economic and financial discipline and structural change, helps to mitigate some of the moral hazard concerns. Such conditionality is also critical to the success of the overall stabilization effort. As I will be discussing in a moment, at the root of the problems is poor public policy that has resulted in misguided investments and very weak financial sectors. Convincing a sovereign nation to alter destructive policies that impair its own performance and threaten contagion to its neighbors is best handled by an international financial institution, such as the IMF. What we have in place today to respond to crises should be supported even as we work to improve those mechanisms and institutions. Accordingly, I fully back the Administration's request to augment the financial resources of the IMF--U.S. participation in the New Arrangements to Borrow and an increase in the U.S. quota in the IMF. Hopefully, neither will turn out not to be needed, and no funds will be drawn. But it is better to have it available if that turns out not to be the case and quick response to a pending crisis is essential. I also believe it is important to have mechanisms, such as the Treasury Department's Exchange Stabilization Fund, that permit the United States in exceptional circumstances to provide temporary bilateral financial support, often on short notice, under appropriate conditions and on occasion in cooperation with other countries. In testimony in mid-November, I endeavored to outline the roots of the current crisis. This morning I should like to carry the analysis a bit further. Companies in Korea and many other Asian countries have become formidable world-class producers in a number of manufacturing sectors using advanced technologies, but in a number of cases they permitted leverage to rise to levels that could only be sustained with continued very rapid growth. Growth, however, was destined to slow. Asian economies to varying degrees over the last half century have tried to combine rapid growth with a much higher mix of government-directed production than has been evident in the essentially market-driven economies of the West. Through government inducements, a number of select, more sophisticated manufacturing technologies borrowed from the advanced market economies were applied to these generally low-productivity and, hence, low-wage economies. Thus, for selected products, exports became competitive with those of the market economies. This engendered overall economic growth at a rate far exceeding that of economies at the cutting edge of technology, whose growth has been bound by hard-fought, but slow, accretions to knowledge. There was, however, an upper limit to emerging country growth defined by that cutting edge as to how far this specialized Asian economic regime could develop. As the process broadened beyond a few select applications of advanced technologies, overall productivity continued to increase and the associated rise in the average real wage in these economies blunted somewhat the competitive advantage enjoyed initially. Slackening of export expansion growth was inevitable. In addition, losses in competitiveness as a result of exchange rates that were pegged to the dollar, which has appreciated against the yen since early 1995, slowed aggregate economic growth somewhat, even before the current crisis developed. For years, domestic savings and rapidly increasing capital inflows had been directed by governments into investments that banks were required to finance. As I pointed out in previous testimony, lacking a true market test, much of that investment was unprofitable. So long as growth was vigorous, the adverse consequences of this type of non-market allocation of resources were masked. Moreover, in the context of pegged exchange rates that were presumed to continue, if not indefinitely, at least beyond the term of the loan, banks and nonbanks were willing to take the risk to borrow dollars (unhedged) to obtain the dollar-denominated interest rates that were invariably lower than those available in domestic currency. Western, especially American investors, diversified some of their huge capital gains of the 1990s into East Asian investments. In hindsight, it is evident that those economies could not provide adequate profitable opportunities at reasonable risk to absorb such a surge in funds. This surge, together with distortions caused by government planning, has resulted in huge losses. With the inevitable slowdown, business losses and nonperforming bank loans surged. Banks' capital eroded rapidly and, as a consequence, funding sources have dried up, as fears of defaults have risen dramatically. In an environment of weak financial systems, lax supervisory regimes, and vague guarantees about depositor or creditor protections, bank runs have occurred in several countries and reached crisis proportions in Indonesia. Uncertainty and retrenchment have escalated. The state of confidence so necessary to the functioning of any economy has been torn asunder. Vicious cycles of ever rising and reinforcing fears have become contagious. Some exchange rates have fallen to levels that are understandable only in the context of a veritable collapse of confidence in the functioning of an economy. It is clear, for example, that neither changes in the relative purchasing power of the Indonesian rupiah relative to the U.S. dollar, nor their relevant interest rates, can explain the more than four-fifths decline in the rupiah by early 1998. The sharp exchange rate changes in East Asia in recent months, as have similar instances elsewhere, do not appear to have resulted wholly from a measured judgment that fundamental forces have turned appreciably more adverse. More likely, its root is a process that is neither measured nor rational, one based on a visceral, engulfing, fear. The exchange rate changes appear the consequence not of the accumulation of new knowledge of a deterioration in fundamentals but its opposite: the onset of uncertainties that destroy previous understandings of the way the world works. That has induced massive disengagements of investors and declines in Asian currencies that have no tie to reality. A similar breakdown was also evident in Mexico three years ago, albeit to a somewhat lesser degree. In late 1994, the government was rapidly losing reserves in a vain effort to support a currency that had come under attack when the authorities failed to act expeditiously and convincingly to contain a burgeoning current account deficit financed in large part by substantial short-term flows denominated in dollars. These two recent crisis episodes have afforded us increasing insights into the dynamics of the evolving international financial system, though there is much we do not yet understand. With the new more sophisticated financial markets punishing errant government policy behavior far more profoundly than in the past, vicious cycles are evidently emerging more often. For once they are triggered, damage control is difficult. Once the web of confidence, which supports the financial system, is breached, it is difficult to restore quickly. The loss of confidence that one understands the dynamics of the systems with which we are engaged can trigger rapid and disruptive changes in the pattern of finance, which, in turn, feed back on exchange rates and asset prices. Moreover, investor concerns that weaknesses revealed in one economy may be present in others that are similarly situated means that the loss of confidence can quickly spread to other countries. At one point the economic system appears stable, the next it behaves as though a dam has reached a breaking point, and water (read, confidence) evacuates its reservoir. The United States experienced such a sudden change with the decline in stock prices of more than 20 percent on October 19, 1987. There is no credible scenario that can readily explain so abrupt a change in the fundamentals of long-term valuation on that one day. Such market panic does not appear to reflect a simple continuum from the immediately previous period. The abrupt onset of such implosions suggests the possibility that there is a marked dividing line for confidence. When crossed, prices slip into free fall--perhaps overshooting the long-term equilibrium--before markets will stabilize. But why do these events seem to erupt without some readily evident precursor? Certainly, the more extended the risk-taking, or more generally, the lower the discount factors applied to future outcomes, the greater the proportion of current output (mainly capital goods), driven by perceived future needs. Hence, under such conditions the more vulnerable are markets to a shock that abruptly triggers a revision in expectations of future needs and sets off a vicious cycle of contraction of financial and product markets. Episodes of vicious cycles cannot be easily forecast, as our recent experience with Asia has demonstrated. Certainly, there were indications that Thailand's large current account deficits were unsustainable. Once the recent crisis was triggered in early July with Thailand's eventual forced abandonment of its exchange rate peg, it was apparently the lethal combination of pegged exchange rates, high leverage, weak banking and financial systems, and declining demand in both Thailand and elsewhere that transformed a correction into a collapse. Normally the presence of these factors would have produced a modest retrenchment, not the kind of discontinuous fall in confidence that leads to a vicious cycle of decline. But with a significant part of short-term liabilities, bank and nonbank, denominated in foreign currencies (predominantly dollars), unhedged, the initial pressure on domestic currencies was apparently too much to bear, leading to a sharp crack in the fixed exchange rate structure of many East Asian economies. The belief that local currencies could, virtually without risk of loss, be converted into dollars at any time was shattered. Investors, both domestic and foreign, endeavored en masse to convert to dollars, as confidence in the ability of the local economy to earn dollars to meet their fixed obligations diminished. Local exchange rates fell against the dollar, inducing still further declines. The weakening of growth also led to lowered profit expectations and contracting net capital inflows of dollars. This was an abrupt change from the pronounced acceleration through 1996 and the first half of 1997. The combination of continued strong demand for dollars to meet debt service obligations and the slowed new supply, destabilized the previously fixed exchange rate regime. This created a marked increase in uncertainty and retrenchment, further reducing capital inflows, still further weakening local currency exchange rates. Such vicious cycles continue until either defaults or restructuring lowers debt service obligations, or the low local exchange rates finally induce a pickup in the supply of dollars. These virulent episodes appear to be at the root of our most recent breakdowns in Mexico and Asia. Their increased prevalence may, in fact, be a defining characteristic of the new high-tech international financial system. We shall never be able to alter the human response to shocks of uncertainty and withdrawal; we can only endeavor to reduce the imbalances that exacerbate them. While, as indicated earlier, I do not believe we are as yet sufficiently knowledgeable of the full complex dynamics of our increasingly developing high-tech financial system, enough insights have been gleaned from the crises in Mexico and Asia (and previous experiences) to enable us to list a few of the critical tendencies toward disequilibrium and vicious cycles that will have to be addressed if our new global economy is to limit the scope for disruptions in the future. These elements have all, in times past, been factors in international and domestic economic disruptions, but they appear more stark in today's market. Leverage Certainly in Korea, probably in Thailand and Indonesia, and possibly elsewhere, a high degree of leverage (the ratio of debt to equity) appears to be a place to start. Exceptionally high leverage often is a symptom of excessive risk-taking that leaves financial systems and economies vulnerable to loss of confidence. It is not easy to imagine the cumulative cascading of debt instruments seeking safety in a crisis when assets are heavily funded with equity. The concern is particularly relevant to banks and many other financial intermediaries, whose assets typically are less liquid than their liabilities and so depend on confidence in the payment of liabilities for their continued viability. Moreover, both financial and nonfinancial businesses can employ high leverage to mask inadequate underlying profitability and otherwise have inadequate capital cushions to match their volatile environments. Excess leverage in nonfinancial business can create problems for lenders including their banks; these problems can, in turn, spread to other borrowers that rely on these lenders. Fortunately, since lending by nonfinancial firms to other businesses is less prevalent than bank lending to other banks, direct contagion is less likely. But the leverage of South Korea's chaebols, because of their size and the pervasive distress, has clearly been an important cause of bank problems with their systemic implications. Interest Rate and Currency Risk Banks, when confronted with a generally rising yield curve, have a tendency to incur interest rate or liquidity risk by lending long and funding short. This exposes them to shocks, especially those institutions that have low capital-asset ratios. When financial intermediaries, in addition, seek low-cost, unhedged, foreign currency funding, the dangers of depositor runs, following a fall in the domestic currency, escalate. Weak Banking Systems Banks play a crucial role in the financial market infrastructure. When they are undercapitalized, have lax lending standards, and are subjected to weak supervision and regulation, they become a source of systemic risk both domestically and internationally. Lack of a cadre of loan officers who have experience in judging lending risk can produce debilitating losses even when lending is not directed by government inducement, or the need to support members of an associated group of companies. Experienced bank supervision and regulation cannot fully substitute for poor lending procedures, but presumably it could encourage better practice. But apparently even that has been lacking in many emerging economies. Interbank Funding, Especially in Foreign Currencies Despite its importance for distributing savings to their most valued use, short-term interbank funding, especially cross border, may turn out to be the Achilles' heel of an international financial system that is subject to wide variations in financial confidence. This phenomenon, which is all too common in our domestic experience, may be particularly dangerous in an international setting. Moral Hazard The expectation that monetary authorities or international financial institutions will come to the rescue of failing financial systems and unsound investments has clearly engendered a significant element of moral hazard and excessive risk-taking. The dividing line between public and private liabilities, too often, becomes blurred. Weak Central Banks To effectively support a stable currency, central banks need to be independent, meaning that their monetary policy decisions are not subject to the dictates of political authorities. In East Asia, as in many other areas, the central bank was not in a position to resist political pressures focused on the short run. Securities Markets Recent adverse banking experiences have emphasized the problems that can arise if banks are almost the sole source of intermediation. Their breakdown induces a sharp weakening in economic growth. A wider range of nonbank institutions, including viable debt and equity markets, are important safeguards of economic activity when banking fails. Inadequate Legal Structures Finally, an effective competitive market system requires a rule of law that severely delimits government's arbitrary intrusion into commercial disputes. Defaults and restructuring will not always be avoidable. Indeed "creative destruction," as Joseph Schumpeter put it, is often an important element of renewal in a dynamic market economy. But an efficient bankruptcy statute is required to aid in this process, especially in the case of cross-border defaults. * * * Interest and currency risk-taking, excess leverage, weak financial systems, and interbank funding are all encouraged by the existence of a safety net. In a domestic context, it is difficult to achieve financial balance without a regulatory structure that seeks to simulate the market incentives that would tend to control these financial elements if there were not broad safety nets. It is even more difficult to achieve such a balance internationally among sovereign governments operating out of different cultures. Thus, governments have developed a patchwork of arrangements and conventions governing the functioning of the international financial system that I believe will need to be thoroughly reviewed and altered as necessary to fit the needs of the new global environment. A review of supervision and regulation of private financial institutions, especially those that are supported by a safety net, is particularly pressing because those institutions have played so prominent a role in the emergence of recent crises. As I have testified previously, I believe that, in this rapidly expanding international financial system, the primary protection from adverse financial disturbances is effective counterparty surveillance and, hence, government regulation and supervision should seek to produce an environment in which counterparties can most effectively oversee the credit risks of potential transactions. Here a major improvement in transparency, including both accounting and public disclosure, is essential. To be sure, counterparties often exchange otherwise confidential information as a condition of a transaction. But broader dissemination of detailed disclosures of governments, financial institutions, and firms, is required if the risks inherent in our global financial structure are to be contained. A market system can approach an appropriate equilibrium only if the signals to which individual market participants respond are accurate and adequate to the needs of the adjustment process. Among the important signals are product and asset prices, interest rates, debt by maturity, detailed accounts of central banks, and private enterprises. Blinded by faulty signals, a competitive free-market system cannot reach a firm balance except by chance. In today's rapidly changing marketplace producers need sophisticated signals to hone production schedules and investment programs to respond to consumer demand. There is sufficient bias in political systems of all varieties to substitute hope (read, wishful thinking) for possibly difficult preemptive policy moves, both with respect to financial systems and economic policy. There is often denial and delay in instituting proper adjustments. Recent propensities to obscure the need for change have been evidenced by unreported declines in official reserves, issuance by governments of the equivalent to foreign currency obligations, or unreported large forward short positions against foreign currencies. It is very difficult for political leaders to incur what they perceive as large immediate political costs to contain problems that they see (often dimly) as only prospective. Reality eventually replaces hope, but the cost of delay is a more abrupt and disruptive adjustment than would have been required if action had been more preemptive. Increased transparency for businesses, financial institutions, and governments is a key ingredient in fostering more discipline on private transactors and on government policymakers. Increased transparency can counter political bias in part by exposing for all to see the risks to stability of current policies as they develop. Under such conditions, failure to act would also be perceived as having political costs. I suspect that recent political foot dragging by governments in both developed and developing countries on the issue of greater transparency is credible evidence of its power and significance. Transparency, which is so important to foster safe and sound lending practices, is, of course, less relevant for local currency lending if banks are guaranteed with sovereign credits. Moreover, transparency becomes especially difficult to create for organizations and corporations with large interlocking ownerships. Cross holdings of stock lead too often to lending on the basis of association, not economic value. The list of problems that must be addressed to achieve balance in our future global financial system could be significantly extended, but let me end with a notion that is relevant also to today's crisis. It is becoming increasingly evident that supervision and regulation should address excess nonperforming loans expeditiously. The expected values of the losses on these loans are, of course, a subtraction from capital. But since these estimates are uncertain, they embody an additional risk premium that reduces the markets' best estimate of the size of effective equity capital even if capital is replenished. It is, hence, far better to remove these dubious assets and their associated risk premium from bank balance sheets, and dispose of them separately, preferably promptly. * * * As a consequence of the unwinding of market restrictions and regulations, and the rapid increase in technology, the international financial system has expanded at a pace far faster than either domestic GDP or cross-border trade. To reduce the risk of systemic crises in such an environment, an enhanced regime of market incentives, involving greater sensitivity to market signals, more information to make those signals more robust, and broader securities markets--coupled with better supervision--is essential. Obviously appropriate macropolicies, as ever, are assumed. But attention to microdetails is becoming increasingly pressing. Nonetheless, it is reasonable to expect that despite endeavors at risk containment and prevention the system may fail in some instances, triggering vicious cycles and all the associated contagion for innocent bystanders. A backup source of international financial support provided only with agreed conditions to address underlying problems, the task assigned to the IMF, can play an essential stabilizing role. The availability of such support must be limited because its size cannot be expected to expand at the pace of the international financial system. I doubt if there will be worldwide political support for that. In closing, I should like to stress that the significant degree of volatility that continues to exist in Asian markets indicates exceptionally high levels of uncertainty, bordering on panic. It is not reasonable to expect that the substantial investments needed to implement meaningful structural reforms can proceed very far until we observe a simmering down of frenetic changes in asset prices and exchange rates. That is likely to result only when stability of banking and financial systems generally is achieved. The failure of the fragile banking systems of East Asia to hold steady as financial pressures increased was a defining element in the developing crisis. The stabilization of those banking systems is crucial, if confidence, that has been so thoroughly undercut in this most debilitating crisis, is to be restored. Footnotes Wage levels in an industry are largely driven by the average wage level of all workers in an economy against whom the industry's workers compete.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of a Combined Order of Prohibition and Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty against John E. Colley, a former employee and institution-affiliated party of the Trustco Bank New York, Schenectady, New York, formerly a state-chartered bank that was a member of the Federal Reserve System. Mr. Colley, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the order as a result of his alleged breaches of his fiduciary duty to Trustco. Mr. Colley paid a fine of $40,000. A copy of the order is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application of Indiana United Bancorp, Greensburg, Indiana, to merge with P.T.C. Bancorp and thereby acquire Peoples Trust Company, both of Brookville, Indiana. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Indiana United Bancorp Greensburg, Indiana Order Approving the Acquisition of a Bank Holding Company Indiana United Bancorp ("Indiana United"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 3 of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1842) to acquire by merger P.T.C. Bancorp ("PTC"), and thereby indirectly acquire its subsidiary bank, Peoples Trust Company, Brookville, Indiana. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (63 Federal Register 228 (1998)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the proposal and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 3 of the BHC Act. Indiana United is the 43d largest commercial banking organization in Indiana, and controls one subsidiary bank with approximately $273 million in deposits, representing less than 1 percent of total deposits in commercial banking organizations in the state ("state deposits"). PTC is the 48th largest commercial banking organization in Indiana, controlling approximately $251 million in deposits. On consummation of the proposal, Indiana United would become the 27th largest commercial banking organization in Indiana, controlling deposits of approximately $524 million, representing less than 1 percent of state deposits. Competitive Considerations The BHC Act prohibits the Board from approving a proposal submitted under section 3 of the BHC Act if the proposal would result in a monopoly or if the effect of the proposal may be substantially to lessen competition in any relevant market unless the Board finds that the anticompetitive effects of the proposed transaction are clearly outweighed in the public interest by the probable effect of the transaction in meeting the convenience and needs of the community to be served. Indiana United and PTC compete directly in the Greensburg, Indiana, banking market. Indiana United is the largest depository institution in the market, controlling deposits of approximately $105 million, representing 42.5 percent of the total deposits in depository institutions in the market ("market deposits"). PTC is the fifth largest depository institution in the market, controlling deposits of approximately $2 million, representing less than 1 percent of market deposits. On consummation of the proposal, Indiana United would control deposits of approximately $107 million, representing 43.4 percent of market deposits. Concentration in the market, as measured by the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index ("HHI"), would increase by 74 points to 3627. In evaluating the competitive effects of the proposal in the Greensburg banking market, the Board has considered several factors that tend to mitigate the concentration of banking resources in the market. The Greensburg banking market is a relatively small rural market in central Indiana that, upon consummation of the proposal, would continue to be served by four bank holding companies and a thrift organization, including a large multistate bank holding company with more than $20 billion of assets. In addition, the market appears to be relatively attractive for entry by new competitors. Since 1995, two banks and one thrift institution have entered the market by each establishing a de novo branch, and the population and deposits per banking office in the market continue to exceed the average for rural Indiana banking markets. As in other cases, the Board has sought comments from the Department of Justice and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ("FDIC") on the competitive effects of the proposal. The Department of Justice has reviewed the proposal and advised the Board that consummation of the proposal would not likely have any significantly adverse competitive effects in the Greensburg banking market or any other relevant banking market. The FDIC did not object to consummation of the proposal or indicate it would have any significantly adverse competitive effects in the Greensburg banking market or any other relevant banking market. Based on all the facts of record, and for the reasons discussed in this order, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposal is not likely to result in any significantly adverse effects on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in the Greensburg banking market or any other relevant banking market. Other Factors The BHC Act also requires the Board to consider the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the companies and banks involved in the proposal, the convenience and needs of the communities to be served, and certain supervisory factors. The Board has reviewed these factors in light of the record, including supervisory reports of examination assessing the financial and managerial resources of the organizations and financial information provided by Indiana United. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that the financial and managerial resources and the future prospects of Indiana United, PTC, and their respective subsidiary banks are consistent with approval, as are the other supervisory factors the Board must consider under section 3 of the BHC Act. In addition, considerations related to the convenience and needs of the communities to be served are consistent with approval of this proposal. Conclusion Based on the foregoing, and in light of all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the application should be, and hereby is, approved. The Board's approval is specifically conditioned on compliance by Indiana United with all the commitments made in connection with this application. For the purpose of this action, the commitments and conditions relied on by the Board in reaching its decisions are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The acquisition of PTC shall not be consummated before the thirtieth calendar day following the effective date of this order, or later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective February 17, 1998. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes State deposit data are as of June 30, 1997. The Greensburg banking market consists of Adams, Clinton, Fugit, Clay, and Washington townships in Decatur County, Indiana. In this context, depository institutions include commercial banks, savings banks, and savings associations. Market share data are as of June 30, 1997. These data are based on calculations in which the deposits of thrift institutions are included at 50 percent. The Board previously has indicated that thrift institutions have become, or have the potential to become, significant competitors of commercial banks. See Midwest Financial Group, 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 386 (1989); National City Corporation, 70 Federal Reserve Bulletin 743 (1984). Under the revised Merger Guidelines, 49 Federal Register 26,823 (June 29, 1984), a market in which the post-merger HHI is above 1800 is considered highly concentrated. The Department of Justice has informed the Board that a bank merger or acquisition generally will not be challenged (in the absence of other factors indicating anticompetitive effects) unless the post-merger HHI is at least 1800 and the merger increases the HHI by more than 200 points. The Department of Justice has stated that the higher than normal HHI thresholds for screening bank mergers for anticompetitive effects implicitly recognize the competitive effect of limited-purpose lenders and other non-depository financial entities. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan and Governors Kelley, Phillips, Meyer, Ferguson, and Gramlich. Absent and not voting: Vice Chair Rivlin.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application by WestStar Bank, Bartlesville, Oklahoma, to merge with Victory Bank of Nowata, Nowata, Oklahoma, and also to establish a branch at the main office of Victory Bank, at 108 North Maple, Nowata, Oklahoma. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. WestStar Bank Bartlesville, Oklahoma Order Approving the Merger of a Bank and Establishment of a Branch WestStar Bank, Bartlesville, Oklahoma ("WestStar"), a state member bank, has requested the Board's approval under section 18(c) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. § 1828(c)) (the "Bank Merger Act") to merge with Victory Bank of Nowata, Nowata, Oklahoma ("Victory Bank"). WestStar also has applied under section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. § 321) to establish a branch at the main office of Victory Bank, which is located at 108 North Maple, Nowata, Oklahoma. Notice of the applications, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been given in accordance with the Bank Merger Act and the Board's Rules of Procedure (12 C.F.R. 262.3(b)). As required by the Bank Merger Act, reports on the competitive effects of the merger were requested from the United States Attorney General, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency ("OCC"), and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ("FDIC"). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the applications and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in the Bank Merger Act and the Federal Reserve Act. WestStar is a wholly owned subsidiary of Arvest Bank Group, Bentonville, Arkansas, which is the sixth largest commercial banking organization in Oklahoma, controlling $775.5 million of deposits, representing 2.6 percent of total deposits in commercial banking organizations in the state. Victory Bank controls deposits of $19.7 million, representing less than 1 percent of deposits in the state. On consummation of the proposal, Arvest Bank Group would remain the sixth largest commercial banking organization in Oklahoma. Competitive Considerations The Bank Merger Act provides that the Board may not approve an application if the effect of the acquisition is to create a monopoly or substantially to lessen competition in any section of the country unless the Board finds the anticompetitive effects of the proposal are clearly outweighed in the public interest by the probable effect of the proposal in meeting the convenience and needs of the community. WestStar asserts that WestStar and Victory Bank operate in separate banking markets. Alternatively, WestStar contends that the appropriate banking market should include the Bartlesville banking market as previously defined by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City ("Reserve Bank") plus the town of Coffeyville, Kansas. The Board believes, however, that the appropriate market for analyzing the competitive effects of the proposal is the Bartlesville banking market as previously defined. The Board bases its conclusion on an analysis of employment opportunities, commuting data, shopping patterns, loan and deposit data, an on-site investigation of the banking market conducted by the Reserve Bank in January 1998, and other facts of record that indicate that there is substantial commuting, travel, and interaction between Bartlesville and Nowata. In light of these, and all facts of record, the Board concludes that the Bartlesville banking market reflects commercial and banking realities and represents an area where local customers can practicably turn for alternatives. Accordingly, the relevant banking market for considering the competitive effects of the proposal is the Bartlesville banking market as defined above. WestStar is the largest depository institution in the Bartlesville banking market, controlling deposits of approximately $349 million, representing approximately 47 percent of the total deposits in depository institutions in the market ("market deposits"). Victory Bank is the tenth largest depository institution in the market, controlling deposits of $19.7 million, representing approximately 3 percent of market deposits. On consummation of the proposal, WestStar would remain the largest depository institution in the Bartlesville banking market, controlling deposits of approximately $358.7 million, representing approximately 50 percent of market deposits. Concentration in the market, as measured by the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index ("HHI"), would increase 262 points to 2892. The Board has taken into account considerations that materially mitigate the competitive effect of the proposal. The Bartlesville banking market, for example, is a rural banking market with a significant number of competing depository institutions relative to its total market deposits of $715 million. After consummation of the proposal, 11 depository institution competitors, in addition to WestStar, would remain in the banking market. The remaining competitors include two of Oklahoma's largest commercial banking organizations that operate throughout the state. The Board also notes that a large credit union has a substantial effect on competition in the banking market. The credit union controls a substantial amount of deposits in the banking market, and actively engages in home mortgage and consumer lending. The Board believes that these factors mitigate the potentially adverse effects of the proposal. The Department of Justice has reviewed the proposal and advised the Board that consummation of the proposal would not likely have any significantly adverse competitive effects in the Bartlesville banking market or any relevant banking market. The OCC and the FDIC also have not objected to the proposal. Based on all the facts of record, and for the reasons discussed above, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposal would not have a significantly adverse effect on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in the Bartlesville banking market or any other relevant banking market. Other Considerations The Bank Merger Act also requires the Board to consider the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the existing and proposed institutions and the convenience and needs of the community to be served. The Board has carefully considered these factors in light of all the facts of record. The facts of record include supervisory reports of examination that assess the financial and managerial resources of the organizations and financial information provided by WestStar. Based on these and all other facts of record, the Board concludes that financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the institutions involved are consistent with approval, as are other supervisory factors. WestStar intends to increase Victory Bank's hours of operation and would offer its expanded products and services to the bank's customers and residents in the Nowata area, including access to ATMs, cash management services, trust services, and a greater array of retail and commercial checking accounts. WestStar also has a satisfactory record of performance under the Community Reinvestment Act of helping to meet the credit needs of all its communities, including low- and moderate-income areas. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that considerations relating to convenience and needs are consistent with approval. The Board also concludes that all the factors that must be considered under section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act are consistent with approval. Conclusion Based on the foregoing and all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the applications should be, and hereby are, approved. The Board's approval of the proposal is specifically conditioned on compliance by WestStar with all the commitments made in connection with this application. For purposes of this action, the commitments and conditions relied on in reaching this decision are both conditions imposed in writing by the Board, and as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The proposed acquisition shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day following the effective date of this order, or later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extending for good cause by the Board or by the Reserve Bank, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective February 18, 1998. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes Victory Bank is owned indirectly by Victory Bancorp ("Bancorp") through an intermediate bank holding company, Victory Bancshares ("Bancshares"). In connection with the bank merger, WestStar would acquire all the voting shares of Bancorp; Bancshares would merge with and into Bancorp; and Bancorp would merge with and into WestStar. Because this transaction is in substance a merger of banks that is subject to Board review under the Bank Merger Act, the steps of the transaction would occur in immediate succession, Victory Bank would never be operated by WestStar as a separate bank, and the transaction does not raise issues that would bar Board approval under the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), the Board has waived the applications required under section 3 of the BHC Act for the intermediate steps for this transaction. State data are as of June 30, 1997, and market data are as of June 30, 1996. 12 U.S.C. § 1828(c)(5). The Reserve Bank defines the Bartlesville banking market as an area approximated by Nowata and Washington Counties and the northeastern quadrant of Osage County in Oklahoma; and the town of Caney, Kansas. The Board and the courts have found that the relevant banking market for analyzing the competitive effects of a proposal must reflect commercial and banking realities and should consist of the local area where local customers can practicably turn for alternatives. See St. Joseph Valley Bank, 68 Federal Reserve Bulletin 673, 674 (1982). The key question to be considered in making this selection "is not where the parties to the merger do business or even where they compete, but where, within the area of competitive overlap, the effect of the merger on competition will be direct and immediate." United States v. Philadelphia Nat'l Bank, 374 U.S. 321, 374 (1963); United States v. Phillipsburg Nat'l Bank, 399 U.S. 350 (1969). Bartlesville is the center of economic activity for a commercially integrated area generally encompassed by Washington, Nowata, and the northeastern portion of Osage Counties. Bartlesville is in Washington County, which is between Osage County to the west and Nowata County to the east, and has a population of 33,000 residents making it the largest town in the banking market. The area's largest employers, including a petroleum company with approximately 3100 employees and a medical center and school district office with more than 800 employees each, are in Bartlesville. Commuting data from the Census Bureau for 1990 show that approximately 27 percent of the residents in the Nowata community, where Victory Bank is located, commute to work in the Bartlesville area. Area residents also may obtain a variety of goods and services from large retail stores in an enclosed mall, restaurants, automobile dealerships, entertainment complexes, and a medical center that are unavailable in the smaller communities within a 40 mile radius of Bartlesville. Data from the Oklahoma Transportation Department indicate that in 1995, the average daily traffic count between Nowata and Bartlesville on State Highway 60 was 3,400 vehicles, which was more than twice the number of vehicles that used the highway to travel from Nowata in the opposite direction. In addition, loan and deposit data indicated that residents of Nowata obtain products and services from banking organizations in Bartlesville. The facts of record do not support including Coffeyville within the Bartlesville banking market. Coffeyville, a mid-size town in Kansas with a population of approximately 13,000 residents, is approximately 40 miles northeast of Bartlesville. No highway directly connects the town with Bartlesville. In addition, Census Bureau commuting data for 1990 show that almost all the people who commute from Nowata County to Coffeyville reside in South Coffeyville, which is a small town in Nowata County approximately five miles from Coffeyville. Coffeyville also has a hospital and a full complement of retail stores. In this context, depository institutions include commercial banks, savings banks, and savings associations. Market share data before consummation are based on calculations in which the deposits of thrift institutions are included at 50 percent. The Board previously has indicated that thrift institutions have become, or have the potential to become, significant competitors of commercial banks. See WM Bancorp, 76 Federal Reserve Bulletin 788 (1990); National City Corporation, 70 Federal Reserve Bulletin 743 (1984). Under the revised Department of Justice Merger Guidelines, 49 Federal Register 26,823 (June 29, 1984) ("DOJ Guidelines"), a market in which the post-merger HHI is above 1800 is considered highly concentrated. The Justice Department has informed the Board that a bank merger or acquisition generally will not be challenged (in the absence of other factors indicating anticompetitive effects) unless the post-merger HHI is at least 1800 and the merger increases the HHI by more than 200 points. The Justice Department has stated that the higher than normal HHI thresholds for screening bank mergers for anticompetitive effects implicitly recognize the competitive effect of limited-purpose lenders and other non-depository financial entities. The credit union was originally established for the employees of the petroleum company in Bartlesville but has broadened its membership criteria to include employees of other companies. Approximately 26,900 residents in the Bartlesville banking market, representing approximately 39 percent of the market's total population, are credit union members. If deposits for the credit union were weighted at 50 percent, WestStar would control 44.5 percent of market deposits, and the HHI would increase by 206 points to 2405. 12 U.S.C. § 2901 et seq. ("CRA"). WestStar and Victory Bank received a satisfactory rating under the CRA at their most recent performance examinations. Under Oklahoma law, a bank is permitted to branch into another county by acquisition if the bank to be acquired has operated for at least five years. See Okla. Stat. Tit. 6 § 501.1. Victory Bank has operated for at least five years, and Oklahoma banking officials have confirmed that the proposal would be consistent with state branching law. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Phillips, Ferguson, and Gramlich. Absent and not voting: Governor Meyer.
For immediate release |
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application of First Financial Corporation to acquire The Morris Plan Company of Terre Haute, Inc., both of Terre Haute, Indiana. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. First Financial Corporation Terre Haute, Indiana Order Approving the Acquisition of a Bank First Financial Corporation ("FFC"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 3 of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C § 1842) to acquire The Morris Plan Company of Terre Haute, Inc. ("MPC"), an insured bank organized as an industrial development and investment company operating in Terre Haute, Indiana. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (63 Federal Register 228 (1998)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the proposal and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 3 of the BHC Act. FFC is the 14th largest depository institution in Indiana, and controls eight subsidiary banks with approximately $1.2 billion in deposits, representing approximately 1.6 percent of total deposits in commercial banking organizations in the state ("state deposits"). MPC is the 185th largest depository institution in Indiana, controlling approximately $33 million in deposits. On consummation of the proposal, FFC would become the 13th largest depository institution in Indiana, controlling deposits of approximately $1.2 billion, representing 1.7 percent of state deposits. Competitive Considerations The BHC Act prohibits the Board from approving a proposal under section 3 of the BHC Act if the proposal would result in a monopoly or if the effect of the proposal may be substantially to lessen competition in any relevant market unless the Board finds that the anticompetitive effects of the proposed transaction are clearly outweighed in the public interest by the probable effect of the transaction in meeting the convenience and needs of the community to be served. FFC and MPC compete directly in the Terre Haute, Indiana, banking market. FFC is the largest depository institution in the banking market, controlling deposits of approximately $872 million, representing 47.4 percent of the total deposits in depository institutions in the market ("market deposits"). MPC is the eighth largest depository institution in the market, controlling deposits of approximately $16.5 million, representing 0.9 percent of market deposits. On consummation of this proposal, FFC would control deposits of approximately $905 million, representing 48.8 percent of market deposits. Concentration in the market, as measured by the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index ("HHI") would increase by 115 points to 3186. In evaluating the competitive effects of the proposal in the Terre Haute banking market, the Board has considered several factors that tend to mitigate the competitive effects of the proposal. On consummation of the proposal, eight competitors would remain in the market, including two of the largest bank holding companies based in Indiana. Four of these competitors, not including MPC, would each have a market share of more than 5 percent, and the second and third largest competitors in the market would have market shares of 24.4 and 10.7 percent, respectively. Since 1995, two banks have entered the market, one through the establishment of a de novo branch and one through the acquisition of a bank operating only in the Terre Haute banking market. As in other cases, the Board sought comments from the Department of Justice on the competitive effects of the proposal. The Department of Justice has reviewed the proposal and advised the Board that consummation of the proposal would not likely have any significantly adverse competitive effects in the Terre Haute banking market or any other relevant banking market. Based on all the facts of record, and for the reasons discussed in this order, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposal is not likely to result in any significantly adverse effects on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in the Terre Haute banking market or any other relevant banking market. Other Factors The BHC Act also requires the Board to consider the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the companies and banks involved in the proposal, the convenience and needs of the communities to be served, and certain supervisory factors. The Board has reviewed these factors in light of the record, including supervisory reports of examination assessing the financial and managerial resources of the organizations and the Community Reinvestment Act performance records of the institutions involved, and financial information provided by FFC. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that the financial and managerial resources and the future prospects of FFC, its subsidiary banks, and MPC are consistent with approval, as are the other supervisory factors the Board must consider under section 3 of the BHC Act. In addition, considerations related to the convenience and needs of the communities to be served are consistent with approval of the proposal. Conclusion Based on the foregoing, and in light of all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the application should be, and hereby is, approved. The Board's approval is specifically conditioned on compliance by FFC with all the commitments made in connection with this application. For the purpose of this action, the commitments and conditions relied on by the Board in reaching its decisions are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The acquisition of MPC shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day following the effective date of this order, or later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective February 23, 1998. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes In this context, depository institutions include commercial banks, savings banks, and savings associations. State deposits are as of September 30, 1997. The Terre Haute banking market consists of Clay and Vigo Counties; Clinton and Helt Townships in Vermillion County; Florida, Raccoon and Jackson Townships in Parke County; and Fairbanks, Curry and Jackson Townships in Sullivan County; all in Indiana. Market share data are as of June 30, 1997. These data are based on calculations in which the deposits of thrift institutions are included at 50 percent. The Board previously has indicated that thrift institutions have become, or have the potential to become, significant competitors of commercial banks. See Midwest Financial Group, 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 386 (1989); National City Corporation, 70 Federal Reserve Bulletin 743 (1984). Under the revised Department of Justice Merger Guidelines, 49 Federal Register 26,823 (June 29, 1984), a market in which the post-merger HHI is above 1800 is considered highly concentrated. The Department of Justice has informed the Board that a bank merger or acquisition generally will not be challenged (in the absence of other factors indicating anticompetitive effects) unless the post-merger HHI is at least 1800 and the merger increases the HHI by more than 200 points. The Department of Justice has stated that the higher than normal HHI thresholds for screening bank mergers for anticompetitive effects implicitly recognize the competitive effect of limited-purpose lenders and other non-depository financial entities. Voting for this action: Vice Chair Rivlin and Governors Kelley, Phillips, Meyer, Ferguson, and Gramlich. Absent and not voting: Chairman Greenspan.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today that the Consumer Advisory Council will hold its next meeting on Thursday, March 19. For this meeting, the location has been changed to the Board Room of the Eccles Building. The session will begin at 9 a.m. and is open to the public. The Council's function is to advise the Board on the exercise of the Board's responsibilities under the Consumer Credit Protection Act and on other matters on which the Board seeks its advice. Time permitting, the Council will discuss the following topics: Simplification of the Mortgage Lending Disclosures Bank Regulatory Issues Electronic Communication Issues Related to the Year 2000 Reports by committees and other matters previously considered by the Council or initiated by the Council members may also be discussed. The Board invites comment from the public on any of these matters. The Board's notice is attached. FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM Consumer Advisory Council Notice of Meeting of Consumer Advisory Council The Consumer Advisory Council will meet on Thursday, March 19. The meeting, which will be open to public observation, will take place at the Federal Reserve Board's offices in Washington, D.C. For this meeting, the location has been changed to the Board Room of the Eccles Building. The meeting will begin at 9:00 a.m. and is expected to continue until 4:00 p.m., with a lunch break approximately between 1:00 p.m. and 2:00 p.m. The Eccles Building is located on C Street, Northwest, between 20th and 21st Streets in Washington, D.C. The Council's function is to advise the Board on the exercise of the Board's responsibilities under the Consumer Credit Protection Act and on other matters on which the Board seeks its advice. Time permitting, the Council will discuss the following topics. Recommendations to Simplify Mortgage Lending Disclosures The Consumer Credit Committee will lead a discussion of issues related to legislative recommendations being developed to simplify, consolidate, and streamline the provisions of the Board's Regulation Z (Truth in Lending) and HUD's Regulation X (Real Estate Settlement Procedures) affecting home mortgage lending. In particular, attention will focus on the feasibility of providing consumers with firm costs for shopping purposes, and the possibility/desirability of adding new consumer protections against abusive lending and foreclosure practices. Bank Regulatory Issues The Bank Regulation Committee will lead a discussion regarding the ongoing implementation of the revised Community Reinvestment Act regulations; in particular, attention will focus on interagency efforts to enhance uniformity in CRA examinations conducted by the four banking agencies. Electronic Communication The Depository and Delivery Systems Committee will lead a discussion regarding an upcoming Board proposal to permit electronic notices, disclosures, and documentation to substitute for paper communications under Board regulations that implement the Electronic Fund Transfer Act, Truth in Lending Act, the Consumer Leasing Act, the Truth in Savings Act, and the Equal Credit Opportunity Act. Issues Related to the Year 2000 The Council will discuss issues related to encouraging public awareness of preventive measures being taken by financial institutions and other entities to prepare for the century date change, and of error resolution and other rights that consumers will have in the event problems occur. Governor's Report Reserve Board Member Laurence H. Meyer will report on economic conditions, recent Board initiatives, and issues of concern, with an opportunity for questions from Council members. Members Forum Individual Council members' will present views on the economic conditions present within their industries or local economies. Committee Reports Council committees will report on their work plans for 1998. Other matters previously considered by the Council or initiated by Council members also may be discussed. Persons wishing to submit views to the Council regarding any of the above topics may do so by sending written statements to Deanna Aday-Keller, Secretary, Consumer Advisory Council, Division of Consumer and Community Affairs, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, D.C. 20551. Information about this meeting may be obtained from Ms. Aday-Keller, 202-452-6470. Telecommunications Device for the Deaf (TDD) users may contact Diane Jenkins, 202-452-3544. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 25, 1998. (signed) William W. Wiles William W. Wiles Secretary of the Board
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced a public meeting for Friday, March 13, in Philadelphia on the proposal by First Union Corporation, Charlotte, to acquire CoreStates Financial Corp, Philadelphia. The purpose of the meeting is to collect information relating to factors the Board is required to consider under the Bank Holding Company Act. These factors are the effects of the proposal on the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the companies and banks involved in the proposal, competition in the relevant markets, and the convenience and needs of the communities to be served. Convenience and needs considerations include consideration of the records of performance of First Union and CoreStates under the Community Reinvestment Act. The meeting will be held at the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, 10 Independence Mall, Philadelphia, and will begin at 9:00 a.m. EST. Persons wishing to testify at the meeting must submit a written request no later than 5:00 p.m. EST, Thursday, March 5, containing a brief statement of the nature of the expected testimony and the estimated time required for the presentation (together with their address, telephone number, and facsimile number if available), to Michael E. Collins, Senior Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, 10 Independence Mall, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19106 (facsimile: 215/574-3943). Persons interested only in attending the meeting do not need to submit a written request to attend. On the basis of the requests to testify, the presiding officer of the public meeting will establish a schedule of appearances and prescribe all necessary procedures to ensure that the meeting proceeds in a fair and orderly manner. An agenda for the meeting, which will include the scheduled time for each person's testimony, will be provided to participants at a later date. Attached is a copy of the Notice of Public Meeting, which sets forth the procedures to be followed at the meeting. In connection with this action, the Board has determined that the period for public comment on the proposal will close at 5:00 p.m. EST, Friday, March 13, 1998. Attachment First Union Corporation Charlotte, North Carolina Notice of Public Meeting Philadelphia, Pennsylvania Background and Public Meeting Notice On January 20, 1998, First Union Corporation, Charlotte, North Carolina ("First Union"), requested the Board's approval under the Bank Holding Company Act (12 U.S.C. § 1841 et seq. ) ("BHC Act") and related statutes to acquire CoreStates Financial Corp, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania ("CoreStates") and its banking and nonbanking subsidiaries. The General Counsel of the Board of Governors, acting pursuant to authority delegated by the Board (12 C.F.R. 265.6(a)(2)), hereby orders that a public meeting on the First Union/CoreStates proposal be held in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, on Friday, March 13, 1998. The public meeting will be held at the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, 10 Independence Mall, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, and will begin at 9:00 a.m. EST. Purpose and Procedures The purpose of the public meeting is to collect information relating to factors the Board is required to consider under the BHC Act. These factors are the effects of the proposal on the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the companies and banks involved in the proposal, competition in the relevant markets, and the convenience and needs of the communities to be served. Convenience and needs considerations include consideration of the records of performance of First Union and CoreStates under the Community Reinvestment Act, which requires the Board to take into account in its consideration of a bank acquisition proposal the institutions' record of meeting the credit needs of its entire community, including low- and moderate-income neighborhoods, consistent with the safe and sound operation of the institution. 12 U.S.C. § 2903. Testimony at the public meeting will be presented to a panel consisting of a Presiding Officer, or his designee, and other panel members appointed by the Presiding Officer. The Presiding Officer at the meeting will be Griffith L. Garwood, Director of the Board's Division of Consumer and Community Affairs. In conducting the public meeting, the Presiding Officer will have the authority and discretion to ensure that the meeting proceeds in a fair and orderly manner. In contrast to a formal administrative hearing, the rules for taking evidence in an administrative proceeding will not apply to this public meeting. Panel members may question witnesses, but no cross-examination of witnesses will be permitted. The public meeting will be transcribed and information regarding procedures for obtaining a copy of the transcript will be announced at the public meeting. All persons wishing to testify at the public meeting must submit a written request to Michael E. Collins, Senior Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, 10 Independence Mall, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19106 (facsimile: 215/574-3943), not later than 5:00 p.m. EST, Thursday, March 5, 1998. The request must include the following information: (i) a brief statement of the nature of the expected testimony and the estimated time required for the presentation; (ii) address and telephone number (and facsimile number, if available) of the person testifying; and (iii) identification of any special needs, such as persons desiring translation services, persons with a physical disability who may need assistance, or persons requiring visual aids for their presentation. To the extent available, translators will be provided to persons wishing to present their views in a language other than English if this information is included in the request to testify. Persons interested only in attending the meeting do not need to submit a written request to attend. On the basis of the requests received, the Presiding Officer will prepare a schedule for persons wishing to testify. In order to ensure an opportunity for all interested commenters to present their views, the Presiding Officer may limit the time for presentation and establish the order of presentation. Persons not listed on the schedule may be permitted to speak at the public meeting at the discretion of the Presiding Officer if time permits at the conclusion of the schedule of witnesses. Copies of testimony may, but need not, be filed with the Presiding Officer before a person's presentation. By order of the General Counsel, effective February 25, 1998. (signed) J. Virgil Mattingly, Jr. J. Virgil Mattingly, Jr. General Counsel
For immediate release The Basle Committee on Banking Supervision has issued for public comment documents on the supervision of financial conglomerates that have been prepared by the Joint Forum on Financial Conglomerates. Comment is requested by July 31, 1998, and should be directed to the Basle Committee at FAX: 011-41-61-280-9100. The Joint Forum documents were prepared along with the International Association of Securities Commissions and the International Association of Insurance Advisors, and are accessible on the Internet at the Bank for International Settlements website ( ). The emergence of financial conglomerates and blurring of distinctions among the activities of firms in the banking, securities and insurance sectors has raised important supervisory issues that are addressed in these documents. The documents include discussion of such topics as capital adequacy and sound, prudential management principles, and describe possible frameworks for facilitating the exchange of information and enhancing cooperation between supervisors. The documents, which are in the form of working papers, are being distributed to supervisory agencies and industry representatives in each sector worldwide. Input from industry and supervisory sources will play an important role in the ongoing work of the Joint Forum as it addresses supervisory issues related to financial conglomerates.
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan Risk management in the global financial system Before the Annual Financial Markets Conference of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Miami Beach, Florida February 27, 1998 It is a pleasure to address this conference on risk management once again. The conference has consistently been an interesting and constructive one. I regret that I cannot attend in person. As I have noted previously--and, indeed, as is evident to everyone who attends a conference like this--the global financial system has been evolving rapidly in recent years. New technology has radically reduced the costs of borrowing and lending across traditional national borders, facilitating the development of new instruments and drawing in new players. One result has been a massive increase in capital flows. Information is transmitted instantaneously around the world, and huge shifts in the supply and demand for funds naturally follow. This burgeoning global system has been demonstrated to be a highly efficient structure that has significantly facilitated cross-border trade in goods and services and, accordingly, has made a substantial contribution to standards of living worldwide. Its efficiency exposes and punishes underlying economic weakness swiftly and decisively. Regrettably, it also appears to have facilitated the transmission of financial disturbances far more effectively than ever before. The crisis in Mexico several years ago was the first such episode associated with our new high-tech international financial system. The current Asian crisis is the second. We do not as yet fully understand the new system's dynamics. We are learning fast, and need to update and modify our institutions and practices to reduce the risks inherent in the new regime. This morning, I should like to offer an analysis of the origins and nature of the Asian crisis and of some implications for risk management--with respect both to systemic risk and to the risks facing individual financial firms. Companies in Korea and many other Asian countries have become formidable world-class producers in a number of manufacturing sectors using advanced technologies, but in a number of cases--relying on government guarantees, explicit or implicit--they permitted leverage to rise to levels that could only be sustained with continued very rapid growth. Growth, however, was destined to slow. Asian economies to varying degrees over the last half century have tried to combine rapid growth with a much higher mix of government-directed production than has been evident in the essentially market-driven economies of the West. Through government inducements, a number of select, more sophisticated manufacturing technologies borrowed from the advanced market economies were applied to these generally low-productivity and, hence, low-wage economies. Thus, for selected products, exports became competitive with those of the market economies. This engendered rapid overall economic growth at a rate far exceeding that of economies at the cutting edge of technology, whose growth has been bound by hard-fought, but slow, accretions to knowledge. There was, however, an upper limit defined by that cutting edge as to how far this specialized Asian economic regime could develop. As the process broadened beyond a few select applications of advanced technologies, overall productivity continued to increase and the associated rise in the average real wage in these economies blunted somewhat the competitive advantage enjoyed initially. Slackening of export growth was inevitable. In addition, losses in competitiveness as a result of exchange rates that were pegged to the dollar, which has appreciated against the yen since early 1995, slowed aggregate economic growth somewhat, even before the current crisis developed. For years, domestic savings and rapidly increasing capital inflows had been directed by governments into investments that banks were required to finance. Lacking market signals that are required to shape productive investment, much of that investment was unprofitable. So long as growth was vigorous, the adverse consequences of this type of non-market allocation of resources were masked. Moreover, in the context of pegged exchange rates that were presumed to continue, if not indefinitely, at least beyond the term of the loan, banks and nonbanks were willing to take the risk to borrow dollars (unhedged) to obtain the dollar-denominated interest rates that were invariably lower than those available in domestic currency. Western, especially American, investors diversified some of their huge capital gains of the 1990s into East Asian investments. In hindsight, it is evident that those economies could not provide adequate profitable opportunities at reasonable risk to absorb such a surge in funds. This surge, together with distortions caused by government planning, has resulted in a huge misallocation of resources. With the inevitable slowdown, business losses and nonperforming bank loans surged. Banks' capital eroded rapidly and, as a consequence, funding sources have dried up, as fears of defaults have risen dramatically. In an environment of weak financial systems, lax supervisory regimes, and vague guarantees about depositor or creditor protections, bank runs have occurred in several countries and reached crisis proportions in Indonesia. Uncertainty and retrenchment have escalated. The state of confidence so necessary to the functioning of any economy has been torn asunder. Vicious cycles of ever rising and reinforcing fears have become contagious. Some exchange rates have fallen to levels that are understandable only in the context of a veritable collapse of confidence in the functioning of an economy. It is clear, for example, that neither changes in the relative purchasing power of the Indonesian rupiah, nor the relevant interest rates, can explain the more than four-fifths decline in the rupiah relative to the U.S. dollar by early 1998. The sharp exchange rate changes in East Asia in recent months, as similar instances elsewhere, do not appear to have resulted wholly from a measured judgment that fundamental forces have turned appreciably more adverse. More likely, its root is a process that is neither measured nor rational, one based on a visceral, engulfing, fear. The exchange rate changes appear the consequences, not of the accumulation of new knowledge of a deterioration in fundamentals, but of its opposite: the onset of uncertainties that destroy previous understandings of the way the world works. That has induced massive disengagements of investors and declines in Asian currencies that have no tie to reality. In all aspects of life, when confronted with uncertainty, people tend to withdraw. A similar breakdown was also evident in Mexico three years ago, albeit to a somewhat lesser degree. In late 1994, the government was rapidly losing reserves in a vain effort to support a currency that had come under attack when the authorities failed to act expeditiously and convincingly to contain a burgeoning current account deficit financed in large part by substantial short-term flows denominated in dollars. These two recent crisis episodes have afforded us increasing insights into the dynamics of the evolving international financial system, though there is much we do not yet understand. With the new more sophisticated financial markets punishing errant government policy behavior far more profoundly than in the past, vicious cycles are evidently emerging more often. For once they are triggered, damage control is difficult. Once the web of confidence, which supports the financial system, is breached, it is difficult to restore quickly. The loss of confidence that one understands the dynamics of the systems with which we are engaged can trigger rapid and disruptive changes in the pattern of finance, which, in turn, feed back on exchange rates and asset prices. Moreover, investor concerns that weaknesses revealed in one economy may be present in others that are similarly situated means that the loss of confidence can quickly spread to other countries. At one point the economic system appears stable, the next it behaves as though a dam has reached a breaking point, and water (read, confidence) evacuates its reservoir. The United States experienced such a sudden change with the decline in stock prices of more than 20 percent on October 19, 1987. There is no credible scenario that can readily explain so abrupt a change in the fundamentals of long-term valuation on that one day. Such market panic does not appear to reflect a simple continuum from the immediately previous period. The abrupt onset of such implosions suggests the possibility that there is a marked dividing line for confidence. When crossed, prices slip into free fall--perhaps overshooting the long-term equilibrium--before markets will stabilize. But why do these events seem to erupt without some readily evident precursor? Certainly, the more extended the risk-taking, or more generally, the lower the discount factors applied to future outcomes, the greater the proportion of current output (mainly capital goods) driven by perceived future needs. Hence, under such conditions the more vulnerable are markets to a shock that abruptly triggers a revision in expectations of future needs and sets off a vicious cycle of contraction of financial and product markets. Episodes of vicious cycles cannot be easily forecast, as our recent experience with Asia has demonstrated. Certainly, there were indications that Thailand's large current account deficits were unsustainable. Once the recent crisis was triggered in early July with Thailand's eventual forced abandonment of its exchange rate peg, it was apparently the lethal combination of pegged exchange rates, high leverage, weak banking and financial systems, and declining demand in Thailand and elsewhere that transformed a correction into a collapse. Normally the presence of these factors would have produced a modest retrenchment, not the kind of discontinuous fall in confidence that leads to a vicious cycle of decline. But with a significant part of short-term liabilities, bank and nonbank, denominated in dollars or other foreign currencies, unhedged, the initial pressure on domestic currencies was apparently too much to bear, leading to a sharp crack in the fixed exchange rate structure of many East Asian economies. The belief that local currencies could, virtually without risk of loss, be converted into dollars at any time was shattered. Investors, both domestic and foreign, endeavored en masse to convert to dollars, as confidence in the ability of the local economy to earn dollars to meet their fixed obligations diminished. Local exchange rates fell against the dollar, inducing still further declines. The weakening of growth also led to lowered profit expectations and contracting net capital inflows of dollars. This was an abrupt change from the pronounced acceleration through 1996 and the first half of 1997. The combination of continued strong demand for dollars to meet debt service obligations and the slowed new supply destabilized the previously fixed exchange rate regime. This created a marked increase in uncertainty and retrenchment, further reducing capital inflows, still further weakening local currency exchange rates. This vicious cycle will continue until either defaults or restructuring lowers debt service obligations, or the low local exchange rates finally induce a pickup in the supply of dollars. These virulent episodes appear to be at the root of our most recent breakdowns in Mexico and Asia. Their increased prevalence may, in fact, be a defining characteristic of the new high-tech international financial system. We shall never be able to alter the human response to shocks of uncertainty and withdrawal; we can only endeavor to reduce the imbalances that exacerbate them. As indicated earlier, I do not believe we are as yet sufficiently knowledgeable of the full complex dynamics of our increasingly developing high-tech financial system. However, enough insights have been gleaned from the crises in Mexico and Asia (and previous experiences) to enable us to list a few of the critical tendencies toward disequilibrium and vicious cycles that have all, in times past, been factors in international and domestic economic disruptions, but that appear more stark in today's market. Certainly in Korea, probably in Thailand and Indonesia, and possibly elsewhere, a high degree of leverage (the ratio of debt to equity) appears to be a place to start. Exceptionally high leverage often is a symptom of excessive risk-taking that leaves financial systems and economies vulnerable to loss of confidence. It is not easy to imagine the cumulative cascading of debt instruments seeking safety in a crisis when assets are heavily funded with equity. The concern is particularly relevant to banks and many other financial intermediaries, whose assets typically are less liquid than their liabilities and so depend on confidence in the payment of liabilities for their continued viability. Moreover, both financial and nonfinancial businesses can employ high leverage to mask inadequate underlying profitability and otherwise have inadequate capital cushions to match their volatile environments. Excess leverage in nonfinancial business can create problems for lenders including their banks; these problems can, in turn, spread to other borrowers that rely on these lenders. Fortunately, since lending by nonfinancial firms to other businesses is less prevalent than bank lending to other banks, direct contagion is less likely. But the leverage of South Korea's chaebols, because of their size and the pervasive distress, has clearly been an important cause of bank problems with their systemic implications. Banks, when confronted with a generally rising yield curve, have a tendency to incur interest rate or liquidity risk by lending long and funding short. This exposes them to shocks, especially those institutions that have low capital-asset ratios. When financial intermediaries, in addition, seek low-cost, unhedged, foreign currency funding, the dangers of depositor runs, following a fall in the domestic currency, escalate. Banks play a crucial role in the financial market infrastructure. When they are undercapitalized, have lax lending standards, and are subjected to weak supervision and regulation, they become a source of systemic risk both domestically and internationally. Despite its importance for distributing savings to their most valued use, short-term interbank funding, especially cross border, may turn out to be the Achilles' heel of an international financial system that is subject to wide variations in financial confidence. This phenomenon, which is all too common in our domestic experience, may be particularly dangerous in an international setting. An important contributor to past crises has been moral hazard. The expectation that monetary authorities or international financial institutions will come to the rescue of failing financial systems and unsound investments clearly has engendered a significant element of moral hazard and excessive risk-taking. The dividing line between public and private liabilities, too often, becomes blurred. Weak central banks also have been a contributor to crises. To effectively support a stable currency, central banks need to be independent, meaning that their monetary policy decisions are not subject to the dictates of political authorities. In East Asia, as in many other areas, the central bank was not in a position to resist political pressures focused on the short run. In addition, recent adverse banking experiences have emphasized the problems that can arise if banks are almost the sole source of intermediation. Their breakdown induces a sharp weakening in economic growth. A wider range of nonbank institutions, including viable debt and equity markets, are important safeguards of economic activity when banking fails. Finally, an effective competitive market system requires a rule of law that severely delimits government's arbitrary intrusion into commercial disputes. Defaults and restructuring will not always be avoidable. Indeed "creative destruction," as Joseph Schumpeter put it, is often an important element of renewal in a dynamic market economy. But an efficient bankruptcy statute is required to aid in this process, including in the case of cross-border defaults. * * * How should these critical tendencies toward disequilibrium and vicious cycles be addressed if the global economy is to limit the scope for disruptions in the future? What does the prevalence of these elements say about systemic risk and about risk incurred by individual firms? The management of systemic risk, of course, is beyond the scope of individual institutions. While interest and currency risk-taking, excess leverage, and interbank funding represent decisions by individual firms, such decisions, as well as the weakness of financial systems, are all encouraged by the existence of a safety net. In a domestic context, it is difficult to achieve financial balance without a regulatory structure that seeks to simulate the market incentives that would tend to control these financial elements if there were not broad safety nets. It is even more difficult to achieve such a balance internationally among sovereign governments operating out of different cultures. Thus, governments have developed a patchwork of arrangements and conventions governing the functioning of the international financial system. I believe that what is being referred to as the architecture of the international financial system will need to be thoroughly reviewed and altered as necessary to fit the needs of the new global environment. However, what we have in place today to respond to crises should be supported even as we work to improve those mechanisms and institutions. As a consequence of the unwinding of market restrictions and regulations, and the rapid increase in technology, the international financial system has expanded at a pace far faster than either domestic GDP or cross-border trade. To reduce the risk of systemic crises in such an environment, an enhanced regime of market incentives, involving greater sensitivity to market signals, more information to make those signals more robust, and broader securities markets--coupled with better supervision--is essential. Obviously appropriate macropolicies, as ever, are assumed. Nonetheless, it is reasonable to expect that despite endeavors at risk containment and prevention the system may fail in some instances, triggering vicious cycles and all the associated contagion for innocent bystanders. A backup source of international financial support provided only with agreed conditions to address underlying problems, the task assigned to the IMF, can play an essential stabilizing role. The availability of such support must be limited because its size cannot be expected to expand at the pace of the international financial system. I doubt if there will be worldwide political support for that. The policy conditionality, associated principally with IMF lending, which dictates economic and financial discipline and structural change, helps to mitigate some of the moral hazard concerns. Such conditionality is also critical to the success of the overall stabilization effort. Convincing a sovereign nation to alter destructive policies that impair its own performance and threaten contagion to its neighbors is best handled by an international financial institution, such as the IMF. With respect to private financial institutions, risks that are incurred reflect fundamentally the institutions' attitude toward risk and their internal risk management procedures. However, market discipline and official supervision and regulation, especially with respect to those financial institutions that are supported by the public safety net, provide some constraints on individual firms' behavior. Elements of the recent crises in Mexico and Asia that I have pointed to suggest several aspects of risk management and supervisory practices that deserve to be highlighted. In this rapidly expanding international financial system, the primary protection from adverse financial disturbances is effective counterparty surveillance and, hence, government regulation and supervision should seek to produce an environment in which counterparties can most effectively oversee the credit risks of potential transactions. Here a major improvement in transparency, including both accounting and public disclosure, is essential. To be sure, counterparties often exchange otherwise confidential information as a condition of a transaction. But broader dissemination of detailed disclosures of governments, financial institutions, and firms is required if the risks inherent in our global financial structure are to be contained. A market system can approach an appropriate equilibrium only if the signals to which individual market participants respond are accurate and adequate to the needs of the adjustment process. Among the important signals are product and asset prices, interest rates, debt by maturity, detailed accounts of central banks, and private enterprises. Blinded by faulty signals, a competitive free-market system cannot reach a firm balance except by chance. In today's rapidly changing marketplace producers need sophisticated signals to hone production schedules and investment programs to respond to consumer demand. One element of added transparency that ought to be considered is the need for more complete and more frequent information on bank lending and other risk exposures. We must be sensitive to the costs of putting additional reporting burdens on financial institutions. However, it might be for the benefit of those institutions themselves, as well as of the international financial community more generally, if the aggregate exposures of creditors and obligors--both on and off the balance sheet--were better understood. Secondly, we have seen that assets that firms thought were of good quality and to some extent liquid turned out not to be so when the economic and financial environment changed abruptly. Such miscalculations reflect, among other things, inadequate credit analysis, lack of adequate portfolio diversification, poor evaluation of collateral or lack of access to that collateral, or presumptions of official support that were not warranted, perhaps because the authorities did not have the resources to provide that support. Lack of a cadre of loan officers who have experience in judging lending risk can produce debilitating losses even when lending is not directed by government inducement, or the need to support members of an associated group of companies. Experienced bank supervision and regulation cannot fully substitute for poor lending procedures, but presumably it could encourage better practice. Apparently even that has been lacking in many emerging economies. Reliance on real estate for collateral has proven to be problematic. Not only can real estate values fall sharply in certain adverse situations, but at the same time such collateral becomes highly illiquid. Removal of legal impediments to more widespread forms of collateral and to prompt access to collateral would be helpful. It is becoming increasingly evident that nonperforming loans should be dealt with expeditiously. The expected values of the losses on these loans are, of course, a subtraction from capital. But since these estimates are uncertain, they embody an additional risk premium that reduces the markets' best estimate of the size of effective equity capital even if capital is replenished. It is, hence, far better to remove these dubious assets and their associated risk premium from bank balance sheets, and dispose of them separately, preferably promptly. Use of internal models for risk analysis, and as the basis for regulatory capital charges, has become common so far as market risk is concerned. While the limits of models, and the importance of the assumptions that must be made to put them to use, have been reasonably well understood, those issues have been brought into sharp focus by the Asian crisis. For example, firms now appreciate more fully the importance of the tails of the probability distributions of the shocks and of the assumptions about the covariance of price changes. The use of stress tests, which address the implications of extreme scenarios, has properly increased. Use of models for credit analysis is less widespread, but some progress is being made on that score as well. Over time, as credit risk analysis and risk management processes in general become more sophisticated, the framework for regulation and supervision, including the framework for capital charges, will need to adapt to, and take advantage of, evolving risk management practices. * * * Eventually, the Asian economies now suffering from the current crisis will recover. If the proper policies are pursued and there is support from the international community, the process of recovery can begin soon and the structural reforms necessary for more durable growth will be underway. But the lessons from the Asian crisis will remain with us, as the lessons from previous crises have remained. It is important that national and international officials and private individuals learn these lessons now and take advantage of that knowledge, so that we will not have to relearn these lessons in the future. * * * * * * Footnotes Via videoconferencing from Washington, D.C. Wage levels in an industry are largely driven by the average wage level of all workers in an economy against whom the industry's workers compete.
Remarks by Governor Edward M. Gramlich The Samuelson Lecture, before the 24th Annual Conference of the Eastern Economic Association, New York, New York February 27, 1998 Monetary Rules The question of whether the Federal Reserve Board should use rules in the conduct of monetary policy is almost as old as the Fed itself. For a brief time in the Fed's history it used a policy-making rule based on monetary aggregates, and today many are suggesting that it use a rule based on the federal funds rate. Other countries have used policy-making rules that are based on explicit inflation targets. While at this moment the Fed is an institution where members vote on monetary policy using their own best judgment, the issues illustrated in discussing the question of rules are still interesting and controversial. These issues are what I plan to talk about today. There are several types of policy-making rules. The simplest form is an unconditional rule, such as having the monetary authorities raise the money supply x percent per year, come what may. An alternative approach would base a rule on some target objective, such as stable prices, and have monetary authorities reduce the inflation rate to some specified amount, however the authorities choose to do that. An intermediate approach might be called a feedback rule. Under this approach policy objectives, or targets, might be specified in the rule and the authorities would respond in a regular way to deviations between actual values and the target levels of these variables. Rules could also vary in how binding they are. At one extreme, they might be mandated by Congress, as would have been the case in a stable price bill introduced by Senator Connie Mack in the early 1990s (but never passed). They might be self-imposed, as happened in the late 1970s, when the voting members of the Fed's open market committee agreed to follow a pre-specified rule based on monetary quantities. In either case they might carry exceptions for special circumstances. At the other extreme, they might be simple informal rules of thumb that guide some members in their votes on monetary policy. There are a long set of pros and cons for rules in general. On the con side, rules must inevitably oversimplify and one might think that monetary authorities could conduct policy better simply by using their own best judgment. Moreover, there may be several competing monetary objectives - say, reducing inflation and smoothing exchange rates. Rules based on one objective may be inconsistent with rules based on other objectives. Or, rules may simply not work that well, or may work well in one set of circumstances but not another. At the same time, there are also some powerful advantages to rules. One is that central bank policy becomes clear, regular, and consistent. Rules (like models) may help monetary authorities sort through a welter of conflicting statistics and provide good roadmaps. Rules can give quantitative guidance, when authorities are aware in a general way of the need to tighten or ease, but do not know how much. Rules can discipline central bank behavior, especially when the central bank may be facing political pressures. Rules can be worked out in advance in ways likely to stabilize the economy, they can be tested historically, and they can incorporate complex lag patterns. In general, they might be preferable to flying by the seat of one's pants, or indeed to flying blind. History In the early days, before most countries had central banks, countries operated under the gold standard, which entailed its own set of rules. The world supply of money was determined by the usable gold supply. New gold discoveries would lead to monetary expansions in recipient countries, which would then experience rises in prices and output. Contractions in the supply of usable gold would require contractions in prices and output. If a country on its own over-inflated demand, say by fiscal policy, its demand would spill over to foreigners and its gold would flow out. While the gold standard was in this sense self-regulating, it was not a perfect system. Monetary policy was not set consciously in terms of the economic needs of the country, but by the world gold market. The world gold stock would fluctuate in line with international discoveries, while the stock in particular countries reflected trade flows. There was no automatic provision for money or liquidity to grow in line with the normal production levels in the economy. John Taylor (1998) has shown that this regime was responsible for large fluctuations in real output, much less stability in real output than has been achieved in the post gold standard era. In the gold standard period of 1890-1905, for example, the US economy suffered five major recessions. The Federal Reserve started up just as the gold standard was shutting down. While it took some years for Federal Reserve practices to evolve, over time it has become understood that the rate of growth in money or liquidity set by the Fed determines the normal long run inflation rate in the United States. If inflation is too high, monetary growth can be cut back. If there is unemployment, monetary growth can be expanded. This has all been encapsulated in the Fed's motto that it should "lean against the wind." An Unconditional Rule: CROG But how much should it lean against what type of wind? Economists have debated this from the beginning. The great conservative economist of the twentieth century, Milton Friedman, has long espoused an unconditional rule that would have the Fed simply allow the money supply to rise by about four percent a year, the rate Friedman determines would lead to approximate long run price stability. The great liberal economist of the twentieth century, Paul Samuelson, has on the other hand argued that the Fed was given two eyes, one to watch the money supply and one to watch interest rates. With these two eyes and presumably the rest of its head, Samuelson figures the Fed is able to set monetary policy magnitudes judgmentally, without any need for rules or rules of thumb. The logic of the Friedman constant rate of growth (CROG) standard is that if the trend growth of real output is on the order of three percent per year, the trend growth of money of about four percent per year would permit for some low, and perhaps irreducible, inflation and also account for positive or negative trend changes in velocity. Were there expansionary or contractionary fiscal shocks, interest rates would rise or fall to stabilize output. As contrasted with the gold standard, overall liquidity would rise at a steady pace set to accommodate the normal growth in the economy, rather than an erratic pace set by worldwide gold discoveries. At the same time, CROG too contains potential difficulties. A first, pointed out by William Poole (1970), is that there could be shocks in the demand for money, related to technological or regulatory changes in the money creation system, foreign flows, or whatever. The CROG system would be buffeted by these, much as the gold standard system was buffeted by disturbances from the gold market. Moreover, as with the gold standard, there is no role in CROG for short term discretionary monetary actions. Even with automatic monetary stabilizers, economic cycles, under either the gold standard or CROG, could be long cycles and there would be no way to shorten them. This last issue brings up a key point of issue between those who became known as stabilization policy passivists, such as Friedman, and stabilization policy activists, such as Samuelson and Arthur Okun. To the passivists it is a virtue that there is no role for discretionary policy actions -- they feel that activist policy is intrinsicially either too little or too late (or too much or too soon) -- and they are perfectly comfortable in forswearing its use. Activists, on the other hand, might admit that certain historical policy mistakes had been made but still hold out the hope that discretionary actions could on balance stabilize the system. Pragmatically, the ability of a policy strategy such as CROG to stabilize the economy depends on the stability of money velocity. If velocity is stable, either constant (as the classical economists used to think) or slowly changing, keeping money growth on a smooth trend will keep overall GDP growth on a smooth trend. If on the other hand, velocity is not stable, by definition CROG would imply big cycles in total output unrelated to money growth. Figure 1 shows the actual path of velocity (M2 basis) over the 1959-97 period. There are clear upswings and downswings. Until 1990 these swings could be related to a measure of the opportunity cost of money (which still would not save a simple version of CROG), but since 1990 the movements in velocity cannot even be explained by movements in the opportunity cost of holding money. These swings now make it very difficult to use of CROG as a rule of thumb for monetary policy. A Target Rule: Inflation Targeting A different approach, used in a number of industrialized countries (Canada, the United Kingdom, New Zealand, Sweden, Australia, Finland, Spain, and Israel, to name a few) is known as inflation targeting. Rather than have some monetary quantity under the control of the authorities advance x percent per year, the idea of inflation targeting is to move right to the ultimate goal of monetary policy, stable prices - overall price levels should grow no more than y percent per year. Rather than having monetary authorities operate in terms of a simple rule, the authorities are simply told to get inflation down, one way or another. In this sense, inflation targeting is a very different type of rule. It gives very great discretion to the monetary authorities to pursue one objective, and no ability to pursue any other objective. While inflation targeting would seem to force central banks to become very specific about their policies, in fact the actual inflation targeting strategies have been more flexible. They have usually required the central bank to target between one and three percent inflation. They have also been defined in terms of some version of the underlying rate of inflation - the overall inflation rate less food and energy prices, the impact of exchange rates, excise taxes, and perhaps other clearly exogenous prices. Moreover, the real world inflation targets that have been instituted usually give the central bank an out, if this quarter it wants to worry about exchange rates, output gaps, or other economic goals (Ben Bernanke and Frederic Mishkin, (1997)). While not as loose as rules of thumb, nor have inflation targets been entirely rigid. The advantages and disadvantages of inflation targeting are much as for those of the other policy rules. On the one hand, central bank policy becomes more transparent and more logically related to what most people would say should be the underlying goal of central bank policy. On the other hand, there is a great loss of central bank flexibility. All central bank objectives apart from stabilizing prices are relegated to the background. Moreover, in the event of adverse price shocks, which impart a negative correlation between price and output movements, inflation targeting may force the central bank into undesirable contractionary policies just when unemployment is rising, though the fact that the targets can be written in terms of underlying inflation mitigates this concern. There are also timing questions. Often inflation targets are adopted when countries' inflation rates are clearly too high. In this event, should central banks be required (asked) to stabilize inflation gradually or abruptly? If there are nonlinearities in the inflation process, output gaps would normally be less if the central bank were to try to reduce inflation more gradually. A close relative to inflation targeting is nominal income targeting, suggested by Robert Hall and Greg Mankiw (1994). The main difference between inflation targeting and nominal income targeting is in the shocks. If there are price shocks, nominal income will not change as much as inflation, and the central bank would be better off targeting nominal income than inflation directly. On the other hand, if there are output productivity shocks, these shocks could alter nominal income and force the central bank to expand or contract even if inflation were on target. In general it is difficult to tell whether price shocks or productivity shocks will be larger and more prevalent, and hence whether nominal income targeting will or will not improve on inflation targeting. A Feedback Rule: Taylor's Rule An intermediate approach has been devised recently by John Taylor (1993). Taylor's rule has the monetary authorities manipulate a variable they can easily control, the federal funds rate, in response to deviations between actual and target values of objective variables. These actual variables thus feed back onto policy. Taylor works backwards by determining how the federal funds rate, a short term interest rate, should respond to inflation and output. Using the funds rate directly eliminates the influence of shocks in the demand for money. These now become details that only the trading desk has to worry about. But working out the response patterns preserves the desirable stabilizing properties of a CROG rule. The Taylor rule can be expressed in a simple formula PFR = r* + p + .5y + .5(p - p*) where PFR is the prescribed federal funds rate in nominal terms, the magnitude to be set by the monetary authorities. The equilibrium funds rate in real terms is r* and the actual rate of inflation is p. The deviation of output from its long-term trend is y and desired inflation is p*. While Taylor's rule is often expressed in terms of contemporaneous values of inflation and output, if there are lags in monetary policy, p and y could be forecast values, so that monetary policy could be made forward-looking. Suppose that monetary authorities were close to policy-making bliss, with no actual or forecast output or inflation deviations. Then the authorities would simply set the nominal funds rate at r* + p*, its desired long run value. If there were an inflationary shock, the monetary authorities would raise the funds rate by 1.5 times the change in inflation (the derivative of PFR with respect to p). This means that the real funds rate would rise as inflation rises, preserving the overall system stabilizing properties. If on the other hand, there were a recession, either current or forecast, the implied negative value of y, or output gap, tells authorities to lower the funds rate. The coefficient levels of .5 were inferred by Taylor from the properties of large simulation models of the time, though later research has shown that larger response coefficients would make the rule even more stabilizing (Andrew Levin, Volker Wieland, and John Williams, 1998). The adjustment coefficients already build stabilizing properties into the Taylor rule. If inflation rises, the rule tells the Fed to raise the real federal funds rate. If output falls, the rule tells the Fed to lower the real funds rate. But there could be even more stability implicit in this rule than meets the eye, through the behavior of long term bond rates. For any given funds rate, if output rises the spread between long term interest rates and the funds rate will rise and dampen output demand. If output falls, the spread will fall and stimulate output demand. So there are direct stabilizing properties built into the rule, and indirect properties through the behavior of long term bond markets. While such a simple rule might seem woefully inadequate as a descriptor of complex, subtle monetary policy, it turns out to explain actual monetary behavior in recent years quite well. Figure 2, taken from Taylor's 1998 paper, shows the plot of the actual funds rate over the 1987-1997 period. Rule 1 uses the coefficients of .5 and .5; rule 2 doubles the output response coefficient (g in the Figure). By historical standards, the 1987-97 decade was a good decade for the Federal Reserve, with only one recession and with gradually declining inflation rates. The equation tracks the actual path of the federal funds rate over this era of relatively successful policy very well. One could make the fit even closer by fitting equation 1) econometrically -- the fit becomes tighter and the estimated response coefficients rise. While most actual voting members of the open market committee during these years would probably be horrified that their behavior could be captured in such a simple equation, it seems that it can be. Taylor (1998) himself takes the reasoning further by going farther back in time, to eras when central bank policy was less successful. He uses his rule to show that: In the 1960-63 period, the time of high unemployment, monetary policy was too tight. In the 1965-79 period, the time of accelerating inflation, monetary policy was too easy. In the 1981-85 period, the time of high unemployment, monetary policy again became too tight. Many fans of Taylor's rule are reluctant to take the analysis this far. First, there is a technical question -- Athanasios Orphanides (1997) shows that Taylor's clear results become much more muddled when the actual data that were available to policy-makers at the time are inserted into the rule. Moreover, the Taylor rule presumes that monetary policy is independent in the sense that the Fed is free to vary the funds rate. Since the United States was on fixed exchange rates in the early 1960s, monetary authorities would have been substantially less free to lower the funds rate, as Taylor's rule would have recommended. Finally, there is a question of historical context. If the Federal Reserve were confronting the overhang of fifteen years of accelerating inflation combined with very large anticipated budget deficits, as it was in the early 1980s, policy might be forgiven a modest overadjustment according to the Taylor rule. But while there are problems with Taylor's historical analysis, the central conclusion of this analysis -- that monetary policy was far too easy most of the time (1965-79) and could have benefitted from a rule is certainly borne out by others (see Richard Clarida, Jordi Gali, and Mark Gertler (1998)). Taylor's cautious implication is that sometime in the 1980s, well before Taylor wrote his path-breaking paper, monetary policy has gotten on track and has pretty much stayed on track since. After all these years the Fed may finally be learning how to conduct monetary policy. Uncertainties The previous paragraph sounds like a basketball announcer describing a player who has made his last thirty free throws. No sooner are the words spoken than the player puts up two bricks. Is the Fed really learning how to conduct monetary policy? Perhaps. But there are uncertainties all over the place, both about the Taylor rule and indeed about rules in general. At the present time there are at least four main uncertainties about the Taylor rule. The inflation objective. The Taylor rule requires the monetary authority to get specific about price stability. Exactly what index is the Fed trying to stabilize, at exactly what level? Because there are well-known measurement problems with all price indeces, it is not necessary for the Fed to shoot for zero inflation, but the Fed does have to shoot for p*, and it certainly has to know whether actual or forecast inflation is above or below p*. That is not so hard when the economy is clearly suffering from inflation by anybody's definition, but it can become tricky as inflation declines and approaches its goal. The output objective. Uncertainties are even worse as regards the output term. Deviations of output from its trend are usually defined in terms of the so-called non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment (NAIRU). If, for example, the actual unemployment rate is above NAIRU, there is an implied output gap and the Taylor rule tells the Fed to lower the funds rate. As with the inflation term, the Fed must then know where NAIRU is, and know whether current or forecast unemployment implies a positive or negative output gap. The unexpectedly quiescent behavior of inflation in the face of low unemployment in the late 1990s has led economists into major soul-searching about NAIRU. Whereas earlier in the decade most economists would have pegged NAIRU at about six percent, now opinions and estimates range all over the map. A recent Journal of Economic Perspectives (1997) symposium finds some economists who still believe in a stable NAIRU, some who believe in the concept of NAIRU but argue that its level changes, and some who think the whole concept is a snare and delusion. While the notion of a time varying NAIRU is conceptually attractive, there is again a question about how much time varying NAIRU should do, with respect to what. This NAIRU uncertainty then transfers over to output gap uncertainty. For the Fed to lean against the wind of output gaps, it has to know what the output gaps are, and that too can become quite tricky as unemployment approaches its desired level. The equilibrium funds rate. Even if inflation and output are on target, the Fed still has to determine what value to use for r*, the equilibrium real federal funds rate. An easy approach is to get that by the regression method - simply fit the Taylor rule and compute r* from the regression intercept. The problem with this approach is that it is only descriptive - fitting the Taylor rule only estimates how previous policy-makers might have responded to inflation and unemployment. To get to the normative concept of what the equilibrium real funds rate should be is harder. One approach might be to use the rate on newly-introduced long term indexed bonds as a measure of the equilibrium real interest rate for an economy that saves roughly as much as that of the United States. The saving clause is necessary because in most economies long-term equilibrium real interest rates depend on national saving rates. Subtracting a stable price term structure premium then gives an estimate of r*. There might be other ways of inferring r*, but however that is done, it must be done. Lags. A last problem in applying the Taylor rule is lags. Since there are long (and perhaps variable) lags in the impact of monetary policy, monetary policy must in principle move well in advance of the inflation and output gaps. These gaps then have to be forecast, and the forecast in principle must be for a period far enough ahead that monetary policy can act in a timely matter. This is a strong requirement and one can get misleading policy prescriptions by not looking ahead far enough, as is shown by David Small (1996). So the Taylor rule generally describes monetary policy well in years when policy was relatively successful, and also generally describes how monetary policy may have gotten off track in years when policy was less successful. It has desirable theoretical and stabilization properties. It gives clear signals when output and inflation are far from their target values. Yet it can still be very difficult to apply such a rule. There are interpretation problems on all the relevant targets - desired inflation, desired output, and the desired equilibrium funds rate. The rule may also have to be applied well in advance to be successful. The rule gives guidance, but certainly not complete guidance. Implications To return to the theme at the outset, there have been attempts to reduce monetary policy to formula - first in terms of unconditional rules involving monetary aggregates, then targeting rules involving inflation, and now in terms of response rules involving the federal funds rate. There are advantages and disadvantages to each form of rule, with perhaps the net edge for the advantages being greatest for the Taylor rule. The uncertainties implicit in using any rule of thumb, however well it might have performed in the past, are probably sufficient that policy-makers should retain their discretion. There can also be periods when the Fed is pursuing multiple goals. At the same time, the science of rule-building may have advanced to the point where monetary rules of thumb might play some useful role in the conduct of monetary policy. Myriad short term uncertainties and special factors mean that rules still cannot deal with many ad hoc situations. But in view of the deeper uncertainties about how hard monetary authorities should lean against what wind, rules of thumb might give good guidance to policy-makers. They might help authorities avoid large and persistent mistakes. Rather than replacing judgment, in the end rules may aid judgment. Footnotes Note. I have benefitted from the comments of Joseph Coyne, Roger Ferguson, Robert Frank, Donald Kohn, David Lindsey, Laurence Meyer, Athanasios Orphanides, Susan Phillips, Alice Rivlin, David Small, and Volker Wieland. John Taylor, "A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules" (Stanford University, 1998). William Poole, "Optimal Choice of Monetary Policy Instruments in a Simple Stochastic Macro Model," Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 84 (May 1970), pp. 197-216. Ben S. Bernanke and Frederic S. Mishkin, "Inflation Targeting: A New Framework for Monetary Policy?" Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 11 (Spring 1997), pp. 97-116. Robert E. Hall and N. Gregory Mankiw, "Nominal Income Targeting," in N. Gregory Mankiw, ed., Monetary Policy (University of Chicago Press, 1994), pp. 71-94. John Taylor, "Discretion Versus Policy Rules in Practice," Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 39 (December 1993), pp. 195-214. Andrew Levin, Volker Wieland, and John C. Williams, "Robustness of Simple Monetary Policy Rules Under Model Uncertainty" (Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 1997). Athanasios Orphanides, "Monetary Policy Rules Based on Real-Time Data" (Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 1997). Richard Clarida, Jordi Gali, and Mark Gertler, "Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory" (New York University, 1998). "The Natural Rate of Unemployment," Symposium, in Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 11 (Winter 1997), pp. 3-108. David Small, "The Simple Analytics of Choosing the Optimal Response Parameters in a Monetary Policy Rule for Nominal Income Targeting" (Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 1996).