Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan At the Haas Annual Business Faculty Research Dialogue, University of California, Berkeley, California September 4, 1998 The question posed for this lecture of whether there is a new economy reaches beyond the obvious: Our economy, of course, is changing everyday, and in that sense it is always "new." The deeper question is whether there has been a profound and fundamental alteration in the way our economy works that creates discontinuity from the past and promises a significantly higher path of growth than we have experienced in recent decades. The question has arisen because the economic performance of the United States in the past five years has in certain respects been unprecedented. Contrary to conventional wisdom and the detailed historic economic modeling on which it is based, it is most unusual for inflation to be falling this far into a business expansion. Many of the imbalances observed during the few times in the past that a business expansion has lasted more than seven years are largely absent today. To be sure, labor markets are unusually tight, and we should remain concerned that pressures in these markets could spill over to costs and prices. But, to date, they have not. Moreover, it is just not credible that the United States can remain an oasis of prosperity unaffected by a world that is experiencing greatly increased stress. Developments overseas have contributed to holding down prices and aggregate demand in the United States in the face of strong domestic spending. As dislocations abroad mount, feeding back on our financial markets, restraint is likely to intensify. In the spring and early summer, the Federal Open Market Committee was concerned that a rise in inflation was the primary threat to the continued expansion of the economy. By the time of the Committee's August meeting, the risks had become balanced, and the Committee will need to consider carefully the potential ramifications of ongoing developments since that meeting. Some of those who advocate a "new economy" attribute it generally to technological innovations and breakthroughs in globalization that raise productivity and proffer new capacity on demand and that have, accordingly, removed pricing power from the world's producers on a more lasting basis. There is, clearly, an element of truth in this proposition. In the United States, for example, a technologically driven decline is evident in the average lead times on the purchase of new capital equipment that has kept capacity utilization at moderate levels and virtually eliminated most of the goods shortages and bottlenecks that were prevalent in earlier periods of sustained strong economic growth. But, although there doubtless have been profound changes in the way we organize our capital facilities, engage in just-in-time inventory regimes, and intertwine our newly sophisticated risk-sensitive financial system into this process, there is one important caveat to the notion that we live in a new economy, and that is human psychology. The same enthusiasms and fears that gripped our forebears, are, in every way, visible in the generations now actively participating in the American economy. Human actions are always rooted in a forecast of the consequences of those actions. When the future becomes sufficiently clouded, people eschew actions and disengage from previous commitments. To be sure, the degree of risk aversion differs from person to person, but judging the way prices behave in today's markets compared with those of a century or more ago, one is hard pressed to find significant differences. The way we evaluate assets, and the way changes in those values affect our economy, do not appear to be coming out of a set of rules that is different from the one that governed the actions of our forebears. Hence, as the first cut at the question "Is there a new economy?" the answer in a more profound sense is no. As in the past, our advanced economy is primarily driven by how human psychology molds the value system that drives a competitive market economy. And that process is inextricably linked to human nature, which appears essentially immutable and, thus, anchors the future to the past. But having said that, important technological changes have been emerging in recent years that are altering, in ways with few precedents, the manner in which we organize production, trade across countries, and deliver value to consumers. To explore the significance of those changes and their relevance to the possibility of a "new economy," we need to first detail some key features of our system. The American economy, like all advanced capitalist economies, is continually in the process of what Joseph Schumpeter, a number of decades ago, called "creative destruction." Capital equipment, production processes, financial and labor market infrastructure, and the whole panoply of private institutions that make up a market economy are always in a state of flux--in almost all cases evolving into more efficient regimes. The capital stock--the plant and equipment that facilitates our production of goods and services--can be viewed, with only a little exaggeration, as continuously being torn down and rebuilt. Our capital stock and the level of skills of our workforce are effectively being upgraded as competition presses business managements to find increasingly innovative and efficient ways to meet the ever-rising demands of consumers for quantity, quality, and variety. Supply and demand have been interacting over the generations in a competitive environment to propel standards of living higher. Indeed, this is the process that, in fits and starts, has characterized our and other market economies since the beginning of the Industrial Revolution. Earlier, standards of living barely changed from one generation to the next. This is the tautological sense in which every evolving market economy, our own included, is always, in some sense, "new," as we struggle to increase standards of living. In the early part of the 19th century, the United States, as a developing country, borrowed much technology and savings from Europe to get a toehold on the growth ladder. But over the past century, America has moved to the cutting edge of technology. There is no question that events are continually altering the shape and nature of our economic processes, especially the extent to which technological breakthroughs have advanced and perhaps, most recently, even accelerated the pace of conceptualization of our gross domestic product. We have dramatically reduced the size of our radios, for example, by substituting transistors for vacuum tubes. Thin fiber-optic cable has replaced huge tonnages of copper wire. New architectural, engineering, and materials technologies have enabled the construction of buildings enclosing the same space but with far less physical material than was required, say, 50 or 100 years ago. Most recently, mobile phones have been markedly downsized as they have been improved. As a consequence, the physical weight of our GDP is growing only very gradually. The exploitation of new concepts accounts for virtually all of the inflation-adjusted growth in output. The cause of this dramatic shift toward product downsizing during the past half century can only be surmised. Perhaps the physical limitations of accumulating goods and moving them in an ever more crowded geographical environment resulted in cost pressures to economize on size and space. Similarly, perhaps it was the prospect of increasing costs of processing ever larger quantities of physical resources that shifted producers toward downsized alternatives. Remember, it was less than three decades ago that the Club of Rome issued its dire warnings about the prospects of running out of the physical resources that allegedly were necessary to support our standards of living. Finally, as we moved the technological frontier forward and pressed for information processing to speed up, for example, the laws of physics required the relevant microchips to become ever more compact. But what was always true in the past, and will remain so in the future, is that the output of a free market economy and the notion of wealth creation will reflect the value preferences of people. Indeed, the very concept of wealth has no meaning other than as a reflection of human value preferences. There is no intrinsic value in wheat, a machine, or a software program. It is only as these products satisfy human needs currently, or are perceived to be able do so in the future, that they are valued. And it is such value preferences, as they express themselves in the market's key signals--product and asset prices--that inform producers of what is considered valuable and, together with the state of technology, what could be profitably produced. To get back to basics, the value of any physical production facility depends on the perceived value of the goods and services that the facility is projected to produce. More formally, the current value of the facility can be viewed as the sum of the discounted value of all future outputs, net of costs. An identical physical facility with the same capacity to produce can have different values in the marketplace at different times, depending on the degree to which the investing public feels confident about the ability of the firm to perceive and respond to the future environments in which the plant will be turning out goods and services. The value of a steel mill, which has an unchanging ability to turn out sheet steel, for example, can vary widely in the marketplace depending on the level of interest rates, the overall rate of inflation, and a number of other factors that have nothing to do with the engineering aspects of the production of steel. What matters is how investors view the markets into which the steel from the mill is expected to be sold over the years ahead. When that degree of confidence in judging the future is high, discounted future values also are high--and so are the prices of equities, which, of course, are the claims on our productive assets. The forces that shape the degree of confidence are largely endogenous to an economic process that is generally self-correcting as consumers and investors interact with a continually changing market reality. I do not claim that all market behavior is a rational response to changes in the real world. But most of it must be. For, were it otherwise, the relatively stable economic environments that have been evident among the major industrial countries over the generations would not be possible. Certainly, the degree of confidence that future outcomes are perceivable and projectable, and hence valued, depends in large part on the underlying political stability of any country with a market-oriented economy. Unless market participants are assured that their future commitments and contracts are protected by a rule of law, such commitments will not be made; productive efforts will be focused to address only the immediate short-term imperatives of survival; and efforts to build an infrastructure to provide for future needs will be stunted. A society that protects claims to long-lived productive assets thereby surely encourages their development. That spurs levels of production to go beyond the needs of the moment, the needs of immediate consumption, because claims on future production values will be discounted far less than in an environment of political instability and, for example, a weak law of contracts. At that point, the makings of a sophisticated economy based on longer-term commitments are in place. It will be an economy that saves and invests--that is, commits to the future--and, hence, one that will grow. But every competitive market economy, even one solidly based on a rule of law, is always in a state of flux, and its perceived productiveness is always subject to degrees of uncertainty that are inevitably associated with endeavors to anticipate future outcomes. Thus, while the general state of confidence and consumers' and investors' willingness to commit to long-term investment is buttressed by the perceptions of the stability of the society and economy, history demonstrates that that degree of confidence is subject to wide variations. Most of those variations are the result of the sheer difficulty in making judgments and, therefore, commitments about, and to, the future. On occasion, this very difficulty leads to less-disciplined evaluations, which foster price volatility and, in some cases, what we term market bubbles--that is, asset values inflated more on the expectation that others will pay higher prices than on a knowledgeable judgment of true value. The behavior of market economies across the globe in recent years, especially in Asia and the United States, has underscored how large a role expectations have come to play in real economic development. Economists use the term "time preference" to identify the broader tradeoff that individuals are willing to make, even without concern for risk, between current consumption and claims to future consumption. Measurable discount factors are intended to capture in addition the various types of uncertainties that inevitably cloud the future. Dramatic changes in the latter underscore how human evaluation, interacting with the more palpable changes in real output, can have profound effects on an economy, as the experiences in Asia have so amply demonstrated during the past year. Vicious cycles have arisen across Southeast Asia with virtually no notice. At one point, an economy would appear to be struggling, but no more than had been the case many times in the past. The next moment, market prices and the economy appeared in free fall. Our experiences with these vicious cycles in Asia emphasize the key role in a market economy of a critical human attribute: confidence or trust in the functioning of a market system. Implicitly, we engage in a division of labor because we trust that others will produce and be willing to trade the goods and services we do not produce ourselves. We take for granted that contracts will be fulfilled in the normal course of business, relying on the rule of law, especially the law of contracts. But if trust evaporated and every contract had to be adjudicated, the division of labor would collapse. A key characteristic, perhaps the fundamental cause of a vicious cycle, is the loss of trust. We did not foresee such a breakdown in Asia. I suspect that the very nature of the process may make it virtually impossible to anticipate. It is like water pressing against a dam. Everything appears normal until a crack brings a deluge. The immediate cause of the breakdown was an evident pulling back from future commitments, arguably, the result of the emergence among international lenders of widening doubt that the dramatic growth evident among the Asian "tigers" could be sustained. The emergence of excess worldwide capacity in semiconductors, a valued export for the tigers, may have been among the precipitating events. In any case, the initial rise in market uncertainty led to a sharp rise in discounts on future claims to income and, accordingly, falling prices of real estate and equities. The process became self-feeding as disengagement from future commitments led to still greater disruption and uncertainty, rising risk premiums and discount factors, and a sharp fall in production. While the reverse phenomenon, a virtuous cycle, is not fully symmetrical, some part is. Indeed, much of the current American economic expansion is best understood in the context of favorable expectations, interacting with production and finance to expand rather than implode economic processes. The American economic stability of the past five years has helped engender increasing confidence of future stability. This, in turn, has dramatically upgraded the stock market's valuation of our economy's existing productive infrastructure, adding about $6 trillion of capital gains to household net worth from early 1995 through the second quarter of this year. While the vast majority of these gains augmented retirement and other savings programs, enough spilled over into consumer spending to significantly lower the proportion of household income that consumers, especially upper income consumers, believed it necessary to save. In addition, the longer the elevated level of stock prices was sustained, the more consumers likely viewed their capital gains as permanent increments to their net worth, and, hence, as spendable. The recent windfall financed not only higher personal consumption expenditures but home purchases as well. It is difficult to explain the recent record level of home sales without reference to earlier stock market gains. The rise in stock prices also meant a fall in the equity cost of capital that doubtless raised the pace of new capital investment. Investment in new facilities had already been given a major boost by the acceleration in technological developments, which evidently increased the potential for profit in recent years. The sharp surge in capital outlays during the past five years apparently reflected the availability of higher rates of return on a broad spectrum of potential investments owing to an acceleration in technological advances, especially in computer and telecommunications applications. This is the apparent root of the recent evident quickened pace of productivity advance. While the recent technological advances have patently added new and increasingly flexible capacity, the ability of these technologies to improve the efficiency of productive processes (an issue I will elaborate on shortly) has significantly reduced labor requirements per unit of output. This, no doubt, was one factor contributing to a dramatic increase in corporate downsizing and reported widespread layoffs in the early 1990s. The unemployment rate also began to fall as the pace of new hires to man the new facilities exceeded the pace of layoffs from the old. Parenthetically, the perception of increased churning of our workforce in the 1990s has understandably increased the sense of accelerated job-skill obsolescence among a significant segment of our workforce, especially among those most closely wedded to older technologies. The pressures are reflected in a major increase in on-the-job training and a dramatic expansion of college enrollment, especially at community colleges. As a result, the average age of full-time college students has risen dramatically in recent years as large numbers of experienced workers return to school for skill upgrading. But the sense of increasing skill obsolescence has also led to an apparent willingness on the part of employees to forgo wage and benefit increases for increased job security. Thus, despite the incredible tightness of labor markets, increases in compensation per hour have continued to be relatively modest. Coupled with the quickened pace of productivity growth, wage and benefit moderation has kept growth in unit labor costs subdued in the current expansion. This has both damped inflation and allowed profit margins to reach high levels. That, in turn, apparently was the driving force beginning in early 1995 in security analysts' significant upward revision of their company-by-company long-term earnings projections. These upward revisions, coupled with falling interest rates, point to two key underlying forces that impelled investors to produce one of history's most notable bull stock markets. But they are not the only forces. In addition, the sequence of greater capital investment, productivity growth, and falling inflation fostered an ever more benevolent sense of long-term stable growth. People were more confident about the future. The consequence was a dramatic shrinkage in the so-called equity premium over the past two years to near historic lows earlier this summer. The equity premium is the charge for the additional risks that markets require to hold stocks rather than riskless debt instruments. When perceived risks of the future are low, equity premiums are low and stock prices are even more elevated than would be indicated solely from higher expected long-term earnings growth and low riskless rates of interest. Thus, one key to the question of whether there is a new economy is whether current expectations of future stability, which are distinctly more positive than say a decade ago, are justified by actual changes in the economy. For if expectations of greater stability are borne out, risk and equity premiums will remain low. In that case, the cost of capital will also remain low, leading, at least for a time, to higher investment and faster economic growth. Two considerations are therefore critical to higher asset values and higher economic growth. The first is whether the apparent upward shift in technological advance will persist. The second is the extent of confidence in the stability of the future that consumers and investors will be able to sustain. With regard to the first: How fast can technology advance, augmenting the pool of investment opportunities that have elevated rates of return, which engender still further increases in expected long-term earnings? Technological breakthroughs, as history so amply demonstrates, are frustratingly difficult to discern much in advance. The particular synergies between new and older technologies are generally too complex to anticipate. An innovation's full potential may be realized only after extensive improvements or after complementary innovations in other fields of science. According to Charles Townes, a Nobel Prize winner for his work on the laser, the attorneys for Bell Labs initially, in the late 1960s, refused to patent the laser because they believed it had no applications in the field of telecommunications. Only in the 1980s, after extensive improvements in fiber-optics technology, did the laser's importance for telecommunications become apparent. The future of technology advance may be difficult to predict, but for the period ahead there is the possibility that already proven technologies may not as yet have been fully exploited. Company after company reports that, when confronted with cost increases in a competitive environment that precludes price increases, they are able to offset those costs, seemingly at will, by installing the newer technologies. Such stories seem odd. If cost improvements were available at will earlier, why weren't the investments made earlier? This implies suboptimal business behavior, contrary to what universities teach in Economics 101. But in the real world, companies rarely fully maximize profits. They concentrate on only those segments of their businesses that appear to offer the largest rewards and are rarely able to operate at the most efficient frontier on all fronts simultaneously. When costs rise, the attention of management presumably becomes focused more sharply on investments to limit the effects of rising costs. But if cost-cutting at will is, in fact, currently available, it suggests that a backlog of unexploited capital projects has been built up in recent years, which, if true, implies the potential for continued gains in productivity close to the elevated rates of the last couple of years. Even if this is indeed the case, and only anecdotal evidence supports it, security analysts' recent projected per share earnings growth of more than 13 percent annually over the next three to five years is unlikely to materialize. It would imply an ever-increasing share of profit in the national income from a level that is already high by historic standards. Such conditions have led in the past to labor market pressures that thwarted further profit growth. The second consideration with respect to how high asset values can rise is: How far can risk and equity premiums fall? A key factor is that price inflation has receded to quite low levels. The rising level of confidence in recent years concerning future outcomes has doubtless been related to the fall in the rate of inflation that has, of course, also been a critical factor in the fall in interest rates and, importantly, the fall in equity premiums as well. Presumably, the onset of deflation, should it occur, would increase uncertainty as much as a reemergence of inflation concerns. Thus, arguably, at near price stability, perceived risk from business-cycle developments would be at its lowest, and one must presume that would be the case for equity premiums as well. In any event, there is a limit on how far investors can rationally favorably discount the future and therefore how low equity premiums can go. Current claims on a source of income available 20 or 30 years in the future still have current value. But should claims on the hereafter? An implication of high equity market values, relative to income and production, is an increased potential for instability. As I argued earlier, part of capital gains increases consumption and incomes. Since equity values are demonstrably more variable than incomes, when equity market values become large relative to incomes and GDP, their fluctuations can be expected to effect GDP more than when equity market values are low. Clearly, the history of large swings in investor confidence and equity premiums for rational and other reasons counsels caution in the current context. We have relearned in recent weeks that just as a bull stock market feels unending and secure as an economy and stock market move forward, so it can feel when markets contract that recovery is inconceivable. Both, of course, are wrong. But because of the difficulty imagining a turnabout when such emotions take hold, periods of euphoria or distress tend to feed on themselves. Indeed, if this were not the case, the types of psychologically driven ebbs and flows of economic activity we have observed would be unlikely to exist. Perhaps, as some argue, history will be less of a guide than it has been in the past. Some of the future is always without historical precedent. New records are always being made. Having said all that, however, my experience of observing the American economy day by day over the past half century suggests that most, perhaps substantially most, of the future can be expected to rest on a continuum from the past. Human nature, as I indicated earlier, appears immutable over the generations and inextricably ties our future to our past. Nonetheless, as I indicated earlier, I would not deny that there doubtless has been in recent years an underlying improvement in the functioning of America's markets and in the pace of development of cutting edge technologies beyond previous expectations. Most impressive is the marked increase in the effectiveness in the 1990s of our capital stock, that is, our productive facilities, the issue to which I alluded earlier. While gross investment has been high, it has been, in recent years, composed to a significant extent of short-lived assets that depreciate rapidly. Thus, the growth of the net capital stock, despite its recent acceleration, remains well below the peak rates posted during the past half century. Despite the broadening in recent decades of international capital flows, empirical evidence suggests that domestic investment still depends to a critical extent on domestic saving, especially at the margin. Many have argued persuasively, myself included, that we save too little. The relatively low propensity to save on the part of the American public has put a large premium on the effective use of scarce capital, and on the winnowing out of the potentially least productive and, hence, the least profitable of investment opportunities. That is one of the reasons that our financial system, whose job it is to ensure the productive use of physical capital, has been such a crucial part of our overall economy, especially over the past two decades. It is the signals reflected in financial asset prices, interest rates, and risk spreads that have altered the structure of our output in recent decades towards a different view of what consumers judge as value. This has imparted a significant derived value to a financial system that can do that effectively and, despite recent retrenchments, to the stock market value of those individual institutions that make up that system. Clearly, our high financial returns on investment are a symptom that our physical capital is being allocated to produce products and services that consumers particularly value. A machining facility that turns out an inferior product or a toll road that leads to nowhere will not find favor with the public, will earn subnormal or negative profits, and in most instances will exhibit an inability over the life of the asset to recover the cash plus cost of capital invested in it. Thus, while adequate national saving is a necessary condition for capital investment and rising productivity and standards of living, it is by no means a sufficient condition. The former Soviet Union, for example, had too much investment, and without the discipline of market prices, they grossly misplaced it. The preferences of central planners wasted valuable resources by mandating investment in sectors of the economy where the output wasn't wanted by consumers--particularly in heavy manufacturing industries. It is thus no surprise that the Soviet Union's capital/output ratios were higher than those of contemporaneous free market economies of the West. This phenomenon of overinvestment is observable even among more sophisticated free market economies. In Japan, the saving rate and gross investment have been far higher than ours, but their per capita growth potential appears to be falling relative to ours. It is arguable that their hobbled financial system is, at least in part, a contributor to their economy's subnormal performance. We should not become complacent, however. To be sure, the sharp increases in the stock market have boosted household net worth. But while capital gains increase the value of existing assets, they do not directly create the resources needed for investment in new physical facilities. Only saving out of income can do that. In summary, whether over the past five to seven years, what has been, without question, one of the best economic performances in our history is a harbinger of a new economy or just a hyped-up version of the old, will be answered only with the inexorable passage of time. And I suspect our grandchildren, and theirs, will be periodically debating whether they are in a new economy.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application of First National Bank Group, Inc., Edinburg, Texas, to acquire up to 51 percent of Nueces National Bank, Corpus Christi, Texas. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. First National Bank Group, Inc. Edinburg, Texas Order Approving Application to Acquire Control of a Bank First National Bank Group, Inc. ("First National"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 3 of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. ยง 1842) to acquire up to 51 percent of the voting shares of Nueces National Bank, Corpus Christi, Texas ("Nueces Bank"). Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (63 Federal Register 37,883 (1998)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the proposal and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 3 of the BHC Act. First National, with total consolidated assets of approximately $310 million, owns First National Bank, Edinburg, Texas. First National is the 66th largest banking organization in Texas, controlling deposits of approximately $294 million, representing less than 1 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in the state ("state deposits"). Nueces Bank is the 521st largest banking organization in Texas, controlling deposits of approximately $33 million, representing less than 1 percent of state deposits. On consummation of the proposal, First National would become the 58th largest banking organization in Texas, controlling deposits of approximately $327 million, representing less than 1 percent of state deposits. Competitive Considerations Section 3 of the BHC Act prohibits the Board from approving a proposal that would result in a monopoly, or that may substantially lessen competition in any relevant banking market, if the anticompetitive effects of the proposal are not clearly outweighed in the public interest by the probable effect of the proposal in meeting the convenience and needs of the community to be served. First National and Nueces Bank compete directly in the Corpus Christi, Texas, banking market. After consummation of the proposal, First National would become the 16th largest depository institution in the market, controlling deposits of approximately $34.1 million, representing 1.4 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in the market ("market deposits"). Concentration in the Corpus Christi banking market, as measured by the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index ("HHI"), would not increase, and the market would remain moderately concentrated. In addition, 23 other competitors would remain in the banking market after consummation. Based on these and the other facts of record, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposal would not have a significantly adverse effect on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in the Corpus Christi banking market or any other relevant banking market. Financial, Managerial, and Other Supervisory Factors The Board also has carefully considered the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of First National, First National Bank, and Nueces Bank in light of all the facts of record, including the terms of the proposed acquisition, supervisory reports of examination assessing the financial and managerial resources of the organizations, and financial information provided by First National. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of First National, First National Bank, and Nueces Bank are consistent with approval, as are the other supervisory factors the Board must consider under section 3 of the BHC Act. Convenience and Needs Considerations The Board also has carefully considered the effect of the proposal on the convenience and needs of the communities to be served in light of all the facts of record, including comments received regarding the effect the proposal would have on the communities to be served by First National. Some commenters commended Nueces Bank for serving well the Corpus Christi community, especially Hispanic consumers, small businesses, and low-income persons. Commenters also expressed concern that an institution based outside of Corpus Christi would not be able to meet the needs of the local community and that the local identity and orientation of Nueces Bank would be lost if the transaction were to be consummated. Several of these commenters expressed further concern that the transaction would harm the local Hispanic community if Nueces Bank, Corpus Christi's only minority-owned bank, would not remain a minority-owned institution. The Board has long held that consideration of the convenience and needs factor includes a review of the records of performance of the relevant depository institutions under the Community Reinvestment Act (12 U.S.C. ยง 2901 et seq.) ("CRA"). As provided in the CRA, the Board evaluates the record of performance of an institution in light of examinations by the appropriate federal supervisor of the institution's CRA performance record. An institution's most recent CRA performance evaluation is a particularly important consideration in the applications process because it represents a detailed on-site evaluation of the institution's overall record of performance under the CRA by its appropriate federal supervisor. First National Bank received an overall rating of "outstanding" from its appropriate federal supervisor, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency ("OCC"), at its most recent evaluation for CRA performance, as of December 19, 1996 ("1996 Examination"). Nueces Bank received a "satisfactory" CRA performance rating from the OCC at its most recent evaluation for CRA performance, as of April 1, 1997. The 1996 Examination concluded that First National Bank was responsive to its community's credit needs, including the credit needs of low- and moderate-income individuals and areas. Examiners found that the bank had "more than reasonable" loan-to-deposit ratios in light of the economic and financial condition of, and lending opportunities available in, the bank's assessment area. Examiners also determined that the bank extended a substantial majority of its loans within its assessment area and that the bank's credit was well distributed to borrowers of different income levels and businesses of different sizes. In weighing the concerns expressed by commenters, the Board also has considered First National's statement that it intends to maintain Nueces Bank as a separately chartered national bank serving the Corpus Christi community. First National also indicated that it does not propose to make any changes in the senior management of Nueces Bank as a result of the proposal. In addition, First National asserted that it does not plan to discontinue, or materially change the terms of, any banking services currently being offered or provided by Nueces Bank, including the bank's policies and procedures designed to meet the credit needs of the local community. First National stated, moreover, that it is well-equipped to address the banking needs of Corpus Christi's Hispanic community and noted that its service area includes 12 predominately Hispanic communities in southern Texas, that a substantial majority of its employees are Hispanic, and that its employees own a substantial majority of First National Bank. The Board has carefully considered all the facts of record, including comments received on the proposal and responses to the comments, in reviewing the convenience and needs factor under the BHC Act. Based on a review of the entire record, and for the reasons discussed above, the Board concludes that considerations relating to convenience and needs, including the CRA performance records of First National Bank and Nueces Bank, are consistent with approval of the proposal. Conclusion Based on the foregoing and all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the application should be, and hereby is, approved. The Board's approval of the proposal is specifically conditioned on compliance by First National with all the commitments made in connection with the proposal. The commitments and conditions relied on by the Board in reaching this decision shall be deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. This transaction shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day following the effective date of this order, or later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective September 8, 1998. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Footnotes First National owns 4.85 percent of the voting shares of Nueces Bank and has contracted to purchase additional shares amounting to approximately 46 percent of the bank's outstanding voting shares. First National has indicated that it has no present intention of owning more than 51 percent of Nueces Bank's voting shares. Asset data are as of December 31, 1997, and deposit data are as of June 30, 1997. In this context, depository institutions include commercial banks, savings banks, and savings associations. 12 U.S.C. ยง 1842(c)(1). The Corpus Christi banking market comprises Nueces and San Patricio Counties, the area encompassing Alice and Orange Grove in Jim Wells County, and the community of San Diego in Duval County, all in Texas. Market share data for Nueces Bank are as of June 30, 1997. First National Bank entered the market by establishing a de novo branch in February 1998. The branch currently controls less than $1 million of market deposits. In this context, depository institutions include commercial banks, savings banks, and savings associations. Market concentration calculations include deposits of thrift institutions at 50 percent. The Board previously has indicated that thrift institutions have become, or have the potential to become, significant competitors of commercial banks. See Midwest Financial Group, 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 386 (1989); National City Corporation, 70 Federal Reserve Bulletin 743 (1984). Thus, the Board has regularly included thrift deposits in the calculation of market share on a 50-percent weighted basis. See, e.g., First Hawaiian, Inc., 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 52 (1991). The HHI in the Corpus Christi banking market would remain unchanged at 1585 as a result of the proposal. Under the revised Department of Justice Guidelines (49 Federal Register 26,823 (June 29, 1984)), a market in which the post-merger HHI is between 1000 and 1800 is considered moderately concentrated. The Department of Justice has informed the Board that a bank merger or acquisition generally will not be challenged (in the absence of other factors indicating anticompetitive effects) unless the post-merger HHI is at least 1800 and the merger increases the HHI by more than 200 points. The Department of Justice has stated that the higher than normal HHI thresholds for screening bank mergers for anticompetitive effects implicitly recognize the competitive effect of limited-purpose lenders and other non-depository financial entities. Several commenters objected to the partial nature of First National's tender offer and either expressed concern regarding the proposal's consequences on the remaining shareholders in Nueces Bank or requested that the Board require First National to tender for all the shares of Nueces Bank. These matters are addressed by specific laws other than the BHC Act. The Federal and state securities laws establish rules that govern the manner in which a tender offer for securities must be made, and state law and the National Bank Act establish the rights of owners of a minority interest in a bank. Moreover, the Board and the courts have generally found that these matters are not among the factors the Board is entitled to consider under the BHC Act. See Western Bancshares, Inc. v. Board of Governors, 480 F.2d 749 (10th Cir. 1973). See Banc One Corporation, 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin 602 (1997). The Statement of the Federal Financial Supervisory Agencies Regarding the Community Reinvestment Act provides that a CRA examination is an important and often controlling factor in the consideration of an institution's CRA record and that reports of these examinations will be given great weight in the applications process. 54 Federal Register 13,742 and 13,745 (1989). The 1996 Examination further noted that First National Bank made extensive use of innovative, flexible lending practices and participated in special assistance programs to serve the credit needs of its assessment area. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Meyer, Ferguson, and Gramlich. Absent and not voting: Governor Kelley.
Testimony of Governor Edward M. Gramlich Social security reform Before the Committee on Finance, U.S. Senate September 9, 1998 I am pleased to appear before the Committee to testify on Social Security reform. I speak for myself, as past chair of the 1994-96 Quadrennial Advisory Council on Social Security, and not in my current status as a member of the Federal Reserve Board. Let me first engage in some retrospection. At the time our Advisory Council released its report in early 1997, there was much publicity about the fact that we couldn't agree on a single plan, but had three separate approaches. Since that time it strikes me that there has been a coalescence around the middle-ground approach I advocated. After our report, both the Committee for Economic Development (CED) and Senator Moynihan came out with plans which were similar to my plan and adopted some of its features. Earlier this year the National Commission on Retirement Policy (NCRP) came out with a similar plan, again adopting some features of my plan. In political terms the center seems to be holding--since our report there has been increased interest in sensible middle-ground approaches, and I would encourage this Committee to work in that direction. In trying to reform Social Security, I have stressed the importance of two goals. The first is to make affordable the important social protections of this program that have greatly reduced aged poverty and the human costs of work disabilities. The second is to add new national saving for retirement-both to help individuals maintain their own standard of living in retirement and to build up the nation's capital stock in advance of the baby boom retirement crunch. The Individual Accounts Plan My compromise plan, called the Individual Accounts (IA) Plan, achieves both goals. It preserves the important social protections of Social Security and still achieves long term financial balance in the system by what might be called kind and gentle benefit cuts. Most of the cuts would be felt by high wage workers, with disabled and low wage workers being largely protected from cuts. Unlike the other two plans proposed in the Advisory Council report, there would be no reliance at all on the stock market to finance Social Security benefits, and no worsening of the finances of the Health Insurance Trust Fund. The IA plan includes some technical changes such as including all state and local new hires in Social Security and applying consistent income tax treatment to Social Security benefits. These changes go some way to eliminating Social Security's actuarial deficit. Then, beginning in the 21st century, two other measures would take effect. There would be a slight increase in the normal retirement age for all workers, in line with the expected growth in overall life expectancy (also proposed by the CED, Senator Moynihan, and the NCRP). There would also be a slight change in the benefit formula to reduce the growth of Social Security benefits for high wage workers (also proposed by the CED and NCRP). Both of these changes would be phased in very gradually to avoid actual benefit cuts for present retirees and "notches" in the benefit schedule (instances when younger workers with the same earnings records get lower real benefits than older workers). The result of all these changes would be a modest reduction in the overall real growth of Social Security benefits over time. When combined with the rising number of retirees, the share of the nation's output devoted to Social Security spending would be approximately the same as at present, limiting this part of the impending explosion in future entitlement spending. These benefit cuts alone would mean that high wage workers would not experience rising real benefits as their real wages grow, so I would supplement these changes with another measure to raise overall retirement (and national) saving. Workers would be required to contribute an extra 1.6 percent of their pay to newly-created individual accounts. These accounts would be owned by workers but centrally managed. Workers would be able to allocate their funds among five to ten broad mutual or index funds covering stocks and bonds. Central management of the funds would cut down the risk that funds would be invested unwisely, would cut administrative costs, and would mean that Wall Street firms would not find these individual accounts a financial bonanza. The funds would be converted to real annuities on retirement, to protect against inflation and the chance that retirees would overspend in their early retirement years. Some have objected to these add-on individual accounts because they seem like a new tax. First off, I should point out that since the accounts will be returned to the individual in the future (with investment earnings), they are very different from a tax. Indeed, if people who already have significant pension saving beyond Social Security want to reduce their private contributions and preserve their disposable income, there is nothing to stop them. Finally, as a further sweetener it may be possible to let those who can certify the existence of their own private pensions opt out of these add-on accounts, and thus save Social Security the administrative costs. Whatever is done, the basic idea is to raise national saving for the people who do not have much pension saving beyond Social Security, and this scheme seems well-suited for that. Federal Budget Surpluses A welcome new development since our Council issued its report is the arrival of surpluses in the overall federal budget. Some observers have suggested using these surpluses in some way to build up the individual accounts. One example is your own bill, Mr. Chairman. While the advent of these overall surpluses lessens future interest payments and the overall growth of entitlement spending, I see some problems with "using" the surpluses for Social Security. A first problem from a budget standpoint is that the surpluses already are being used in that way. The overall surplus is more than accounted for by the OASDI surplus, which is already used to finance future Social Security benefits, so there is double-counting in using these federal surpluses again for retirement programs, whether to finance individual accounts or to finance future Social Security spending. The second problem is that use of the surplus in such a way does not generate new national saving, and I continue to think that that should be an important part of Social Security reform. Hence I would not favor taking any additional steps to use the surpluses to raise future retirement benefits. Conclusion The Social Security and pension changes that I have recommended would mean that approximately the presently scheduled level of benefits would be paid to all wage classes of workers, of all ages. The difference between the outcome and present law is that under this plan these benefits would be financed, as they are not under present law. The changes would eliminate Social Security's long run financial deficit while still holding together the important retirement safety net provided by Social Security. They would reduce the growth of entitlement spending. They would significantly raise the return on invested contributions for younger workers. And, the changes would move beyond the present pay-as-you-go financing scheme, by providing new saving to build up the nation's capital stock in advance of the baby boom retirement crunch. As the Congress debates Social Security reform, I hope it will keep these goals in mind and consider these types of changes in this very important program. Thank you very much.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the proposal of Banc One Corporation, Columbus, Ohio, to merge with First Chicago NBD Corporation, Chicago, Illinois ("First Chicago"). The resulting bank holding company would be named Bank One Corporation ("New Bank One") and would acquire control of all of First Chicago's bank, nonbank, and foreign subsidiaries. Attached is the relating to this action.
Remarks by Governor Edward M. Gramlich At the Carnegie Bosch Institute, University Center at Carnegie Mellon, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania September 15, 1998 For many years it has been clear that free trade is generally more efficient economically than protection. There are still huge political fights within countries about trade policies, and there may be occasions when countries are better off deviating from free trade, but free trade normally wins the economic high ground in most policy arguments. But that is not true, or not as true, for international capital flows. Large increases in world debt levels combined with inadequate management of foreign currency risks have led to a collapse of banking systems in country after country, massive changes in exchange rates, and a recession or depression in much of the world economy. In view of these provocations, many observers are now reexamining their preconceptions that free international capital flows are optimal. Particular countries such as Malaysia are clamping on exchange controls, free trade economists such as Paul Krugman are suggesting currency controls as a least bad option, a good many others are recommending distortionary taxes on some capital flows, and almost everybody is at least reexamining their preconceptions. But before this process goes too far, I would like to enter a contrary plea. There are clear problems with the present system of international lending and borrowing. But there are clear and important benefits as well. We know what the problems are. Let's fix them as soon as possible, and try to preserve the important benefits of international capital flows. The Benefits of World Capital Flows Let me start with the benefits of world capital flows. Much of this is standard neoclassical economics, but it bears repeating in these troubled times. Countries' saving and investment propensities can differ markedly around the world. If economies were closed to capital flows, domestic interest rates would equilibrate saving and investment in each country. These interest rates would vary widely, which means that capital would have a different marginal value in each country. Suppose now the world were to be opened up to capital flows. Capital would flow out of those countries with low interest rates, where investment prospects are scarce compared to domestic saving, and towards countries where interest rates are high, where investment prospects are abundant relative to domestic saving. Countries that import capital would benefit from a greater stock of high productivity investments. Countries that export capital would put their saving to better use. Both countries would gain, and the world economy would also gain because scarce saving is better allocated to capital markets around the world. This all may sound a bit academic, but the process has been very important in the world's economic development. Countries undergoing development can sometimes squeeze the requisite saving out of their poor economies, as the United Kingdom did in the 19th century and Japan did in the 20th century. Or they can import capital to supplement domestic saving, as the United States, Canada, and Australia did in the 19th century and several countries in Eastern Europe and Asia have done in the 20th century. This imported capital has been very important in the world's development process, and it has often brought with it other benefits, such as the international spreading of technological improvements. Without world capital flows, the general level of development in the world would be far less. Problems If that's the story, what's the problem? Why do world capital markets seem to be causing such anguish, in country after country? Why are countries turning away from open capital markets? It turns out that there is some fine print that goes with the neoclassical model, and the world economy has had some trouble with the fine print. Here are some of the ways. Exchange rate volatility. Countries trade in different currencies, and exchange rates are necessary to make the conversions. But in addition to being the devices for converting currencies, exchange rates play another important role in the world economy - they also represent the mechanisms for bringing countries price structures in line in international trade. Suppose one country's prices are too high for it to compete in world trade, either because it has suffered an adverse trade shock, has had too much inflation, has too rigid labor contracts, or for some other reason. The country can suffer a painful recession to get its prices back in line. Or it can let its currency depreciate. Depreciations are not absolutely necessary, as is asserted by advocates of fixed exchange rates. But depreciations, or currency fluctuations in general, are often far less costly ways to make international adjustments. The next time you hear someone complain about exchange rate changes, ask them what else they had in mind to restore international equilibrium. While exchange rate changes have this potentially stabilizing effect, they can also be destabilizing. When exchange rates are allowed to fluctuate, they are set in currency markets according to the demands and supplies of forward-looking traders, and they can be very volatile, often overshooting long term values. This volatility can destabilize trade and impart significant uncertainty to international lending. Borrowers may borrow in international markets expecting to repay at one exchange rate, and when the bill comes due, the exchange rate may differ, by a lot. Lenders and borrowers can both hedge, but hedging is costly, and institutions providing this hedge can go broke. Financial institutions. Financial institutions engage in what is known as maturity transformation. They take deposits from you and me, which deposits can be redeemed any time we take out our check book, and make long term loans to mortgage borrowers and businesses. There are fantastic efficiencies in this process - consumers can get higher returns on their saving, and business can borrow and invest in productive equipment. Indeed, banks and other financial institutions play the same role in allocating domestic saving to its best uses that the international capital market plays for international capital. But as with capital flows, there are risks. If the banks' loans go bad, the institution is in trouble and may not be able to redeem deposits. Within a country's borders there are often institutions such as deposit insurance to protect savers, but internationally the risks can be greater. Given that banks are involved in the domestic saving, investment process, it is not surprising that they have become heavily involved in the international saving, investment process. In general this process too has led to worldwide efficiencies, but here too there are risks. In Japan, for example, the banks have been hurt by a massive decline in real estate and other values, which have put many nonperforming loans on their books. In Korea and Indonesia, the banks were hurt by the foreign currency exposure of their borrowers. Incentive effects. Incentive effects are always important in economics, generally complicating the analysis of policy measures. Nowhere is this as true as with international capital flows. One incentive problem involves what is known as moral hazard. Suppose national governments do intervene to protect the safety and soundness of banks. That intervention might seem sensible, but it could inspire more risky lending by the banks, to let the government pick up the tab if things go bad. A second problem involves unilateral default on loan payments or currency obligations. Defaults would appear to benefit debtors, but in the long run these debtors will have trouble getting new credit. Or contagion effects. Even if one borrower is perfectly sound, if other borrowers like it go under, lenders will be reluctant to lend to similarly classified borrowers. Discussions of international capital flows abound with these incentive effects. Transparency. A last issue involves transparency. For the international capital market to work well, lenders must know the risks and rewards. They must know the aggregate debt of a country, the exchange rate risks they are taking, and the on and off-balance sheet liabilities of all relevant banks. When they do not have a good picture of these risks, they can get into serious trouble. While the world financial crisis has hit with uneven force in various countries, and while local situations have differed, the interaction between these four elements has almost always been critical. Sometimes big changes in exchange rates precipitated a crisis, sometimes big changes in asset values put the banks in trouble, sometimes moral hazard issues generated unsound loans, and almost everywhere there was a lack of transparency. Once a crisis got going, unilateral defaults and contagion effects spread it to other countries. The result was a broadscale financial collapse, which then fed over to the real sector and caused bankruptcies, credit restraints, and recessions. These real income losses in turn magnified the financial problems. Solutions Are there any solutions to this mess? Many are calling for an end to open capital markets, as if the benefits are not worth the costs. Others are calling for distortionary taxes, to protect countries from too much openness. Should we go part or all of the way back to closed economies? I remain an optimist and I think not. There may be occasional instances where some restrictions are necessary to control extreme capital flows not justified by economic fundamentals. Moreover, the world capital system clearly is in need of repair. But I hope we can repair it and get back to a world where saving in whatever country goes to the country that needs it most, and that can pay the most to the saver. And to a world where international capital flows are an important vehicle for world economic development. Let me discuss some remedies that should help in that process. Financial institutions. Two types of corrections are necessary. A first is tantamount to preventive medicine - what should be done when institutions are not in crisis? The basic need here is for better bank supervision. Supervision must be improved to insure that proper risk management techniques are put in place and followed. Previous practices where banks, or those to whom banks made loans, loaded up on short term hard currency denominated liabilities must be curbed. Market discipline can also be used to control risk, by exposing financial institutions to as much market discipline as possible and by limiting moral hazard problems. But even with all the preventive medicine in the world, the patient sometimes gets sick, and banks in Japan and a number of other countries surely are. What is to be done then? Examination of a number of historical episodes suggests that there are three important elements to dealing with a banking collapse. First, the bank regulators must go through the balance sheets, determine the problem loans, take them off the banks' balance sheets, sell them, and have the public take whatever losses were entailed. Second, the troubled institutions must be closed down with the management replaced and shareholders suffering losses. Third, the healthy institutions must then be recapitalized, preferably by new equity sales in capital markets. The sooner these steps are taken, the better. The longer they are not taken, the longer troubled banks will continue incurring losses, engaging in risky practices, threatening the safe institutions, generating contagion effects, and not performing the banks' all-important maturity transformation function. Indeed, here is a way foreign capital flows can be part of the solution to the problem, because new foreign-owned banks that can perform this maturity transformation function can be invited to participate in credit-starved economies. Maturity transformation. While financial institutions perform maturity transformation, there is no reason to unduly burden the system. Countries have often gotten into trouble when they have done too much maturity transformation - that is, borrowed from abroad at short maturities to finance long term investment. Steps could be taken to limit such borrowing, either nationally or through bank supervision. Some economists have used this idea to propose taxes on short term borrowing, though the tax rates necessary to do the job could be very high and it might be more effective to use orthodox principles of bank supervision. Transparency. A further set of corrective mechanisms involves greater transparency. It must be clearer to lenders and borrowers alike what risks they are taking. This requires better reporting by financial institutions, and it also requires better aggregate statistics on the uncommitted foreign reserve balances of individual countries. Transparency alone cannot do the job of good bank regulation, but it is hard to imagine a solution to the international lending problems of the day without more transparent accounting. The IMF. Last but not least I discuss the IMF. Frankly, my own feeling is that if an institution like the IMF did not exist, we would want to invent something like it. Here is an international institution that, at least in principle, can supervise the finances of different countries without the accusations of big brother that would come about if the United States alone tried to put itself in this role. Moreover, it can organize other lending countries to bring support to countries in need of liquidity assistance, as opposed to having the bill fall entirely on the United States. Supporting the existence of something like the IMF does not suggest agreement with its exact structure or with all of its policies. The present crisis indicates that international preventive medicine provisions are weak. It may be difficult for the IMF to perform this warning system role, but there is clearly a need for better warnings about the risks of lending to certain countries, to prevent currency vulnerabilities from building up as much as they did. The IMF's "one size fits all" recommendations of fiscal austerity should also be reexamined, because in many Asian countries expansionary fiscal policies were clearly called for - indeed, still are called for - while the IMF initially recommended the reverse. But the two biggest criticisms of the IMF involve the moral hazard issue and exchange rate flexibility. On moral hazard, the criticism is more or less inevitable. Any time there is any governmental attempt to increase safety and soundness, moral hazard questions can be raised. In the case of the IMF, if it is there to bail out countries in a liquidity crisis, countries will be more likely to end up in liquidity crises. The answer, it seems to me, is for the IMF to attach tight conditions on its lending, so that countries will certainly not look forward to getting into debtor status. In terms of underlying structural change, this is one of the few leverage points the international lending community has on borrowing countries, and it is important for the IMF to use its tool well. On exchange rate flexibility, the problem with the critics is that they are not saying the same thing. Some say the IMF is too quick to let the exchange rate fall, some say it is not quick enough. Both cannot be right at the same time. As a general rule, the exchange rate flexibility issue is a hard one and it is hard to make broad recommendations. Sometimes a country's cost structure is clearly out of line, or its inflation rate is clearly too high, and exchange rate flexibility seems to be the least costly way to bring prices and wages back into line. But exchange rate flexibility will cause capital losses and will raise the cost and risk of future capital transactions. That does not mean that the exchange rate must be preserved at all costs, but it does mean that capital flows themselves put some constraints on the normal international adjustment mechanisms. Given all this, it is hard for me to take a firm policy on exchange flexibility, and I have some sympathy for the apparent open-mindedness of the IMF on the issue. Will these solutions be enough? Who knows. But I think we all have a stake in making the world capital system work better. Before we initiate more artificial restrictions on capital flows, we should try to improve the system to take advantage of its very large benefits.
Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan International economic and financial systems Before the Committee on Banking and Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives September 16, 1998 As I testified before this Committee in the midst of the Mexican financial crisis in early 1995, major advances in technology have engendered a highly efficient and increasingly sophisticated international financial system. The system has fostered impressive growth in world trade and in standards of living for the vast majority of nations who have chosen to participate in it. But that same efficient financial system, as I also pointed out in that earlier testimony, has the capability to rapidly transmit the consequences of errors of judgment in private investments and public policies to all corners of the world at historically unprecedented speed. Thus, problems that appeared first in Thailand more than a year ago quickly spread to other East Asian economies that are relatively new participants in the international financial system, and subsequently to Russia and to some degree to eastern Europe and Latin America. Even long-time participants in the international financial community, such as Australia, New Zealand, and Canada, have experienced the peripheral gusts of the financial turmoil. Japan, still trying to come to grips with the bursting of its equity and real estate bubbles of the late 1980s, has experienced further setbacks as its major Asian customers have been forced to retrench. Reciprocally, its banking system problems and weakened economy have exacerbated the difficulties of its Asian neighbors. The relative stability of China and India, countries whose restrictions on international financial flows have insulated them to some extent from the current maelstrom, has led some to conclude that the relatively free flow of capital is detrimental to economic growth and standards of living. Such conclusions, in my judgment, are decidedly mistaken. The most affected emerging East Asian economies, despite the sharp contraction in their economic output during the past year, have retraced, on average, only one-sixth of their per capita growth over the past ten years. Even currently, their average per capita incomes are more than 2รฏยฟยฝ times the levels of India and China despite the unquestioned gains both have made in recent years as they too have moved partially to join the international financial community. Moreover, outside of Asia, several East European countries have made significant progress towards the adoption and implementation of market systems and have increasingly integrated their financial systems into the broader world context to the evident benefit of their populations. Latin American nations, though currently under pressure, have largely succeeded in opening up their economies to international financial flows, and more rapidly rising living standards have been the result. It is clear, nonetheless, that participation in the international financial system with all its benefits carries with it an obligation to maintain a level of stability and a set of strong and transparent institutions and rules if an economy is to participate safely and effectively in markets that have become highly sensitive to misallocation of capital and other policy errors. When domestic financial systems fail for lack of adequate institutional infrastructures, the solution is not to turn back to a less turbulent, but also less prosperous, past regime of capital controls, but to strengthen the domestic institutions that are the prerequisite for engaging in today's international financial system. Blocking the exodus or repatriation of capital, as some of the newer participants in the international financial system appear inclined to do after they get into trouble, is, of course, the equivalent of the economy receiving a subsidized injection of funds. If liquidity is tight, the immediate effect of controls can be relief from the strain of meeting obligations and a temporary sense of well-being. This is an illusion however. The obvious consequence of confiscating part, or all, of foreign investors' capital and/or income, is to ensure a sharp reduction in the availability of new foreign investment in the future. The presumption that controls can be imposed temporarily, while an economy stabilizes, and then removed, gives insufficient recognition to the imbalances in an economy that emerge when controls are introduced. Removing controls subsequently creates its own set of problems, which most governments, inclined to impose controls in the first place, are therefore loathe to do. Indeed, controls are often employed to avoid required--but frequently politically difficult--economic adjustments. There are many examples in history of controls imposed and removed, but rarely without great difficulty and cost. To be sure, any economy can operate with its borders closed to foreign investment. But the evidence is persuasive that an economy deprived of the benefits of new technologies, and inhospitable to risk capital, will be mired at a suboptimal standard of living and slow growth rate associated with out-of-date technologies. It is often stipulated that while controls on direct foreign investment and its associated technology transfer are growth inhibiting, controls on short-term inflows do not adversely affect economic welfare. Arguably, however, the free flow of short-term capital facilitates the servicing of direct investments as well as the financing of trade. Indeed, it is often difficult to determine whether certain capital flows are direct investments or short term in nature. Chile is often cited as an example of the successful use of controls on short-term capital inflows. But in response to the most recent international financial turmoil, Chile has chosen to lower its barriers in order to encourage more inflows. Those economies at the cutting edge of technology clearly do not need foreign direct investment to sustain living standards and economic growth. The economy of the United States in the 1950s, for example, needed little foreign investment and yet was far more dominant in the world then, than it is today. That was a major change from our experiences of the latter half of the nineteenth century, when the vast amount of investment and technology from abroad played a significant role in propelling the U.S. economy to world-class status. Even today, though we lead the world in many of the critical technologies, we still need to borrow a substantial share of the mobile pool of world savings to finance our level of domestic investment. Were we unable to do so, our standard of living would surely suffer. But the inflow of foreign capital would be much reduced if there were uncertainties about whether the capital could be freely repatriated. While historically there could be considerable risk in American investments--for example, some nineteenth century investments in American railroads entailed large losses--the freedom of repatriation and the sanctity of private contracts were, with rare exceptions, secure. Our experiences, and those of others, raise the question of the sustainability of free international capital flows when the conditions fostering and protecting them are impaired or absent. Specifically, an economy whose private and/or public sectors have become heavy net debtors in foreign currency is at risk of default, especially when its exchange rate unexpectedly moves adversely. Clearly, should default become widespread among a number of economies, the flow of international capital to other economies perceived as potentially in similar circumstances will slow and in certain instances reverse. The withdrawal of the ongoing benefits of free flowing capital, as recent history has so amply demonstrated, often can be abrupt and disruptive. The key question is obviously how do private sector entities and governments and, by extension, economies as a whole allow themselves through currency mismatches to reach the edge of insolvency? Indeed, where was the appropriate due diligence on the part of foreign investors? Investors will, on occasion, make misjudgments, and borrowers will, at times, misread their capabilities to service debt. When market prices and interest rates adjust promptly to evidence of such mistakes, the consequences of the mistakes are generally contained and, thus, rarely cumulate to pose significant systemic risk. There was some evidence of that process working in the latter part of the nineteenth century and early twentieth century when international capital flows were largely uninhibited. Losses, however, in an environment where gold standard rules were tight and liquidity constrained, were quickly reflected in rapid increases in interest rates and the cost of capital generally. This tended to delimit the misuse of capital and its consequences. Imbalances were generally aborted before they got out of hand. But following World War I such tight restraints on economies were seen as too inflexible to meet the economic policy goals of the twentieth century. From the 1930s through the 1960s and beyond, capital controls in many countries, including most industrial countries, inhibited international capital flows and to some extent the associated financial instability--presumably, however, at the cost of significant shortfalls in economic growth. There were innumerable episodes, of course, where individual economies experienced severe exchange rate crises. Contagion, however, was generally limited by the existence of restrictions on capital movements that were at least marginally effective. In the 1970s and 1980s, recognition of the inefficiencies associated with controls, along with newer technologies and the deregulation they fostered, gradually restored the free flow of international capital prevalent a century earlier. In the late twentieth century, however, fiat currency regimes have replaced the rigid automaticity of the gold standard in its heyday. More elastic currencies and markets, arguably, are now less sensitive to and, hence, slower to contain the misallocation of capital. Market contagion across national borders has consequently been more prevalent and faster in today's international financial markets than appears to have been the case a century ago under comparable circumstances. As I pointed out before this Committee almost a year ago, a good part of the capital that flowed into East Asia in recent years (largely in the 1990s) probably reflected the large surge in equity prices in most industrial economies, especially in the United States. The sharp rise induced a major portfolio adjustment out of then perceived fully priced investments in western industry into the perceived bargain priced, but rapidly growing, enterprises and economies of Asia. The tendency to downplay the risks of lending in emerging markets, reinforced by the propensity of governments explicitly or implicitly to guarantee such investments in a number of cases, doubtless led to an excess of lending that would not have been supported in an earlier age. As I also pointed out in previous testimony, standards of due diligence on the part of both lenders and borrowers turned somewhat lax in the face of all the largess generated by abundant capital gains and all the optimism about the prospects for growth in the Asian region. The consequent emergence of heavy losses and near insolvency of a number of borrowing banks and nonfinancial businesses engendered a rush by foreign capital to the exits and induced severe contractions in economies with which borrowers and policymakers were unprepared and unable to cope. At that point the damage to confidence and the host economies had already been done. Endeavors now to block repatriation of foreign funds, while offering temporary cash flow relief, have significant long-term costs and clearly should be avoided, if at all possible. I recognize that if problems are allowed to fester beyond the point of retrieval, no market-oriented solution appears possible. Short-term patchwork solutions to achieve stability are presumed the only feasible alternatives. When that point is reached, an economy is seen as no longer having the capability of interacting normally with the international financial system, and is inclined to withdraw behind a wall of insulation. It must be remembered, however, that the financial disequilibria that caused the initial problems would not have been addressed. Unless they are, those problems will reemerge. As I implied earlier with respect to the nineteenth century American experience, there are certain conditions precedent to establishing a viable environment for international capital investment, one not subject to periodic systemic crises. Some mechanism must be in place to enhance due diligence on the part of lenders, but especially of borrowers individually and collectively. Losses of lenders do on occasion evoke systemic risks, but it is the failure of borrowers to maintain viable balance sheets and an ability to service their debts that creates the major risks to international stability. The banking systems in many emerging East Asian economies effectively collapsed in the aftermath of inappropriate borrowing, and large unhedged exposures, in foreign currencies. Much will be required to bolster the fragile market mechanisms of many, but certainly not all, economies that have recently begun to participate in the international financial system. Doubtless at the head of the list is reinforcing the capabilities of banking supervision in emerging market economies. Conditions that should be met before engaging in international borrowing need to be promulgated and better monitored by domestic regulatory authorities. Market pricing and counterparty surveillance can be expected to do most of the job of sustaining safety and soundness. The experience of recent years in East Asia, however, has clearly been less than reassuring. To be sure, lack of transparency and timely data inhibited the more sophisticated risk evaluation systems from signaling danger. But that lack itself ought to have set off alarms. As one might readily expect, today's risk evaluation systems are being improved as a consequence of recent failures. Just as importantly, if not more so, unless weak banking systems are deterred from engaging in the type of near reckless major international borrowing that some systems in East Asia engaged in during the first part of the 1990s, the overall system will continue at risk. A better regime of bank supervision among those economies with access to the international financial system needs to be fashioned. In addition, the resolution of defaults and workout procedures require significant improvements in the legal infrastructures in many nations seeking to participate in the international financial system. None of these critical improvements can be implemented quickly. Transition support by the international financial community to those in difficulty will, doubtless, be required. Such assistance has become especially important since it is evident from the recent unprecedented swings in currency exchange rates for some of the emerging market economies that the international financial system has become increasingly more sensitive than in the past to shortcomings in domestic banks and other financial institutions. The major advances in technologically sophisticated financial products in recent years have imparted a discipline on market participants not seen in nearly a century. Whatever international financial assistance is provided must be carefully shaped not to undermine that discipline. As a consequence, any temporary financial assistance must be carefully tailored to be conditional and not encourage undue moral hazard. It can be hoped that despite the severe trauma that most of the newer participants in the international financial system are currently experiencing, or perhaps because of it, improvements will emerge to the benefit, not only of the emerging market economies but, of the long-term participants of the system as well. Footnotes Parenthetically, a century ago, banks were rarely subsidized and, hence, were required by the market to hold far more capital than they do now. In today's environment, bank supervision and deposit insurance have displaced the need for high capital-asset ratios in industrial countries. Many of the new participants in the international financial system have had neither elevated capital, nor adequate supervision. This shortfall is now generally recognized and being addressed. There are, of course, other reforms that I believe need to be addressed. These were outlined in my earlier testimonies before this Committee.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today that the Consumer Advisory Council will hold its next meeting on Thursday, October 22. The meeting will take place in Dining Room E, Terrace level, in the Board's Martin Building. The session will begin at 9 a.m. and is open to the public. The Council's function is to advise the Board on the exercise of its responsibilities under the Consumer Credit Protection Act and on other matters on which the Board seeks its advice. Time permitting, the Council will discuss the following topics: Community Development Lending on Indian Reservations Debit Cards with Stored-Value Characteristics Community Reinvestment Act Credit Scoring Reports by committees and other matters previously considered by the Council or initiated by the Council members may also be discussed. The Board invites comment from the public on any of these matters. The Board's notice is attached. FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM Consumer Advisory Council Notice of Meeting of Consumer Advisory Council The Consumer Advisory Council will meet on Thursday, October 22. The meeting, which will be open to public observation, will take place at the Federal Reserve Board's offices in Washington, D.C., in Dining Rooms E and F of the Martin Building (Terrace level). The meeting will begin at 9:00 a.m. and is expected to continue until 4:00 p.m., with a lunch break from approximately 1:00 p.m. until 2:15 p.m. The Martin Building is located on C Street, Northwest, between 20th and 21st Streets. The Council's function is to advise the Board on the exercise of the Board's responsibilities under the Consumer Credit Protection Act and on other matters on which the Board seeks its advice. Time permitting, the Council will discuss the following topics: Community Development Lending on Indian Reservations The Community Affairs and Housing Committee will lead a Council discussion on ways to overcome potential barriers to community reinvestment and community development lending on Indian Reservations. Debit Cards with Stored-Value Characteristics The Depository and Delivery Systems Committee will lead a discussion of possible treatment under Regulation E (Electronic Fund Transfers) of certain debit-card products with stored-value characteristics. Community Reinvestment Act The Bank Regulations Committee will lead a discussion on several issues related to the implementation of Regulation BB (Community Reinvestment Act), such as the scope of the limited-purpose bank designation, the primacy of the lending test, bank performance under the services and investments tests, and the use of the strategic plan option. Credit Scoring An ad hoc committee representing the Bank Regulations, Consumer Credit, and Community Affairs and Housing Committees will lead a discussion on issues related to the increased use and possible impact of credit scores on mortgage and small business loan providers and consumers. Governor's Report Federal Reserve Board Member Edward M. Gramlich will report on recent Board initiatives and issues of concern. Members Forum Individual Council members will present views on economic conditions present within their industries or local economies. Committee Reports Council committees will report on their work. Other matters previously considered by the Council or initiated by Council members also may be discussed. Persons wishing to submit views to the Council regarding any of the above topics may do so by sending written statements to Deanna Aday-Keller, Secretary, Consumer Advisory Council, Division of Consumer and Community Affairs, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, D.C. 20551. Information about this meeting may be obtained from Ms. Aday-Keller, 202-452-6470. Telecommunications Device for the Deaf (TDD) users may contact Diane Jenkins, 202-452-3544. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 17, 1998. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson, Secretary of the Board
Testimony of Governor Edward W. Kelley, Jr. Year 2000 progress of the banking and financial services sector Before the Committee on Banking and Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives September 17, 1998 Thank you for again inviting me to appear before this Committee to discuss the Year 2000 issue. This problem poses a major challenge to public policy: the stakes are enormous, nothing less than the preservation of a safe and sound financial system that can continue to operate in an orderly manner when the clock rolls over at midnight on New Year's Eve and the millennium arrives. The Year 2000 problem will touch much more than just our financial systems and could temporarily have adverse effects on the performance of the overall U.S. economy as well as the economies of many, or all, nations if not corrected. As I said last April in testimony before the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation, some of the more adverse scenarios are not without a certain plausibility, if this challenge were being ignored. But it is not being ignored. While it is impossible today to precisely forecast the impact of this event, and the range of possibilities runs from minimal to extremely serious, an enormous amount of work is being done in anticipation of the rollover of the millennium, and I am optimistic that this work will pay off. In that spirit, let me update you on what the Federal Reserve has done to address the Year 2000 issue. Since I last testified here in November 1997, the Federal Reserve has met the goals that we set for ourselves. We have: renovated our mission-critical applications and nearly completed our internal testing; opened our mission-critical systems to customers for testing; progressed significantly in our contingency planning efforts; implemented a policy concerning changes to our information systems; and concluded our initial review of all banks subject to our supervisory authority. While these accomplishments are indicative of our significant progress in addressing the Year 2000 issue, much work remains. In the testing area, we are finalizing plans for concurrent testing of multiple mission-critical applications by customers. We are coordinating with the Clearing House for Interbank Payment Systems (CHIPS) and the Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunications (SWIFT) to provide a common test day for customers of Fedwire and these two systems. We have a System-wide project underway to enhance our contingency plans to address failures external to the Federal Reserve. We are conducting a second round of supervisory reviews of banks subject to our supervisory authority and also actively coordinating with various domestic and international Year 2000 organizations. This morning I would like to discuss these achievements and the important aspects of the job that remain ahead of us. FEDERAL RESERVE READINESS The Federal Reserve has completed the renovation of its mission-critical systems, and we are nearing the conclusion of our internal Year 2000 testing efforts. Internal testing includes both individual applications and application interfaces, such as the exchange of data between Fedwire and our Integrated Accounting System. Testing is conducted through a combination of two elements: one is future-dating our computer systems to verify the readiness of our information technology, and the other is testing critical future date processing within our business applications. Communications network components are also being tested and certified in special test lab environments at the Federal Reserve Automation Services and the Board of Governors. The Reserve Banks and the Board have implemented test century date change (CDC) local area networks to verify the readiness of vendor provided products and internal applications that operate in network-based computing environments. With the exception of a few systems that will be replaced by March 1999, we will complete the testing activities and implement our mission-critical applications in production by year-end 1998. On June 29, 1998, we made our future-dated test environment available to customers for Year 2000 testing; the crucial testing period will extend through 1999. Depository institutions which are Federal Reserve customers, and thus rely on our payment applications such as Fedwire, Fed ACH, and check processing systems, can test century rollover and leap year transactions six days a week. On six weekends this fall, depository institutions will be able to test Year 2000 test dates with several applications simultaneously. We are providing assistance to our customers who test with us, and have provided them, through a series of Century Date Change bulletins, with technical information and guidelines concerning the testing activity. By the end of August, almost 400 customers, including the U.S. Treasury, had conducted CDC testing with the Federal Reserve, and the number scheduling tests is increasing rapidly. These tests encompass ten of our mission-critical applications. To ensure that the nation's larger banks are taking advantage of this testing opportunity, we intend to contact any that have not availed themselves of this service. Several foreign banking organizations have begun to test large dollar payment systems with the Federal Reserve and CHIPS. Most large foreign banks will participate in the September 26, 1998, coordinated test in which Fedwire, CHIPS, and SWIFT are participating. Like most information technology environments, ours are composed primarily of vendor hardware and software products. To assess the Year 2000 readiness of these environments, as well as our building systems such as vault and climate control systems, we have created an automated inventory of the vendor products that we use and are tracking the Year 2000 compliance status of those products. Although the Federal Reserve has made progress in independently testing vendor products, we will continue these efforts. In prior testimony, I have noted the critical dependence of banks on telecommunication services and the need to ensure the readiness of telecommunication service providers. To foster a better understanding of the importance of information sharing by the telecommunications industry, I wrote to Federal Communications Commissioner Powell about this issue. Commissioner Powell has been responsive and has provided us and others with information regarding the FCC's oversight and plans. The Federal Reserve is also participating in the Telecommunications Sector Group of the President's Council on Year 2000 Conversion. In addition, the Federal Reserve is monitoring telecommunication carriers to assess whether those used by the Federal Reserve will be Year 2000 compliant. We are pleased with the responsiveness of the telecommunications industry: plans for industry testing are well under way, with participation from the major service providers, as well as their suppliers. CONTINGENCY PLANNING As the nation's central bank, the Federal Reserve is actively engaged in contingency planning for both operational disruptions and systemic risks. An internal CDC Council consisting of senior managers is coordinating contingency planning across the Federal Reserve's various functions and is fostering a cohesive approach to internal readiness and interaction with the financial community. In general, the banking industry's focus has also progressed from the renovation of systems to business continuity and contingency planning. Contingency planning for the Federal Reserve includes payments systems, currency availability and distribution, information processing, the discount window, and the supervision function. We will also play an important role in coordinating with the financial community concerning issues such as systemic risk and cross-border payments. \ Operational Contingency The Federal Reserve's plans for operational continuity build on existing contingency plans. As you know, we have long maintained comprehensive contingency plans that are routinely tested and have been implemented during natural disasters and other disruptions. These plans cover our internal systems, as well as the services we provide to depository institutions. In June 1998, each of the Federal Reserve's business offices completed assessments of the adequacy of existing contingency scenarios to address CDC risks. Federal Reserve CDC contingency workgroups are identifying problems external to the Federal Reserve that may arise when the date changes to 2000, such as those affecting telecommunications providers, large financial institutions, utility companies, other key financial market participants, and difficulties abroad that affect U.S. markets or institutions. The workgroups are developing corresponding recommendations to mitigate those problems. The Federal Reserve plans to finalize contingency plans reflecting these recommendations by November 30, 1998. We will continue to refine our CDC contingency plans as necessary throughout 1999. In fourth quarter 1998, we will focus our efforts on how to test our contingency plans to ensure their operational effectiveness at the century rollover. Change Management As a part of our operational readiness planning, the Federal Reserve is developing procedures to manage the risks posed by changes to information systems in 1999 and the first quarter of 2000. After the scheduled completion of testing and implementation of our critical applications, changes to Federal Reserve policies, rules, regulations, and services that generate changes to critical information systems create the risk that those systems may no longer be CDC compliant. Consequently, we have established guidelines to significantly limit policy and operational changes, as well as internal hardware and software changes, during late 1999 and early 2000 in order to minimize the risks and complexities of problem resolution associated with the introduction of new processing components. By limiting changes to our systems, we will not only provide a stable internal processing environment entering the Year 2000, but we will also minimize changes that our customers could be required to make to their applications that interface with our software. In addition, we intend to aggressively coordinate with other institutions that typically generate policy and operational changes in the financial industry. We intend to publish our guidelines to assist other organizations facing similar issues and I would urge that Congress, as well as other federal agencies, consider adoption of such change management policies as we move into 1999. Currency As I noted earlier, cash availability and processing is an issue we have considered in the contingency planning process. We have regularly met the public's heightened demand for U.S. currency in peak seasons or in extraordinary situations, such as natural disasters. We recently submitted our fiscal year 1999 currency printing order to the Department of the Treasury's Bureau of Engraving and Printing and we increased the size of next year's print order due to Year 2000 considerations. With this order, we will substantially increase the amount of currency either in circulation or in Federal Reserve vaults over current levels by late 1999. We believe this increase in the level of currency should be ample to meet the public's demand for extra cash during the period surrounding the century rollover. This is a precautionary step on our part -- we believe it is prudent to print more currency than we think will be required than to risk not printing enough. While we do not anticipate any extraordinary demand for cash, we believe it is important that the public have complete confidence that sufficient supplies of currency will be available. In effect, the Federal Reserve is accelerating the timing of currency printing; we are planning for a possible short-lived increased demand for cash and will be able to reduce future print orders to lower-than-normal levels. As we monitor the public's demand for currency, we can introduce other measures to further increase cash levels. First, the recent currency order with the Bureau of Printing and Engraving is for the federal fiscal year 1999, so that there will be time to print additional notes in the last three months of 1999. Second, we can change the print order to increase production of higher denomination notes. Third, we can increase staff in Reserve Bank cash operation functions to improve the turnaround time required to process cash deposits and move currency back into circulation. Finally, as a last resort, we can hold off the destruction of old or worn currency. Liquidity Another contingency planning issue for the Federal Reserve is liquidity. Despite their best efforts, some depository institutions could encounter problems in the rollover in maintaining reliable computer systems, and these problems may or may not affect their funding positions. To the extent necessary, the Federal Reserve is prepared to lend, in appropriate circumstances and with adequate collateral, to depository institutions when market sources of funding are not reasonably available. The terms and conditions of such lending may depend upon the circumstances causing the liquidity shortfall. FINANCIAL SECTOR INITIATIVES The Federal Reserve and private industry have intensified cooperative efforts to address contingency planning. The Year 2000 Contingency Planning Working Group of the New York Clearing House (NYCH), the Securities Industry Association (SIA), and the Federal Reserve are developing coordinated contingency plans for the Year 2000 and will act as liaison with other industry groups addressing contingency planning on behalf of banks, securities firms, exchanges, clearance and settlement organizations, regulators, and international markets. Among other things, the Working Group is considering plans for the establishment of Year 2000 communications centers throughout the country, and perhaps internationally. Primarily, such centers would facilitate the exchange of up-to-date information on developing problems and issues among participants and enhance the development of consensus, when necessary, to coordinate timely responses to problems. The Federal Reserve is assisting in the government's coordination of the Year 2000 effort within the financial industry by participating in the Financial Institutions Sector Group of the President's Council on Year 2000 Conversion. A senior Board official who chairs this Sector Group has been working with representatives of government financial organizations, including the federal banking agencies, the Department of the Treasury, the Securities and Exchange Commission, and other agencies responsible for various financial intermediaries, to assess the Year 2000 readiness of the financial industry and formulate strategies for addressing interagency Year 2000 issues. BANK SUPERVISION I would now like to turn to our industry oversight activities. The Federal Reserve met its goal, set in May 1997, of conducting a Year 2000 supervisory review of all banks subject to our supervisory authority by June 1998. This public commitment and visible effort did much to stimulate industry action on the Year 2000 issue. We have also established ties and are providing significant support to numerous public and private groups, both domestic and international, that are addressing the Year 2000 readiness of their respective constituencies. As part of our outreach program, we continually emphasize the critical significance of ensuring that computer systems and applications are Year 2000 compliant and the complexity of the managerial and technological challenges that the required effort presents for all enterprises. For entities such as financial institutions that rely heavily on computers to provide financial services to customers, achieving Year 2000 compliance in mission-critical systems is essential for maintaining the quality and continuity of customer services. While bank supervisors can provide guidance, encouragement, and strong formal and informal supervisory incentives to the banking industry to address this challenge, it is important to recognize that we cannot be ultimately responsible for ensuring or guaranteeing the Year 2000 readiness and viability of the banking organizations we supervise. Rather, the boards of directors and senior management of banks and other financial institutions must be responsible for ensuring that the institutions they manage are able to provide high quality and continuous services from the first day in January of the Year 2000. As we have emphasized continually during the past sixteen months, this critical obligation must be among the very highest of priorities for bank management and boards of directors. Policy Guidance and Supervisory Reviews The Federal Reserve continues to work closely with the other banking agencies that comprise the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC) to address the banking industry's Year 2000 readiness. A series of seven advisory statements has been issued since I was last here in November 1997, including statements on the nature of Year 2000 business risk, the importance of service provider readiness, the means to address customer risk, the need to respond to customer inquiries, the critical importance of testing, the urgency of effective contingency planning, and the need to address the readiness of fiduciary activities. As a result of these advisory statements, the extent of the industry's Year 2000 efforts has significantly intensified. These statements can be found in their entirety at . Compliance with these statements is assessed during the conduct of supervisory reviews. Through June 30, the Federal Reserve had conducted reviews of approximately 1,600 organizations. Information and data collected during these reviews has proven to be reliable, consistent with our overall supervisory experience which is heavily dependent on an extensive on-site examination program. These reviews have resulted in a significant focus of attention on the subject matter within the industry and identified several issues warranting additional attention by the supervisors, particularly the need for the supplemental guidance on testing and contingency planning. It is critical that banks avail themselves of every opportunity to test mission-critical systems internally and with their counterparties, and recurring testing may be warranted as additional systems are renovated to assure that those systems already tested are not adversely affected. Based on the reviews completed by the Federal Reserve, the vast majority of banking organizations are making satisfactory progress in their Year 2000 planning and readiness efforts. About four percent are rated "needs improvement" and fewer than one percent are rated "unsatisfactory." In these cases, the Federal Reserve has initiated intensive supervisory follow-up. Working closely with state banking departments, the Federal Reserve is making a concerted effort to focus additional attention on those particular banking organizations that are deemed deficient in their Year 2000 planning and progress. Deficient organizations have been informed of their status through supervisory review comments, meetings with senior management or the board of directors, and deficiency notification letters calling for submission of detailed plans and formal responses to the deficiencies noted. Such organizations are then subject to increased monitoring and supervisory follow-up including more frequent reviews. Restrictions on expansionary activities by Year 2000 deficient organizations have also been put into place. As a result of these letters, organizations once deemed deficient have taken significant steps to enhance their Year 2000 programs and over half have been upgraded to satisfactory. The Federal Reserve has commenced Phase II of its supervision program which covers the nine months from July 1998 through March 1999. During this second phase, we will conduct another round of supervisory reviews focused on Year 2000 testing and contingency planning. In addition, we have committed to conducting another review of the information systems service providers and will distribute the results to the serviced banks. Assessment of Review Results Based on these reviews and other interactions with the industry, it appears that financial institution progress in renovating mission-critical systems has advanced notably since the Federal Reserve and the other banking agencies escalated efforts to focus the industry's attention on ensuring Year 2000 readiness. Banking organizations are making substantial headway toward Year 2000 readiness and, with some exceptions, are on track to meet FFIEC guidelines. Specifically, the FFIEC guidelines call for the completion of internal testing of mission critical systems by year-end 1998. Most large organizations are nearing completion of the renovation of their mission-critical systems and are vigorously testing those that have been renovated. Smaller organizations are working closely with their service providers in an effort to confirm that the efforts under way will assure the readiness and reliability of the services and products on which they depend. Information Systems Service Providers The banking agencies are examining the Year 2000 readiness of certain information systems service providers and software vendors that provide services and products to a large number of banking organizations. These examinations are often conducted on an interagency basis. The Federal Reserve has participated in reviews of sixteen national service providers and twelve national software vendors. In addition, the banking agencies are examining selected regional service providers and software vendors. These examinations assess the overall Year 2000 program management of the firms and confirm their plans to support products for Year 2000 readiness. To help banking organizations assess the Year 2000 readiness and dependability of their service providers and to encourage examined service providers to cooperate fully with the industry's efforts, the banking agencies are distributing the results of Year 2000 reviews of service providers and software vendors to the serviced banks. The information in the reports is not a certification of the readiness of the service provider, and it is still incumbent on each bank to work closely with its service providers to prepare for the century date change. Service providers and software vendors serving the banking industry are keenly aware of the industry's reliance on their products and services, and most consider their Year 2000 readiness to be their highest priority in order for them to remain competitive in an aggressive industry. Credit Quality FFIEC guidelines call for banks to have a plan to assess customer Year 2000 readiness by June 30, 1998, and to complete an assessment of their customers' Year 2000 readiness by September 30, 1998, in order to better understand the risks faced by the bank if customers are unable to meet their obligations on a timely basis. Even though our Phase I Year 2000 examinations were conducted before the June 30, 1998, milestone, our examiners noted that most organizations either had begun planning or had initiated their customer assessment programs. We have seen no signs that credit quality has deteriorated as a result of Year 2000 readiness considerations, although it is still early. Results from a Federal Reserve Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices (May 1998) indicated that respondents generally include Year 2000 preparedness in their underwriting and loan review standards. Another survey of Senior Loan Officers is to be conducted in November in order to obtain a more timely picture of any deterioration in credit quality related to the Year 2000. Efforts have also been made to prompt the nation's largest banks that syndicate large loans to address the Year 2000 readiness of their borrowers. Through the Shared National Credit Program, banks that syndicate credits over $20 million are asked to provide the banking agencies with information pertaining to the banks' efforts to assess the readiness of the borrowers. This initiative has helped large lenders understand that they need to consider their customers' readiness in their risk management programs. Additional Outreach Initiatives The Federal Reserve is participating in numerous outreach initiatives with the banking industry, trade associations, regulatory authorities, and other groups that are hosting conferences, seminars, and training opportunities focusing on the Year 2000 and helping participants understand better the issues that need to be addressed. Partly in response to the requirements of the Examination Parity and Year 2000 Readiness for Financial Institutions Act, which calls for the banking agencies to conduct seminars for bankers on the Year 2000, the federal banking agencies have been working with state banking departments as well as national and local bankers' associations to develop coordinated and comprehensive efforts at improving the local and regional programs intended to focus attention on the Year 2000. In the first six months of 1998, the Federal Reserve has participated in over 230 outreach initiatives reaching over 14,000 bankers. Another 100 outreach initiatives are scheduled for the third quarter of 1998. In addition, our public web site provides extensive information on our Year 2000 supervision program and on other resources available to the industry to help prepare for the millennium. INTERNATIONAL COORDINATION International cooperation on Year 2000 has intensified over the past several months because of the efforts of the public sector Joint Year 2000 Council (Joint Council) and the private sector Global 2000 Coordinating Group (G-2000). As you recall from your hearings on international issues in June, Mr. Ernest Patrikas, then Chairman of the Joint Council and a senior official of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, testified on the global efforts of the Joint Council to enhance international initiatives by financial regulators. His successor as Chairman of the Joint Council, Federal Reserve Governor Roger Ferguson, is continuing those efforts and is working closely with an external consultative committee composed of representatives from international financial services providers, international financial market associations, financial rating agencies, and a number of other international industry associations. The Joint Council is working to foster better awareness and understanding of Year 2000 issues on the part of regulators around the world; for example, the Joint Council is sponsoring a series of regional seminars for banking, insurance, and securities supervisors. The G-2000 includes more than forty financial institutions from over twenty countries that are addressing country assessments, testing, and contingency planning, as well as other issues. The group has developed a standard framework for assessing individual country preparations for the century date change and also will address the Year 2000 readiness of financial institutions, service providers, and the countries' infrastructures. This framework is being used to collect information and assess the readiness of about twenty major countries by the end of this year, with others scheduled for in-depth reviews in 1999. The Basle Committee on Banking Supervision continues to be active on Year 2000 issues, both within the Joint Council and separately, as part of its normal supervisory activities. Year 2000 will be a major issue to be discussed at the International Conference of Bank Supervisors in October. The Basle Committee is also planning a follow-up survey on Year 2000 progress. CLOSING REMARKS Financial institutions have made significant progress in renovating their systems to prepare for the Year 2000 and much has been accomplished to ensure the continuation of reliable services to the banking public at the century rollover. We are committed to a rigorous program of industry testing and contingency planning and, through our supervisory initiatives, to identifying those organizations that most need to apply additional attention to Year 2000 readiness. The Federal Reserve has renovated its mission-critical applications, and we are nearing the completion of our internal testing activities. To manage the risks posed by subsequent changes to these systems, the Federal Reserve has instituted guidelines to significantly limit policy, operational, hardware, and software changes during late 1999 and early 2000. Going forward, we will continue our industry and international coordination efforts, including participation in the President's Council on Year 2000 Conversion, the Joint Year 2000 Council, and trade associations, to assist the industry in preparing for the Year 2000. In closing, I would like to thank the Committee for its extensive efforts to focus the industry's attention on this significant matter. Awareness of the extent and importance of this challenge is a critical first step in meeting it, and the Committee's participation has been most helpful. For your convenience, I have attached a of the answers to the questions posed by the House and Senate Banking Committees.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between the ShoreBank, Cleveland, Cleveland, Ohio, the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, and the Ohio Division of Financial Institutions. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve today issued a supervisory letter which emphasizes the importance of developing and implementing effective internal credit rating systems and stresses the important role such systems should play in credit risk management, especially at large banking organizations. The letter instructs examiners to evaluate the adequacy of such systems as an element of the normal supervisory process, and tells examiners to consider the results of that evaluation in assessing an institution's risk management, capital adequacy, and asset quality. To assist examiners in their evaluation, the letter describes sound practices in the design of risk rating systems and in the internal processes by which banks assign and validate risk ratings. The letter also addresses current and emerging practices in application of risk ratings to several key areas of large banks' overall risk management processes. Internal credit risk ratings are used by large banking institutions to identify gradations in credit risk among their business loans. The supervisory letter grows out of a Federal Reserve staff analysis of internal credit risk rating systems and exposures at large institutions. The long-term goal of this analysis is to encourage broader adoption of sound practices in the use of such ratings and to promote further innovation and enhancements by the industry in this area. The is attached.
For immediate release As part of its ongoing work to improve risk management standards in banks, the Basle Committee on Banking Supervision (Basle Committee) issued a paper today entitled Framework for Internal Control Systems of Banking Organisations. In this paper, the Basle Committee presents the first internationally accepted framework for supervisors to use in evaluating the effectiveness of the internal controls over all on- and off-balance-sheet activities of banking organizations. The paper describes elements that are essential to a sound internal control system, recommends principles that supervisors can apply in evaluating such systems, and discusses the role of bank supervisors and external auditors in this assessment process. It also comments on the lessons learned from recent internal control failures. The internal control framework described in the paper is designed for international banking organizations. The guidance is broadly consistent with the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO) document, Internal Control - Integrated Framework, that is extensively used by larger U.S. banks. The paper is being distributed to supervisory authorities around the world, to banks and to other interested parties. The paper was previously issued as a proposal for public comment in January 1998. Prior to this proposal, the Basle Committee's guidance had discussed internal controls in specific areas of bank activities, such as interest rate risk and trading and derivatives activities. The Basle Committee's press release and the paper can be obtained from the Internet ( ) or from the Basle Committee Secretariat at the Bank of International Settlements.
For immediate release As part of its ongoing work to improve risk management standards in banks, the Basle Committee on Banking Supervision (Basle Committee) issued today two papers entitled Enhancing Bank Transparency and Operational Risk Management. The first paper on bank transparency gives guidelines to banks and bank supervisors on public disclosures in bank financial reports. The paper recommends that banks make meaningful disclosure in six broad areas: financial performance; financial position (including capital, solvency and liquidity); risk management strategies and practices; risk exposures (including credit risk, market risk, liquidity risk, and operational, legal and other risks); accounting policies; and basic business, management and corporate governance information. The Basle Committee strongly recommends that banks address these categories in their financial reports and other disclosures to the public. Within each broad area, significant detail in disclosures may be required, depending in part on the institution's activities. The second paper on operational risk management makes public the results of recent interviews with major banks in the G-10 countries on their management of operational risk. The purpose of these interviews was to assess the current state of art of operational risk management. The survey results indicate that, while senior management's awareness of operational risk has been increasing, most banks are only in the early stages of developing a framework for measuring and monitoring operational risk. The Basle Committee intends to continue monitoring developments in this area. The text of these reports can be obtained from the Bank of International Settlements (BIS) Web Site on the Internet ( ). They are also available from the Basle Committee's Secretariat at the BIS and from the Basle Committee member bank supervisory authorities and central banks.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its conditional approval of applications by Travelers Group Inc., New York, New York, to become a bank holding company by acquiring Citicorp, New York, New York, and its bank and nonbank subsidiaries, including Citibank, N.A., New York, New York; and to retain certain nonbanking subsidiaries and investments of Travelers, including Salomon Smith Barney Inc., New York, New York, and Travelers Bank & Trust, fsb, Newark, Delaware. The Board's approval is subject to the condition that Travelers and the combined organization, Citigroup Inc., take all actions necessary to conform the activities and investments of Travelers and all its subsidiaries to the requirements of the Bank Holding Company Act in a manner acceptable to the Board, including by divestiture as necessary, within two years of consummation of the proposal. The nonconforming activities conducted by Travelers would represent less than 15 percent of the combined company's total assets and less than 20 percent of its revenues. The Board's action also is subject to the condition that all investments and activities of Travelers and Citigroup after consummation of the proposal conform to the requirements of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders thereunder. The Board's approval also is subject to the condition that Travelers and Citigroup conform the activities of its companies to the requirements of the Glass-Steagall Act and the Board's related orders and interpretations thereunder, including the Board's revenue test. Attached is the relating to this action.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today published a final rule amending Regulation E, Electronic Fund Transfers, to revise the time periods for investigating errors involving point-of-sale (POS) debit cards, foreign transactions, and new accounts. For POS and foreign transactions, the rule requires a financial institution to provisionally credit an account within 10 business days (rather than 20) and leaves in place the 90 calendar day period to complete the investigation. For new accounts, the rule allows a financial institution 20 business days to resolve an alleged error before it must provisionally credit the consumer's account and up to 90 calendar days to complete the investigation. The Board also is publishing final amendments to Regulation DD, Truth in Savings, and Regulation M, Consumer Leasing. The revisions to Regulation DD implement minor changes to the Truth in Savings Act concerning lobby signs and certain disclosures for automatically renewable time accounts, such as certificates of deposit. The Regulation M revisions clarify rules on lease payments, advertisements, and rounding calculations. The Board's notices are attached.
For immediate release |
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application of First Mariner Bancorp, Baltimore, Maryland, to acquire up to 100 percent of the voting shares of Glen Burnie Bancorp, and thereby acquire control of its banking subsidiary, The Bank of Glen Burnie, both of Glen Burnie, Maryland. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. First Mariner Bancorp Baltimore, Maryland Order Approving Acquisition of Control of a Bank Holding Company First Mariner Bancorp ("First Mariner"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 3 of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. ยง 1842) to acquire control and up to 100 percent of the voting shares of Glen Burnie Bancorp ("Glen Burnie"), and thereby acquire control of The Bank of Glen Burnie ("Bank"), both of Glen Burnie, Maryland. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (63 Federal Register 11,446 (1998)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the proposal and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 3 of the BHC Act. First Mariner controls approximately $223 million in deposits, representing less than 1 percent of total deposits in commercial banking organizations in the state of Maryland ("state deposits"). Glen Burnie controls approximately $192 million in deposits, also representing less than 1 percent of state deposits. On consummation of the proposal, First Mariner would control approximately $415 million in deposits. Financial and Managerial Considerations The BHC Act requires the Board to consider the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the companies and banks involved in the proposal. The management of Glen Burnie ("Commenter") has objected to the proposal, contending that First Mariner does not have the financial resources to acquire all the voting shares of Glen Burnie, particularly in light of Glen Burnie's shareholders rights plan. Commenter also contends that state law would effectively limit First Mariner to acquiring approximately 20 percent of the company's voting shares, and that First Mariner's position as a minority shareholder would cause dissension and disruption within the management of Glen Burnie. The Board has carefully considered the comments in light of all the facts of record, including supervisory reports of examination assessing the financial and managerial strength of the institutions involved, accounting adjustments that Commenter alleges would be required in connection with the proposal, and confidential financial information provided by First Mariner regarding the source of funding for purchasing the voting shares of Glen Burnie. The Board notes that First Mariner and its subsidiary bank are currently well capitalized. In addition, First Mariner has committed that its purchase of any voting shares of Glen Burnie in addition to the 18.9 percent of the shares that it already has under contract to purchase will be funded only with equity that qualifies as tier 1 capital, and that First Mariner, Glen Burnie, and their subsidiary banks will remain well capitalized after all share purchases. First Mariner proposes to become the largest shareholder in Glen Burnie, and its acquisition of a minority interest is a first step in seeking to acquire all the shares of Glen Burnie. First Mariner has committed, however, not to elect its nominees to Glen Burnie's board of directors unless its nominees would constitute a majority of the board. Accordingly, First Mariner will either control the board of directors of Glen Burnie or not participate in the board of directors of the company. These circumstances substantially reduce the possibility that dissension or disruption within the board of directors will interfere with the operations of Glen Burnie. The Board recognizes that First Mariner may not succeed in acquiring control of Glen Burnie. The Board has indicated that the acquisition of less than a controlling interest in a bank or bank holding company is not a normal acquisition for a bank holding company. Nonetheless, the requirement in section 3(a)(3) of the BHC Act that the Board's approval be obtained before a bank holding company acquires more than 5 percent of the voting shares of a bank suggests that Congress contemplated the acquisition by bank holding companies of between 5 and 25 percent of the voting shares of a bank or a bank holding company. Nothing in section 3(c) of the BHC Act, moreover, requires denial of an application solely because a bank holding company may acquire less than a controlling interest in a bank or bank holding company. On this basis, the Board has on numerous occasions approved the acquisition by a bank holding company of less than a controlling interest in a bank. Commenter argues that the Board may not approve the proposal because, in the view of Commenter, the proposal is not permissible under applicable state law. Commenter argues that Maryland law prohibits consummation of the proposal unless Bank (the banking institution to be acquired) files a separate application for and receives approval to become an affiliate of First Mariner and its subsidiary bank. The Board may not approve the acquisition of a bank by a bank holding company if the acquisition is prohibited by state law. The Maryland Commissioner of Financial Regulation reviewed the transaction in light of the arguments raised by Commenter and approved the proposal by finding that the proposal was permissible under Maryland law. The Commissioner's order concluded that, when a bank holding company files the appropriate application under Maryland law for a proposed acquisition, a separate application from the Maryland banking institution to be acquired is not required. A state court in Maryland has upheld the Commissioner's decision. Accordingly, based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that its approval of the proposal is not prohibited by state law. Based on these and other facts of record, the Board concludes that considerations relating to the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of First Mariner, Glen Burnie, and their respective subsidiaries are consistent with approval of the proposal, as are the other supervisory factors that the Board must consider under section 3 of the BHC Act. Competitive Considerations The BHC Act prohibits the Board from approving an application under section 3 of the BHC Act if the proposal would result in a monopoly, or if the proposal would substantially lessen competition in any relevant banking market, and the Board has not found that the anticompetitive effects of the proposal are clearly outweighed in the public interest by the probable effect of the proposal in meeting the convenience and needs of the community to be served. First Mariner and Glen Burnie compete directly in the Baltimore, Maryland, banking market. On consummation of the proposal, First Mariner would become the 11th largest depository institution in the market and control approximately $348 million of deposits in the market, representing 1.5 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in the market. The banking market would remain moderately concentrated under the Department of Justice Merger Guidelines, and the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index ("HHI") would increase by 1 point to 1145. Numerous competitors would remain in the market. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that the consummation of the proposal would not have a significantly adverse effect on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in the Baltimore banking market or any other relevant banking market. Convenience and Needs and Other Considerations The BHC Act requires the Board to consider the convenience and needs of the communities to be served in connection with its review of the acquisition of a bank holding company. The Community Reinvestment Act (12 U.S.C. ยง 2901 et seq. ) ("CRA") also requires the Board to take into account, as part of its review of a proposal to acquire a depository institution, the record of performance of each relevant depository institution in helping to meet the credit needs of the institution's entire community, including low- and moderate-income neighborhoods, consistent with the safe and sound operation of the institution. The Board has carefully reviewed the convenience and needs factor and the CRA performance records of the banks involved in light of Commenter's contention that the proposal would not provide any significant benefit to the communities to be served. As provided in the CRA, the Board has evaluated the convenience and needs factor in light of examinations of the CRA performance records of the relevant institutions conducted by the appropriate federal financial supervisory agency. An institution's most recent CRA performance evaluation is a particularly important consideration in the applications process because it represents a detailed on-site evaluation of the institution's overall record of performance under the CRA by its appropriate federal supervisor. First Mariner's subsidiary bank, First Mariner Bank, Baltimore, Maryland, received a "satisfactory" rating from its appropriate federal supervisor, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ("FDIC"), at the bank's most recent examination for CRA performance, as of June 1996. Bank also received a "satisfactory" rating from the FDIC at is most recent examination for CRA performance, as of September 1995. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that the convenience and needs factor, including the CRA performance records of the subsidiary banks of First Mariner and Glen Burnie, are consistent with approval. Conclusion Based on the foregoing and all other facts of record, the Board has determined that the application should be, and hereby is, approved. The Board's approval is specifically conditioned on compliance by First Mariner with all the commitments made in connection with this application and on its compliance with all the requirements of Maryland law that are found to be applicable to the actions taken by First Mariner to acquire an interest in Glen Burnie or Bank. The commitments relied on by the Board in reaching this determination are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision, and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The proposed acquisition of Glen Burnie shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day following the effective date of this order, and not later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective September 28, 1998. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Footnotes First Mariner owns less than 1 percent of the voting shares of Glen Burnie and has an agreement to acquire an additional 18.9 percent of the voting shares. Deposit data are as of June 30, 1998. Glen Burnie has adopted a shareholders rights plan that becomes effective when a shareholder who has acquired or obtained the right to acquire 10 percent or more of Glen Burnie's voting shares before the adoption of the plan acquires 20 percent or more of its voting shares. If this event occurs, each of the other shareholders receives the right to purchase additional voting shares for one-half market value or to receive additional voting shares in exchange for their rights under the plan. Commenter represents that Glen Burnie has elected to be subject to a provision in Maryland law that generally prohibits a shareholder who owns 20 percent or more of a company's voting shares ("control shares") from voting the control shares unless the right to vote the control shares has been approved by two-thirds of the company's disinterested shareholders. See Md. Code Ann., Corps. & Ass'ns ยง 3-702(a) (1997). The control shares provision also contains an exception for the acquisition of shares as part of a merger or other form of business combination. Commenter notes, however, that under the exception, a shareholder who acquires 10 percent or more of the voting shares of a company or any affiliate of the shareholder may not merge or combine with the company for five years after the shareholder's ownership reaches the 10 percent level unless the company's board of directors approves the merger or combination. See Md. Code Ann., Corps. & Ass'ns ยงยง 3-602(a) and 3-603(c)-(e) (1997). Commenter argues that the proposal is inconsistent with the Board's precedent in NBC Co., 60 Federal Reserve Bulletin 782 (1974) ("NBC Co."), in which the Board denied a bank holding company's application to acquire less than 25 percent of the voting shares of a bank because a single shareholder held more than 50 percent of the voting shares of the bank and vigorously opposed the acquisition. The Board concluded that the proposal "would only perpetuate or aggravate dissension in Bank's management" without the applicant having any opportunity to obtain control of the bank. The Board also noted that the proposed acquisition could detract from the overall financial condition of the applicant, which planned to rely on the bank's dividends to service the applicant's acquisition debt. Commenter questions whether First Mariner's representatives or nominees may serve on the board of directors of Glen Burnie in light of the Depository Institution Management Interlocks Act (12 U.S.C. ยง 3201 et seq. ) ("Interlocks Act"). The Interlocks Act prohibits director interlocks between two depository institutions in the same metropolitan statistical area unless the institutions are affiliates for purposes of the Interlocks Act. Under the proposal, First Mariner would own at least 19 percent of Glen Burnie's voting shares but would not have a director on Glen Burnie's board unless its nominees constituted a majority of the board of directors. Accordingly, there would not be a director interlock unless Glen Burnie was a subsidiary of First Mariner for purposes of the BHC Act. See 12 U.S.C. ยงยง 1841(a)(2)(B) and 1841(d). In that event, the two organizations would be affiliates under the Interlocks Act, and the interlock would be permissible. See 12 U.S.C. ยง 3201(3)(A). If First Mariner proposes to establish a director interlock under any other circumstances, that interlock must conform with the Interlocks Act. Commenter also contends that First Mariner would have violated the Interlocks Act if a recent proxy contest challenging Glen Burnie's management by a dissident shareholder that was supported by First Mariner had succeeded. Even assuming that the directors proposed to replace the management nominees were covered by the Interlocks Act, the challenge sought to replace the entire board of directors and would not have violated the Interlocks Act for the reasons discussed above. In any event, no violation of the Interlocks Act occurred because no representative or nominee of First Mariner was elected to Glen Burnie's board of directors. Commenter argues that efforts by First Mariner to obtain confidential information concerning Glen Burnie's management and First Mariner's alleged use of this information to support litigants against Glen Burnie were improper and illustrate the antagonistic and damaging effect that First Mariner would have on Glen Burnie if the proposal were approved by the Board. This matter was reviewed by a court, which ordered the return of certain documents to Glen Burnie, noted that the applicable law was not settled, and determined not to impose any penalty or sanction on First Mariner. Unlike NBC Co., the proposed investment in this case would not impair the financial resources or capital position of First Mariner because First Mariner would neither incur debt to consummate the transaction nor depend on dividends from Glen Burnie to meet any debt servicing requirements. Commenters also do not control a majority of the voting shares of Glen Burnie. Consequently, this proposal more closely resembles the facts in a number of cases approved by the Board involving acquisitions by bank holding companies of minority positions in other institutions without the consent of the institutions' management. See, e.g., Crescent Holding Company, 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 457 (1987) (acquisition of 37 percent of the voting shares of a bank approved notwithstanding possible management dissension); Hudson Financial Associates, 72 Federal Reserve Bulletin 150 (1986) (acquisition of up to 49.8 percent of the voting shares of a bank holding company); City Holding Company, 71 Federal Reserve Bulletin 575 (1985) (acquisition of up to 30 percent of the voting shares of a bank holding company). See e.g., North Fork Bancorporation, Inc., 81 Federal Reserve Bulletin 734 (1995) ("North Fork"); State Street Boston Corporation, 67 Federal Reserve Bulletin 862, 863 (1981). 12 U.S.C. ยง 1842(a)(3); 12 C.F.R. 225.11(c). See e.g., North Fork (acquisition of up to 19.9 percent of the voting shares of a bank holding company); Mansura Bancshares, Inc., 79 Federal Reserve Bulletin 37 (1993) (acquisition of 9.7 percent of the voting shares of a bank holding company); SunTrust Banks, Inc., 76 Federal Reserve Bulletin 542 (1990) (acquisition of up to 24.9 percent of the voting shares of a bank); and First State Corporation, 76 Federal Reserve Bulletin 376 (1990) (acquisition of 24.9 percent of the voting shares of a bank). See Md. Code Ann., Fin. Inst. ยง 5-403 (1997). See Whitney National Bank in Jefferson Parish v. Bank of New Orleans and Trust Company, 379 U.S. 411 (1965). See Order of the Commissioner dated May 4, 1998; Md. Code Ann., Fin. Inst. ยง 5-904 (1997). Glen Burnie may appeal the decision of the court. The Board expects First Mariner to comply with all requirements of state law that are found to be applicable to the actions taken by First Mariner. Commenter maintains that First Mariner was required to obtain the Board's approval under the BHC Act before First Mariner supported a proxy challenge by a dissident shareholder at a recent meeting of Glen Burnie's shareholders. The Board notes that the conduct identified by Commenter falls within the scope of a well-recognized exception for proxy contests to the prior notice requirements of applicable law. See Board letter dated March 6, 1995, to Murray A. Indick, Esq. The Board also notes that the director nominees supported by First Mariner were not elected at the meeting of Glen Burnie's shareholders and that First Mariner has requested the Board's prior approval under this proposal to control Glen Burnie in the future. 12 U.S.C. ยง 1842(c)(1)(B). The Baltimore banking market consists of the Baltimore, Maryland, Ranally Marketing Area and the remainder of Harford County, Maryland. Market share data for all depository institutions, including First Mariner and Glen Burnie, are as of June 30, 1997, and are based on calculations in which the deposits of thrift institutions are included at 50 percent. The Board previously has indicated that thrift institutions have become, or have the potential to become, significant competitors of commercial banks. See Midwest Financial Group, 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 386 (1989); National City Corporation, 70 Federal Reserve Bulletin 743 (1984). Thus, the Board has regularly included thrift deposits in the calculation of market share on a 50-percent weighted basis. See, e.g., First Hawaiian, Inc., 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 52 (1991). Under the revised Department of Justice Merger Guidelines, 49 Federal Register 26,823 (June 29, 1984), a market in which the post-merger HHI is between 1000 and 1800 is considered to be moderately concentrated. The Justice Department has informed the Board that a bank merger or acquisition generally will not be challenged (in the absence of other factors indicating anticompetitive effects) unless the post-merger HHI is at least 1800 and the merger or acquisition increases the HHI by at least 200 points. The Justice Department has stated that the higher than normal threshold for an increase in the HHI when screening bank mergers and acquisitions for anticompetitive effects implicitly recognizes the competitive effect of limited-purpose lenders and other nondepository financial entities. 12 U.S.C. ยง 2903. The Statement of the Federal Financial Supervisory Agencies Regarding the Community Reinvestment Act provides that a CRA examination is an important and often controlling factor in the consideration of an institution's CRA record and that reports of these examinations will be given great weight in the applications process. 54 Federal Register 13,742 and 13,745 (1989); see also Interagency Questions and Answers Regarding Community Reinvestment, 62 Federal Register 52,105 and 52,121 (1997). Commenter requests that the Board hold a public hearing to give Comenter the opportunity to question First Mariner and to obtain additional information about Commenter's alleged violations of law in connection with the proxy contest discussed above. Section 3(b) of the BHC Act does not require the Board to hold a public hearing on an application unless the primary supervisor of the bank to be acquired makes a timely written recommendation of denial. The Board has not received such a recommendation. Under its rules, the Board also may, in its discretion, hold a public meeting or hearing on an application to acquire a bank if a meeting or hearing is necessary or appropriate to clarify factual issues related to the application and to provide an opportunity for testimony, if appropriate. 12 C.F.R. 225.16(e). The Board has carefully considered Commenter's request in light of all the facts of record. In the Board's view, Commenter has had ample opportunity to submit its views, and has submitted substantial written comments, including information regarding the proxy contest, that have been carefully considered by the Board in acting on the application. Commenter's request fails to demonstrate why its written comments do not adequately present its evidence, allegations and views, and, assuming the facts are as Commenter asserts, no material issue is raised by the comments concerning First Mariner's participation in the recent proxy contest for the reasons stated above. Accordingly, Commenter's request is hereby denied. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Meyer, Ferguson, and Gramlich.
For immediate release The Federal Open Market Committee decided today to ease the stance of monetary policy slightly, expecting the federal funds rate to decline 1/4 percentage point to around 5-1/4 percent. The action was taken to cushion the effects on prospective economic growth in the United States of increasing weakness in foreign economies and of less accommodative financial conditions domestically. The recent changes in the global economy and adjustments in U.S. financial markets mean that a slightly lower federal funds rate should now be consistent with keeping inflation low and sustaining economic growth going forward. The discount rate remains unchanged at 5 percent.
For immediate release The Federal Open Market Committee has released the following schedule for its meetings in 1999: February 2-3 August 24 March 30 October 5 May 18 November 16 June 29-30 December 21 The schedule is tentative in light of the Committee's practice of confirming the date for each meeting at the preceding meeting. FOMC meetings are held on Tuesdays unless otherwise noted. The FOMC is composed of the seven members of the Board of Governors and five of the twelve Reserve Bank presidents. The president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York is a permanent member; the other presidents serve one-year terms on a rotating basis. The FOMC oversees open market operations, which is the main tool used by the Federal Reserve to influence money market conditions and the growth of money and credit. In addition, the FOMC directs operations undertaken by the Federal Reserve in foreign exchange markets. The Federal Reserve Bank Presidents voting in 1999 will be: , New York , Philadelphia , Chicago , Dallas , Minneapolis