For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today amended some model forms in its Regulation B, Equal Credit Opportunity, to reflect changes to disclosures required by recent amendments to the Fair Credit Reporting Act. Statutory changes require that additional disclosures be given to a consumer who is denied credit based on information from an affiliate or from a consumer reporting agency. The new model forms go into effect on April 30. A copy of the Board's notice is attached. |
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice of Popular, Inc., Hato Rey, Puerto Rico, to acquire through Popular Cash Express, Inc., Orlando, Florida, the assets of Florida Exchange, Ltd., and Mirando-J., Oak Park, Illinois. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Popular, Inc. Hato Rey, Puerto Rico Order Approving Notice to Engage in Nonbanking Activities Popular, Inc. ("Notificant"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8)) and section 225.24(a) of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.24(a)) to acquire through its wholly owned subsidiary, Popular Cash Express, Orlando, Florida ("Cash Express"), certain assets of Florida Exchange, Ltd. and Mirando-J., Inc., both in Oak Park, Illinois (together "Companies"). Cash Express would engage in the nonbanking activities discussed below. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (62 Federal Register 61,127 (1997)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the notice and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Notificant, with total assets of approximately $19.9 billion, is the largest banking organization in Puerto Rico, and the 42nd largest banking organization in the United States. Notificant controls approximately $10.1 billion in deposits in the United States, and operates branches in New Jersey, Florida, Illinois, Texas, and California. Notificant also engages in a number of nonbanking activities in the United States. The Board has determined by regulation that the following proposed activities are closely related to banking and permissible for bank holding companies under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act: (i) credit and credit related activities; (ii) leasing activities; (iii) financial and investment advisory services; (iv) transactional services; (v) investment and trading services; (vi) insurance activities related to extensions of credit; and (vii) issuing and selling consumer payment instruments. The Board also has determined by order that (i) check cashing and wire transmission services, and (ii) bill payment services are closely related to banking. Notificant has committed to conduct each of these activities in accordance with Regulation Y and the relevant Board interpretations and orders. Notificant also proposes to provide the following government services at Cash Express offices: (i) postage stamps and postage-paid envelopes; (ii) vehicle registration services, including the sale, distribution and renewal of license plates and license tags for motor vehicles; (iii) public transportation tickets and tokens; and (iv) notary public services. Section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act provides that a bank holding company may, with the Board's approval, engage in any activity that the Board determines to be closely related to banking. An activity may be deemed to be closely related to banking if it is demonstrated that (i) banks generally provide the proposed services; (ii) banks generally provide services that are operationally or functionally so similar to the proposed services as to equip them particularly well to provide the proposed services; or (iii) banks generally provide services that are so integrally related to the proposed services as to require their provision in a specialized form. Banks generally are permitted to provide customers access to the type of government services involved in the proposal. Banks are permitted to: (i) sell postage stamps; (ii) provide vehicle registration and licensing services as agent for state departments of motor vehicles; (iii) provide notary public services; and (iv) dispense public transportation tickets from automated teller machines ("ATMs"). The proposed services, moreover, further the public policy objective of providing easier access to government services. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that the proposed activities involving government services are closely related to banking. In order to approve the proposal, the Board also must find that the performance of the proposed activities by Notificant "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public . . . that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices." 12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8). As part of its evaluation of these factors, the Board considers the financial resources of the Notificant and its subsidiaries and the effect of the transaction on those resources. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that financial and managerial considerations are consistent with approval of the proposal. The Board also has carefully considered the competitive effects of the proposed acquisition of the assets of Companies. The record reflects that there are few overlaps in the services provided by Companies and Notificant. To the extent that Notificant and Companies offer different types of products, the proposed acquisition would result in no loss of competition. In those markets in which the product offerings of Notificant and Companies overlap, there are numerous existing and potential competitors. Consummation of the proposal, therefore, would have a de minimis effect on competition, and the Board has determined that the proposal would not result in any significantly adverse competitive effects in any relevant market. The Board expects that the proposed transaction would give Notificant an increased ability to serve the needs of its customers and would allow Notificant to provide existing and new customers with a broader range of products and services. Public benefits also would be derived from providing government services at locations that are convenient for customers. Additionally, there are public benefits to be derived from permitting capital markets to operate so that bank holding companies may make potentially profitable investments in nonbanking companies when those investments are consistent, as in this case, with the relevant considerations under the BHC Act, and from permitting banking organizations to allocate their resources in the manner they believe is most efficient. Based on the foregoing and all the other facts of record, including the commitments made by Notificant, the Board has determined that the performance of the proposed activities by Notificant can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public that would outweigh any possible adverse effects under the proper incident to banking standard of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Conclusion Based on all the facts of record, including all the commitments and representations made by Notificant, and subject to all the terms and conditions set forth in this order, the Board has determined that the notice should be, and hereby is, approved. This determination is subject to all the conditions set forth in the Board's Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.25(g) (12 C.F.R. 225.7 and 225.25(g)), and to the Board's authority to require modification or termination of the activities of a bank holding company or any of its subsidiaries as the Board finds necessary to assure compliance with, or to prevent evasion of, the provisions and purposes of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders issued thereunder. The Board's decision is specifically conditioned on compliance with all the commitments and representations made in the notice, including the commitments and conditions discussed in this order. The commitments, representations, and conditions relied on in reaching this decision shall be deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision, and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. This proposal shall not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective April 2, 1998. (signed) William W. Wiles William W. Wiles Secretary of the Board Footnotes Cash Express is a third-tier subsidiary of Notificant and a direct subsidiary of Popular North America, Inc., a bank holding company registered under the BHC Act. Popular North America, a second-tier subsidiary of Notificant is a direct subsidiary of Popular International Bank, Inc., also a registered bank holding company under the BHC Act. Popular International Bank, Inc. is a wholly owned direct subsidiary of Notificant. Asset data are as September 30, 1997. Ranking data are as of December 31, 1996. See 12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(1), (b)(3), (b)(6), (b)(7), (b)(8)(ii), (b)(11), (b)(13), and (b)(14). These activities include selling prepaid telephone cards and prepaid cellular phone time, and receiving payments for additional time from cellular phone customers. Notificant would not, however, sell or rent cellular phones. See Midland Bank, PLC, 76 Federal Reserve Bulletin 860 (1990); and Norwest Corporation 81 Federal Reserve Bulletin 974 (1995) and 81 Federal Reserve Bulletin 1130 (1995). Notificant has committed that its check cashing and wire transfer services would be conducted in the same manner regardless of whether the transaction involved an affiliated or non-affiliated depository institution. Notificant also states that a customer would not be permitted to wire transfer funds to an account maintained by the customer in an affiliated depository institution or open an account at an affiliated depository institution through Cash Express. Cash Express and Notificant also would not generally cross-market products and services. Cash Express would make loans from affiliates available in a manner similar to a loan production office and in compliance with applicable branching laws. Notificant's bill payment services would include the transfer of funds to the payee by the following means: (i) by wire transfer or money order from Cash Express, (ii) by transfer of funds using a third party provider, or (iii) by transfer of funds using hardware and software provided by a payee under an agreement with Cash Express. See Banc One Corporation 80 Federal Reserve Bulletin 139 (1994), and see, e.g., Norwest Corporation, 81 Federal Reserve Bulletin 974 (1995) and 81 Federal Reserve Bulletin 1130 (1995). Cash Express also would provide services that are incidental to the proposed activities, such as providing mailboxes and related services, photocopying, and sending facsimiles. Revenue from the incidental activities would not exceed 10 percent of the total annual revenues earned by Cash Express. 12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8). See National Courier Association v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 516 F.2d 1229, 1237 (D.C. Cir. 1975). In addition, the Board may consider any other basis that may demonstrate that the proposed activity has a reasonable or close connection or relationship to banking or managing or controlling banks. See Board Statement Regarding Regulation Y, 49 Federal Register 806 (1984); Securities Industry Association v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 468 U.S. 207, 210-211 n.5 (1984). See, e.g., 12 C.F.R. 7.1010 and OCC Interpretive Letter No. 718 (March 14, 1996) (postage stamps, act as agent for the state in selling and renewing license plates and license tags, and public transportation tickets from ATMs); and OCC Conditional Approval Letter No. 267 (January 12, 1998) (notary services). See, e.g., Corbet v. Devon Bank 299 N.E.2d 521, 529 (Ill. App. Ct. 1988); and Legal Interpretation § 1.3 of Title 3 of the New York Compilation of Rules and Regulation (January 31, 1969) (New York trust companies can, under the New York Banking Law, provide vehicle registration and licensing services as agent of the New York State Department of Motor Vehicles). See 12 C.F.R. 225.26; The Fuji Bank, Limited, 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 94 (1989); Bayerishe Vereinbank AG, 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 155 (1987). Notificant indicates that it may provide the proposed services in the future by using technologies that are not described in the notice or discussed in the order. Notificant must consult with the Federal Reserve System before commencing any new activity that is not described in this order to ensure that the activity will satisfy the criteria in the BHC Act and Regulation Y, and to allow the Federal Reserve System an opportunity to consider whether a separate notice should be reviewed in any particular case. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Phillips, Ferguson, and Gramlich. Absent and not voting: Governor Meyer.
Remarks by Governor Laurence H. Meyer The Gillis Lecture, Willamette University, Salem, Oregon April 2, 1998 References Carpenter, S.R. (1940). "Development of the Open Market Function of the Federal Reserve System," Dissertation submitted at the Graduate School of Banking at Rutgers University. Hackley, Howard H., "Should the Federal Open Market Committee be Abolished or Changed?" 1971. "The Development of Open Market Powers and Policies: A Staff Memorandum," in hearings on The Federal Reserve System After Fifty Years , before the Subcommittee on Domestic Finance of the Committee on Banking and Currency, House of Representatives, 88 Cong. 2nd Sess. (Government Printing Office, 1964), pp 1985-2001. Wayne, Edward A., Come with Me to the F.O.M.C., Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, 1951. Note : The first reference was corrected on October, 27, 2023 to note it as a dissertation at Rutgers University, and not as a Board record. Footnotes Edward A. Wayne, Come with Me to the F.O.M.C., Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, 1951. "The Development of Open Market Powers and Policies: A Staff Memorandum," in hearings on The Federal Reserve System After Fifty Years , before the Subcommittee on Domestic Finance of the Committee on Banking and Currency, House of Representatives, 88 Cong. 2nd Sess. (Government Printing Office, 1964), pp 1985-2001.
Remarks by Governor Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. Before the Bankers Roundtable, Phoenix, Arizona April 4, 1998 The Federal Reserve's Role in the Payments System and Its Effect on Competition Thank you for inviting me to speak with you today. I am pleased to have this opportunity to discuss the Federal Reserve's role in the payments system with you for two reasons. The Bankers Roundtable includes many of the major participants in the U.S. payments system. Also, our role in the payments system has received considerable attention recently not only by the Federal Reserve itself but also by Congress, the GAO, and the banking industry, including the Bankers Roundtable. As a central bank, the Federal Reserve needs to ensure that the payments system of the United States (1) supports economic growth, which can best be done by ensuring open access, (2) manages risk well, (3) is resilient in the face of crisis, and (4) continues to evolve to keep pace with the needs of an evolving economy. To achieve these goals, we serve as both payments provider and regulator. Today, I would like to focus on how the Federal Reserve influences the level of competition in the market for payment services and how we hope, through competition, to foster continuing improvements in the payments system. Current Role of Federal Reserve as Service Provider As you know, the Federal Reserve Banks provide a range of payment-related services. Some of these services are generally viewed as critical to the execution of the Federal Reserve's core central bank responsibilities. For example, the Federal Reserve's cash services are integral to one the Fed's primary responsibilities -- to provide for an elastic currency. The Fedwire funds transfer system facilitates final settlement of interbank payments in central bank money and provides liquidity to the financial markets to support a growing economy. Our net settlement service facilitates the final settlement in central bank funds of payments cleared by outside the Federal Reserve. For retail payments, however, the appropriate role of the Federal Reserve is not so obvious. Historically, we can understand why the Federal Reserve began to process check and ACH payments. In an era of rudimentary communications and a fragmented banking system in the early part of this century, the Reserve Banks' involvement in check collection helped to improve the workings of the national economy, spur trade, and overcome some of the structural impediments that had contributed to the financial panics in the late 1800s and early 1900s. At that time, checks were used far differently than they are today, and represented a primary means of making interbank wholesale transfers. Sixty years later, in the 1970s, the Federal Reserve's early participation in and subsidization of the automated clearing house system provided the impetus to launch that new nationwide electronic payment mechanism. I believe that fostering a competitive environment is critically important for all portions of the retail payments system, including those in which the Federal Reserve is a participant. Indeed, the effectiveness of the U.S. retail payments systems can be credited largely to the competitive marketplace in which payments are provided. The Federal Reserve promotes a competitive marketplace in part through innovations that enhance the cost effectiveness and quality of our services. An example of current initiatives we have underway that I think holds great potential is the use of web browser software to enable banks to communicate with the Federal Reserve to send and retrieve information. This technology will make it much easier, for instance, for banks to order cash, retrieve images of checks, and submit the financial information that we ask banks to provide regularly. It will also significantly improve our ability to respond quickly to the evolving needs of our customers. The Federal Reserve is also working to streamline the check collection process through the use of electronics and image processing. Last year, more than 2.2 billion checks -- or about 14 percent of all checks collected by the Reserve Banks -- were presented electronically. In addition to the growing array of image services provided by the Reserve Banks, the Fed is also leading efforts to develop industry standards for the exchange of check images. Another example of current Fed innovation is in the ACH arena. The Federal Reserve will soon provide financial EDI translation capability available to all banks that receive ACH transactions through our Fedline software. This capability will support the Treasury's EFT99 initiative and help facilitate end-to-end electronic payments. In 1980, in part to promote competition among the Federal Reserve and private-sector service providers, Congress enacted the Monetary Control Act. MCA requires the Federal Reserve to price its payment services to recover all costs of providing the services over the long run, including imputed costs that would have been incurred and imputed profits that would have been earned had the services been provided by a private firm. The Federal Reserve has fully met this requirement, and I believe MCA has enhanced the competitive environment for the provision of payment services and has improved payments system efficiency. We must recognize, however, that the competitive market envisioned by Congress in the Monetary Control Act may not be fully realized due to several fundamental differences between the Federal Reserve and private firms. First, the Federal Reserve is immune to insolvency or default. Therefore, its customers do not need to concern themselves with credit risk associated with using the Federal Reserve as an intermediary bank in payment services. Second, the Reserve Banks continue to have some legal advantages over other providers of check services, even though the Federal Reserve Board has taken steps to reduce these advantages through its Regulation CC same-day settlement rule. Third, the Federal Reserve has a different risk-taking profile than do the private firms with which it competes. As you know all too well, many innovations that appear to have great promise fail in the marketplace, while others succeed. The public nature of the Federal Reserve, along with its self-imposed objective of achieving industry average profit margins on each service line, virtually dictates a more conservative approach in the marketplace. In contrast, a private firm may be more willing to risk the funds of its shareholders in anticipation of achieving significantly higher profit margins. Finally, Federal Reserve Banks lack the flexibility afforded their private-sector competitors to be selective in the customers to which they will provide payment services and in their pricing of those payment services. We are also subject to far greater public scrutiny and disclosure than our competitors. You can see from these examples that the Federal Reserve has some material advantages as a competitor, but also some impediments to being an effective competitor. Both the advantages and the impediments should be kept in mind. Rivlin Committee Study Because of these competitive inequities, it is all the more important that the Federal Reserve periodically reassess the need to continue to provide check and ACH services as market structure, technology, and competitive conditions evolve. We last did so in 1996 and 1997 after Chairman Greenspan established the Committee on the Role of the Federal Reserve in the Payments System, or the so-called Rivlin Committee. The Committee examined a range of alternative scenarios under which payments could be provided and sought views from a large number of payments system participants. Most participants urged the Federal Reserve to continue to provide check and ACH services. Many expressed concern as to whether private-sector service providers would adequately meet the needs of all depository institutions, especially small institutions and those in remote locations, if the Federal Reserve were to exit these services. In particular, they noted that the Federal Reserve serves certain market segments that may not yet have demonstrated adequate market competition, specifically, providing check and ACH services to low-volume banks and providing check services to banks throughout the country that need to collect checks drawn on small, remote banks. The Rivlin Committee concluded that the Federal Reserve should continue to provide check and ACH services, with the objectives of enhancing efficiency, promoting integrity, and ensuring access. Given the Federal Reserve's current dominant market position in these services and the risk of disruption if the Federal Reserve were to exit quickly, this conclusion makes sense. The Committee also concluded that we should play a more active role, working collaboratively with providers and users of the payments system, to help evolve strategies for moving to the next generation of payment instruments. Future Role of the Federal Reserve as Service Provider For the longer term, will the conclusion that the Federal Reserve should be a provider continue to be the correct one? This question hinges in large part on the extent to which the Federal Reserve's participation is needed to ensure the smooth functioning of the payments system that achieves the four goals I outlined earlier and whether there are significant barriers to private firms entry into the interbank check and ACH markets. In other words, we need to assess whether the Federal Reserve's operational involvement in retail payment services would foster or impede competition and progress as the market for these payment services evolves. There has been much debate regarding the extent to which check markets are "contestable," or truly subject to competition, particularly those segments of the market that only the Federal Reserve serves. Are there significant barriers to competition in these markets? If so, can they be reduced? The Federal Reserve's market position in some segments may simply indicate that there is insufficient volume to support more than one bank presenting checks to very low-volume endpoints. If that is the case, does this suggest that a private-sector provider could fill the gap if the Fed were to exit this service? If the market will only support one provider, would potential entrants provide sufficient market discipline on that provider to ensure that the terms of its service are reasonable or would regulation be required? One possible barrier to correspondent banks providing services equivalent to the Federal Reserve's is their more limited presentment abilities. As I will discuss shortly, we are currently evaluating this issue. Private-sector entry into ACH appears to face different obstacles. Today, the ACH service exhibits economies of scale over broad volume levels, which suggests that efficiency may be enhanced and unit costs minimized by having few ACH operators. Thus, the Federal Reserve may have an advantage because it processes the large bulk of ACH payments. We believe that the competitive environment that results from multiple ACH operators will best ensure continued efficiency improvements and innovation in this service. I believe it is important that the Federal Reserve take appropriate steps to stimulate the competitive environment in the ACH. Our planned enhancements to our net settlement service, which will provide significant operational benefits for private-sector ACH operators and other private clearing arrangements, is clearly a step in this direction. As market conditions change, we should reassess the ability of the private marketplace to foster the efficiency and integrity of, and access to the full range of, retail payment services without the Federal Reserve's operational involvement. In particular, continued geographic expansion by major correspondent banks resulting from interstate branch banking will lessen the Federal Reserve's distinction as a nationwide service provider. In addition, continued fast-paced technological advancements will likely result in further substantial reductions in the cost of data processing and data communication services. These technological improvements may reduce the barriers faced by other firms in establishing or expanding the scope of their payment services. Finally, the Federal Reserve's operational role in retail payments will decline inevitably as other types of retail payments not provided by the Federal Reserve grow. These changes may promote the competitive environment for the provision of retail payment services and may diminish the Federal Reserve's dominant market position in the provision of these services. Emerging Retail Payment Systems I know some of us are impatient with the pace of the migration of retail payments to electronic alternatives. Earlier predictions of a cashless, checkless society clearly missed their mark. Technological advances, however, are providing new opportunities to accelerate the migration to electronic payments. New payment methods will likely continue to supplement, rather than supplant, existing forms of payment. Given the track record of previous forecasts, I will refrain from speculating on the future pace of this shift from paper to electronic payments. The stakes for banks in making the transition from paper-based retail payments to electronic ones are high. Some industry observers estimate that payments businesses represent as much as one-third of industry revenues, expenses, and profits. The risk to banks is that expenses from the current payments systems stay while significant new investments for emerging payment methods are required. As I see it, banks would be well advised to manage the transition, leverage their advantage from established customer relationships and information, and harness industry-wide energy. Experience has taught us that there are often significant lags between the introduction of a new payment instrument and its widespread use. These lags are due to several factors, such as the time required for the needed physical infrastructure to emerge, the time required for consumers and businesses to become familiar and comfortable with using a new payment method, and the time necessary to achieve the critical mass of acceptance by both payors and payees. In addition, it often takes a long time for service providers to realize the scale economies that would make the new instrument cost effective compared to existing ones. Moreover, the speed of adoption depends on the distribution of risks, costs, and benefits of the new payment methods among the end users of the payments as well as resistance from incumbent service providers. Even if the marginal cost of a new payment technology is equivalent to that of an existing payment, incumbents may have advantages over rivals with new technologies because they may have already incurred the fixed costs of providing their service or may have already gained market share and familiarity with consumers. For example, incumbents may have achieved the benefits from a large network of users, referred to as network externalities by economists. Adoption of new technologies may also be slowed if they require considerable amounts of coordination. A technological leader can try to establish the de facto standard. Or, developers can try to negotiate common standards, which is a time-consuming process that may constrain technological innovation, but spreads risk while permitting competition for customers. The result is a natural tension between maintaining an adequate level of competition and achieving a level of cooperation that enhances efficiency and consumer welfare. I do not believe that the market for new retail electronic payment services reflects the existence of market failures that would suggest a need for direct Federal Reserve operational involvement. These products, and the markets in which they operate, appear to be evolving adequately on their own, just as the credit card, debit card, and ATM networks evolved without a Federal Reserve operational presence. Therefore, with respect to the Federal Reserve as a service provider, I think we have a role as provider and enhancer in traditional payment services, check and ACH, but probably will not be a provider of newer retail services. I have confidence that the private-sector marketplace can provide the combination of new products, services, and service providers to meet the needs of consumers and businesses. Our goal is to determine how we can best aid the process of moving to these new instruments without preempting private sector creativity and problem solving. Federal Reserve as Regulator I've focused my comments thus far on the Federal Reserve's operational role in the payments system. In addition to the Reserve Banks' role as provider of payment services, the Federal Reserve Board also regulates aspects of the payments system. While our role as provider of payment services goes back to the inception of the Federal Reserve, our authority to regulate the interbank collection or execution of payments not processed by the Federal Reserve is only about a decade old. In exercising this regulatory authority, the Board has focused in large part on improving the competitiveness of the market for interbank check collection. The Board's 1994 same-day settlement rule enhanced the ability of correspondent banks to compete with the Federal Reserve Banks in collecting checks. The Board adopted this rule because it believed it was in the best interest of the payments system, even though it knew the rule would reduce the Reserve Banks' check volume. Our goal was competition in the check collection market, not preserving Federal Reserve market share. As I mentioned earlier, even with the same-day settlement rule, correspondent banks may still have difficulty competing with Federal Reserve Banks in some check collection markets due to their more limited presentment abilities. Several weeks ago, the Board issued an advanced notice of proposed rulemaking designed to assess market experience under the same-day settlement rule. The comments we receive will be helpful in assessing whether further reductions in the legal disparities between the Federal Reserve Banks and private-sector banks would further enhance competition and the overall efficiencies that could result from that competition. This analysis is a complex one. I believe that in principle reduction in legal disparities between the Federal Reserve and private-sector banks will enhance market competition. The benefits of regulatory change, however, have to be balanced with a potential increase in costs to paying banks and their check-writing customers. In other words, we should continue to look for ways to reduce legal disparities between the Federal Reserve and private-sector banks, but some of these changes may not reduce costs for all participants in the system. The Federal Reserve's role should also include identifying and reducing regulatory burdens that unreasonably inhibit innovations that improve the efficiency, security, and convenience of payment methods. Regulation may reduce uncertainty for some, but it may also discourage investment in new products or technologies by others. This is particularly true if the product is relatively new and demand for it is relatively uncertain, as is currently the case with a number of emerging electronic payment methods, such as stored-value cards. The government should avoid regulatory actions that may inhibit the evolution of emerging payments products and services or prevent the effective operation of competitive market forces. It is not clear whether, or what type of, regulation will be needed for many new products and it is important to avoid jumping to the conclusion that such regulations are inevitable over the longer term. Often the best regulation is that which addresses specific abuses or public policy concerns. Regulation that anticipates potential future problems runs the risk of resulting in overregulation that unduly stifles innovation. Conclusion I'd like to conclude by re-emphasizing the role of competitive markets in fostering continued efficiency and innovation in the U.S. payments system. The Federal Reserve is striving to foster the competitive environment for those retail payment services in which it plays an operational role as well as those services in which it does not. For those services in which the Reserve Banks have an operational role, they strive to provide them in a cost-effective, high-quality manner and take advantage of technological advances. We also plan to enhance the efficiency and help to foster improvements in the services in which we have an operational role. I believe the Federal Reserve has an obligation as a public entity to periodically assess -- as we have just done -- the extent to which it needs to continue to provide interbank retail payment services in competition with private firms. For newer payments mechanisms, we do not strive to become an active provider. However, we can encourage private-sector initiatives and remove regulatory hurdles to experimentation, where appropriate. We can also help, in collaboration with the private sector, to overcome barriers and market imperfections. Ultimately, however, the marketplace will decide which payment products and services will best meet the needs of households and businesses for reliable, secure, and efficient payments. No matter whether we are discussing existing services, possible new products, or regulatory actions, the Federal Reserve seeks to foster efficiency, integrity, and broad access in the payments system. Our attention to this area reflects our recognition that a smooth functioning payments system is critical to the smooth functioning of the nation's economy.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced major changes in the management structure of its Division of Consumer and Community Affairs, including the appointment of a new Division Director. Effective June 1, the Board appointed Dolores S. Smith as Division Director to succeed Griffith L. Garwood, who is retiring on May 31. Ms. Smith currently serves as an Associate Director of the Division. At the same time, the Board promoted Glenn E. Loney to Deputy Director from Associate Director and named Adrienne D. Hurt and Sandra F. Braunstein to the official staff as Assistant Directors. They join Maureen P. English and Irene Shawn McNulty as Assistant Directors. Ms. Smith joined the Board in 1975 and has been responsible for all of the regulatory work within the division since 1992 and for the Consumer Advisory Council since 1980. As Director, she will oversee the division's work in administering federal consumer protection, fair lending, and community reinvestment statutes and regulations; overseeing the examination of state member banks for compliance; participating in the bank holding company application process; directing the System's Community Affairs program; and overseeing the consumer complaint process. Ms. Smith is a graduate of the University of Texas, the Georgetown University Law Center, and the Stonier Graduate School of Banking. Mr. Loney began his Board career in 1975 and is currently Associate Director with responsibility for compliance examinations, applications processing, community affairs, and fair lending enforcement. As Deputy Director, Mr. Loney will provide operational oversight of designated functional areas (Compliance, Fair Lending Enforcement, Community Affairs, and Consumer Advisory Council) and will assist the director in overseeing all other division functions (Regulations, Consumer Complaints, Consumer Policies, Information Resources, and Administration). Mr. Loney is a graduate of Michigan State University, the University of Michigan Law School, and the Stonier Graduate School of Banking. Ms. Hurt joined the Board in 1983 and currently serves as Managing Counsel, directing one of two units of regulatory attorneys. She has responsibility for several regulations, including Truth in Lending, Electronic Fund Transfers, and Consumer Leasing. As Assistant Director, Ms. Hurt will supervise the division's regulatory work. She holds undergraduate and law degrees from the American University. Ms. Braunstein joined the Board in 1987. She currently serves as the Manager of the Community Affairs program. In her new position as Assistant Director, Ms. Braunstein will continue to oversee the Consumer Affairs program as Community Affairs Officer and will serve as the liaison between the Board and the Consumer Advisory Council. She is a graduate of the American University. Ms. English will continue to have oversight responsibility for the Consumer Complaints, Consumer Policies, Information Resources, and Administration functions. Ms. McNulty will supervise the Reserve Bank Oversight, Applications, and Fair Lending Enforcement functions.
For immediate release The Basle Committee on Banking Supervision has issued two announcements relating to the Basle Accord, which is an international agreement setting minimum capital requirements for banks. One announcement is an amendment to the Accord reducing the risk weight for claims on (and claims guaranteed by) certain securities firms incorporated in OECD countries from 100 percent to 20 percent. To qualify for the preferential risk weight, securities firms must be subject to supervisory and regulatory arrangements and, in particular, capital requirements that are comparable to those applied to banks under the Basle Accord. In the United States this amendment, in general, would provide a reduced capital charge for claims on or guaranteed by broker-dealers registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission and their direct subsidiaries that are subject to supervision and capital requirements. The capital requirements generally would be the SEC's net capital rule or, for securities firms operating in Europe, the European Union's Capital Adequacy Directive. Claims on the holding companies and affiliates of such broker-dealers or securities firms not subject to capital requirements generally would retain their 100 percent risk weighting. The Federal Reserve intends to initiate a rulemaking to propose this revision to its risk-based capital rules for state member banks and bank holding companies. The second announcement sets forth principles governing on-balance-sheet netting for capital purposes. The statement solicits industry comment by June 30, 1998. The announcements are accessible on the Internet at the Bank for International Settlements Web site ( ). Comments on the netting proposal may be submitted to the Basle Supervisors Committee at FAX: 011 41 61 280 9100.
Remarks by Governor Laurence H. Meyer Presented to Public Policy Meeting, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta April 9, 1998 The Economic Outlook and the Challenges Facing Monetary Policy Recent economic performance has been exceptional. I want to focus on the forces responsible for this performance and how much credit economic policy deserves for the outcome. Then I will assess the crosscurrents shaping prospects going forward and the sustainability of recent economic performance and give my perspective on challenges facing monetary policy. Let me emphasize that the views about the economic outlook and about monetary policy I present here are my own and should not be interpreted as the position of the Board of Governors or the FOMC. Where We Are and How We Got There Three forces have driven recent economic performance. First, there has been strong momentum in private domestic demand -- the sum of consumption, private fixed investment and residential construction -- only partially offset by a decline in net exports. The result has been consistent above-trend growth and a rise in resource utilization rates, particularly in the labor market. Second, the strength in the aggregate demand for goods and services has been encouraged by favorable financial conditions. Whereas, normally, financial conditions become less favorable during an expansion and ultimately constrain demand, in this expansion financial conditions have become increasingly favorable and therefore have continued to support above-trend growth. An important element in the favorable financing conditions has, of course, been the soaring stock market. Third, a coincidence of favorable shocks has enabled businesses to produce at a lower cost; in the short run, at least, this restrains inflation. The result has been a slower increase in the CPI and other measures of the overall price level, even as the economy has raced ahead to higher utilization rates. The favorable shocks have included a decline in oil prices, a decline in import prices associated with the cumulative appreciation in the dollar, technological innovations that have sped the reduction in computer prices, changes in medical care management that have held down the increase in benefit costs, and improved crops that have damped food prices. The resulting economic performance has consistently exceeded expectations. I have said many times that if I had a dime for every time I have had to say faster-than-expected growth and lower-than-expected inflation, I would be a rich man today! Growth over 1998 was nearly 4%, the highest annual growth in about a decade. The unemployment rate declined by about 3/4 percentage point last year to a quarter-century low. And inflation declined to a more than 30-year low. There is much to like about this outcome and the policy that supported it. Monetary policy has helped deliver a low inflation environment and the strong economy and disciplined fiscal policy have delivered a balanced budget. In the case of monetary policy, the low inflation environment is one we believe encourages efficient resource allocation and perhaps higher levels of saving and investment. In the case of fiscal policy, the government is no longer competing with the private sector for private saving, contributing to lower real interest rates and higher rates of capital formation. In combination, monetary and fiscal policies have set a stable foundation for private sector decision making. As good as policy has been, it clearly does not deserve all the credit for the exceptional recent performance. I have a rule I religiously follow: If you didn't predict it, don't take credit for it. We did not predict this exceptional performance and we should not take more credit for it than we deserve. Still, there should be little question that policy has made an important contribution to the exceptional performance. The net result of these forces has been that the economy has, in my view, moved beyond the point of sustainable capacity. That is, output is above it's long-run sustainable level. Normally, this would result in rising inflation, but the favorable supply shocks have not only prevented a rise in inflation, but have allowed inflation to decline. Monetary policy has accommodated the above-trend growth and rising utilization rates precisely because they have been accompanied by declining inflation. Contradictions I always appreciated, as a private sector forecaster, that, in any interpretation of the economy, there were always some tensions or contradictions. This reflects the reality that the interpretation of the data is never perfectly clear, always subject to some uncertainty. And so it is today. Let me highlight three uncertainties. First, there is some question about whether or not or, at least, to what degree the economy is operating beyond the point of sustainable capacity. The unemployment rate is below the consensus estimates of the threshold consistent with stable inflation, although there is somewhat greater than normal uncertainty about this estimate. This threshold is called NAIRU, the nonaccelerating inflation rate of unemployment. The President's Council of Economic Advisers estimates this threshold, for example, at 5.4%, Congressional Budget Office at 5.8%, and I have used 5 ï¿½% as my best guess. There is, at any rate, no question about labor markets being very tight. On the other hand, the measures of resource utilization in the product market, notably the capacity utilization rate in the manufacturing sector, do not suggest excess demand. There is, in fact, an unusual discrepancy between the unemployment and capacity utilization rates, compared to previous expansions; that is, the capacity utilization rate is lower than would have been expected, based on past experience, at the prevailing unemployment rate. This undoubtedly accounts for the perception of limited pricing leverage and has contributed to the restrained inflation, despite the low unemployment rate. Nevertheless, the very tight labor markets can be expected to put upward pressure on wage change and hence inflation, once the special forces restraining inflation dissipate or reverse. Second, there is some question about how to assess the degree of restraint or stimulus associated with current monetary policy. Although the nominal federal funds rate has remained nearly constant, the decline in inflation has raised the real federal funds rate. Many have observed the rise in the real federal funds rate to a level well above its historical average and concluded that monetary policy is currently restrictive. The implication is that monetary policy is already well positioned to slow the expansion. On the other hand, many other measures of financial conditions appear to be indicating, to the contrary, that financial conditions are very favorable, highly supportive of contained momentum in aggregate demand and perhaps becoming even more so. This interpretation appears to be confirmed by the continued strength in aggregate demand in general and in interest-sensitive sectors in particular. Real long-term interest rates, based on survey measures of inflation, have been stable to declining, equity prices have been soaring, credit availability has been more than ample, underwriting standards may have eased some, loan pricing is aggressive, spreads between safe and risky assets have narrowed, and the money supply is growing rapidly. I conclude that, notwithstanding the recent rise in the real federal funds rate, neither financial conditions in general nor monetary policy in particular are currently restraining aggregate demand. Third, there has been a significant rebound in productivity growth over 1996 and 1997, compared to the previous two years. That is clear from the data. The question that the data do not immediately reveal is whether this rebound was a normal cyclical rebound or marks a significant increase in trend productivity growth. My view has and continues to be that the increase is predominantly a cyclical rebound. This leads me into my next topic. Stories In my last outlook talk I developed two "stories" that provide alternative explanations for the recent exceptional economic performance. Each story carries with it an implication about the sustainability of recent performance and a challenge for monetary policy. I call one story "temporary bliss." This story emphasizes the role of good fortune in the current exceptional performance and highlights the potential that we may not be able to maintain the recent rate of growth and the current high labor utilization rates for much longer without ultimately suffering an increase in inflation. The key to this story is the series of favorable supply shocks that have, in my judgment, masked, for a time, the normal consequences of very tight labor markets and permitted the economy to operate beyond the point of long-run sustainable capacity without the usual inflationary consequences. The challenge facing monetary policy, in this interpretation, is to facilitate a transition to a more sustainable state before the favorable supply shocks dissipate or reverse. The second story I call "permanent bliss." This story emphasizes the possibility that structural changes have permanently altered what the economy is capable of delivering in terms of both average growth and the unemployment rate consistent with stable inflation. In this interpretation, monetary policy must be careful not to interfere with the economy taking advantage of its improved potential. The truth, as I have noted previously, is likely some combination of the two stories. I keep them separate to highlight the differences in policy implications between temporary supply shocks and permanent structural change. I have said previously that I have lowered my estimate of NAIRU, for example, from 6% to 5 1/2%, in response to my reading of the evidence of the last several years. I have also raised my estimate of trend productivity -- from 1.1%, the average rate for the 20 years prior to the current expansion to 1.3% or 1.4%. A tenth of this increase in trend productivity growth reflects the technical revisions to the CPI which have lowered the chain measure of the GDP deflator by a tenth. This is not an increase in trend productivity in this expansion, relative to previous expansions, but rather an upward revision to productivity growth over the entire postwar period, the mirror image of a decline in the upward bias to measured inflation. It should be noted, nevertheless, that the technical revisions to measured inflation do account for part of the appearance of improved economic performance. In addition, the data suggest to me, as to many private sector forecasters, that there might be a tenth or two increase in trend productivity, an improvement that is generally associated with capital deepening, an increase in the amount of equipment each worker has at its disposal, as a result of the strength of investment in this expansion. As such, this improvement in productivity growth may itself be transitory, part of a one-time increase in the level of productivity associated with a transition to a higher capital-to-labor ratio. Nevertheless, even a couple of tenths improvement in productivity growth, if sustained for some period, would give an important boost to higher living standards over time. But this upward adjustment in my estimate of the productivity trend plays only a negligible role in explaining how we have managed such exceptional economic performance over the last couple of years. It goes in the right direction, but it is simply too small to carry much of the burden. The major player in my view, in addition to the decline in NAIRU, is the coincidence of favorable supply shocks. The relative weights here are very important because they affect the challenge for monetary policy. Challenges for Monetary Policy The challenge for monetary policy, as always, is to sustain the best possible economic performance. The emphasis here is on the "possible." Sometimes we are expected to deliver more than what is possible. We aim for maximum sustainable growth and maximum sustainable levels of output and employment. The emphasis here is on "sustainable." Trying to do more threatens to introduce unnecessary instability into the economy and ultimately to cut short an expansion that otherwise has the potential to continue for some time. Trying to do more threatens to give back some of the reduction in inflation that has moved the U.S. to a position very close to the Federal Reserve's objective of price stability. The bottom line is that it is essential that growth slow from the near 4% over 1997 to and perhaps below trend for a while to allow the economy to move toward a more sustainable state. Prospects There are two sets of crosscurrents that are likely to shape the outlook immediately ahead. First, there is a tug of war between the continued exceptional momentum in private domestic demand and the external drag from the Asian crisis. The latter shock also reinforces the restraint that had been projected from a cumulative appreciation of the dollar that predated the Asian crisis. The result should almost certainly be some slowing in the expansion, relative to 1997. Still, the sharper-than-expected decline in oil prices, the decline in long-term bond yields and the further rise in equity prices in recent months are providing some offset to the external drag coming from Asia and the appreciation of the dollar. The question is when and how much of a slowing results, and whether the slowdown takes growth to or below trend, or leaves growth still above trend. There is still considerable uncertainty about how these crosscurrents will balance out. Second, there is a tug of war between the very tight labor market and the set of forces that have been restraining inflation. The forces restraining inflation have been winning this battle to date, and they have been reinforced this year by the sharper-than-expected decline in oil prices, by the even more extraordinary decline in computer prices in recent months, and by the decline in commodity prices and further downward pressure on import prices associated with the crisis in Asia. Nevertheless, at some point, the favorable supply shocks will dissipate or reverse. As the economy entered 1998, continued momentum in private domestic demand was clearly evident, while the drag from Asia was less obvious. But there was clear evidence in the trade data among the Asian developing economies that a significant swing was under way in their trade balances and there is little doubt that the U.S. economy will bear the greatest burden of this turnaround. The March employment report was the strongest evidence to date that a slowing is under way, although it should be appreciated that there is often more noise than signal in one month's data. And, even with the unexpectedly weak March reading, hours worked advanced at a robust 4.8% annual rate in the first quarter. So there is still considerable uncertainty about whether the spillover from Asia and the earlier cumulative appreciation of the dollar will slow the expansion to or below trend immediately ahead. In terms of inflation, there is no evidence to date that wage pressures are building, relative to last year, and certainly no evidence of a pickup in inflation, though the recent data for core CPI has hinted that the earlier downward trend may now be behind us. At any rate, it appears likely, given the renewal of favorable supply shocks, that inflation will remain well contained this year. But monetary policy has little ability to affect inflation this year. We should, therefore, be focusing on inflation prospects for next year. As I noted earlier, some upward pressure on inflation is likely going forward as forces retraining inflation dissipate or reverse, though a similar statement would have been in order at this time last year. The expected persistence of the special forces restraining inflation is therefore an important consideration in forecasting inflation and in assessing the appropriate course of monetary policy. It is important that, as the forces retraining inflation dissipate or reverse, that this upward pressure on inflation is not reinforced by inflationary pressures generated from very high utilization rates. The key to sustaining the best possible performance going forward is making the transition from the current state where performance is exceptional but unsustainable to the best possible sustainable state. That will require a slowdown in growth, preferably in the near term. Asia may accomplish this, in which case it would substitute for monetary tightening that in my judgment would otherwise be required.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application and notice of First Midwest Bancorp, Inc., Itasca, Illinois, to acquire Heritage Financial Services, Inc., Tinley Park, Illinois ("Heritage"), and thereby acquire Heritage Bank, Blue Island, Illinois, and Heritage's nonbank subsidiaries. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. First Midwest Bancorp, Inc. Itasca, Illinois Order Approving the Acquisition of a Bank Holding Company By order of the Board of Governors, effective April 13, 1998. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes First Midwest would merge Heritage with and into a wholly owned subsidiary, First Midwest Acquisition Corporation ("Acquisition Corp."), that would be formed solely for the purpose of effecting the acquisition. In connection with the proposal, Acquisition Corp. has applied to become a bank holding company. First Midwest also has requested approval of an option to purchase up to 19.9 percent of the voting stock of Heritage if certain events occur. The option would expire on consummation of the proposal. State deposit and ranking data are as of June 30, 1997. The Joliet banking market is defined as Will County, except the townships of Florence, Wilmington, Reed, Custer, and Wesley; the township of Aux Sable in Grundy County; and the townships of Neausay and Seward in Kendall County, all in Illinois. The Chicago banking market is defined as all of Cook, DuPage, and Lake Counties in Illinois. Market share data are as of June 30, 1996. In this context, depository institutions include commercial banks, savings banks, and savings associations. Market share data are based on calculations in which the deposits of thrift institutions are included at 50 percent. The Board previously has indicated that thrift institutions have become, or have the potential to become, significant competitors of commercial banks. See WM Bancorp, 76 Federal Reserve Bulletin 788 (1990); National City Corporation, 70 Federal Reserve Bulletin 743 (1984). Under the revised Department of Justice Merger Guidelines, 49 Federal Register 26,823 (1984), a market in which the post-merger HHI is between 1000 and 1800 is considered moderately concentrated, and a market in which the post-merger HHI is below 1000 is considered unconcentrated. The Justice Department has informed the Board that a bank merger or acquisition generally will not be challenged (in the absence of other factors indicating anticompetitive effects) unless the post-merger HHI is at least 1800 and the merger or acquisition increases the HHI by at least 200 points. The Justice Department has stated that the higher than normal threshold for an increase in the HHI when screening bank mergers and acquisitions for anticompetitive effects implicitly recognizes the competitive effect of limited-purpose lenders and other nondepository financial entities. Some commenters alleged that First Midwest Bank illegally discriminated against them in specific banking transactions. These comments and First Midwest Bank's response, based on a review of the available loan or account files, were forwarded to the bank's appropriate federal supervisor, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, for consideration. The Statement of the Federal Financial Supervisory Agencies Regarding the Community Reinvestment Act provides that a CRA examination is an important and often controlling factor in the consideration of an institution's CRA record and that reports of these examinations will be given great weight in the applications process. See 54 Federal Register 13,742 and 13,745 (1989). A commenter contended that there are no full service banks in the LMI areas of Lake County, Illinois. First Midwest indicates that it operates 12 full service banking offices in Lake County, three of which are in LMI census tracts. The commenter also alleged that First Midwest Bank does not have a commercial loan officer or ATM at its North Chicago branch. First Midwest has stated that it intends to install an ATM at this branch in the near future and that loan officers from any First Midwest branch are available to meet with individuals and companies in the North Chicago area. Several commenters alleged that First Midwest's small business lending practices were inflexible and discriminated against African Americans. As noted, examiners found no evidence of illegal discrimination. First Midwest Bank's CRA performance examination, moreover, commented favorably on the bank's small business lending activities. In 1996, the bank originated approximately 14 percent of the total dollar amount of its small business loans to businesses in LMI census tracts. First Midwest Bank also originated 27 percent of the total dollar amount of its small business loans in Lake County to businesses in LMI census tracts. See 12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(5). 12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8). See 12 C.F.R. 225.26. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Phillips, Meyer, Ferguson, and Gramlich.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice by North Fork Bancorporation, Inc., Melville, New York, to acquire up to 9.9 percent of the voting shares of Long Island Bancorp, Inc., and thereby acquire an interest in Bancorp's wholly owned subsidiary, The Long Island Savings Bank, FSB, both in Melville, New York. Attachment North Fork Bancorporation, Inc. Melville, New York Order Approving Notice to Acquire Shares of a Savings Association By order of the Board of Governors, effective April 13, 1998. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Appendix As part of this proposal, North Fork has committed that it will not, without the Board's prior approval: Exercise or attempt to exercise a controlling influence over the management or policies of Long Island Bancorp ("Bancorp") or any of its subsidiaries; Have or seek to have any employees or representatives serve as an officer, agent, or employee of Bancorp or any of its subsidiaries; Take any action causing Bancorp or any of its subsidiaries to become a subsidiary of North Fork or any of its subsidiaries; Acquire or retain shares that would cause the combined interests of North Fork or any of its subsidiaries and its officers, directors, and affiliates to exceed 9.9 percent of the outstanding voting shares of Bancorp or any of its subsidiaries; Propose a director or slate of directors in opposition to a nominee or slate of nominees proposed by the management or board of directors of Bancorp or any of its subsidiaries; Attempt to influence the dividend policies or practices of Bancorp or any of its subsidiaries; Solicit or participate in soliciting proxies with respect to any matter presented to the shareholders of Bancorp or any of its subsidiaries; Attempt to influence the loan and credit decisions or policies of Bancorp or its bank subsidiary, the pricing of services, any personnel decision, the location of any offices, branching, the hours of operation, or similar activities of Bancorp or any of its subsidiaries; Dispose or threaten to dispose of shares of Bancorp or any of its subsidiaries in any manner as a condition of specific action or nonaction by Bancorp or any of its subsidiaries; Enter into any banking or nonbanking transactions with Bancorp or any of its subsidiaries, except that North Fork and each of North Fork's directors, senior executive officers, related parties, and affiliates may establish and maintain deposit accounts with any bank subsidiaries of Bancorp, provided that the aggregate balance of all such accounts do not exceed $500,000 and that the accounts are maintained on substantially the same terms as those prevailing for comparable accounts of persons unaffiliated with Bancorp or any of its subsidiaries; or Seek or accept representations on the board of directors of Bancorp or any of its subsidiaries. North Fork also has committed that it will: No later than two years following the date of increasing its interest in the voting shares of Bancorp to more than 5 percent, either: acquire control of Bancorp and cause Bancorp and its subsidiaries to cease all activities impermissible for a bank holding company, or reduce its interest in the voting shares of Bancorp to 5 percent or less. Footnotes After North Fork filed notice with the Board to make the proposed investment in Bancorp, Bancorp entered into an agreement with Astoria Financial Corporation, Lake Success, New York ("Astoria"), under which Astoria would purchase, subject to regulatory approval, all the voting shares of Bancorp, including those held or acquired by North Fork. Asset data are as of December 31, 1997, state deposit data are as of June 30, 1997, and incorporate North Fork's acquisitions through February 1998. In this context, depository institutions include commercial banks, savings banks, and savings associations. 12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(4). Bancorp contends that, because North Fork has in the past made similar minority investments in other depository institution holding companies, North Fork's notice should be construed as a request to engage in the activity of making minority investments in depository institutions. The BHC Act and the Board's Regulation Y include a specific requirement that a bank holding company receive Board approval prior to acquiring more than 5 percent of the voting shares of a bank or a savings association. North Fork has filed the required notice under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act to acquire more than 5 percent of the shares of Bancorp and Savings Bank, which are engaged in activities that the Board has determined to be closely related to banking. Savings Bank engages in certain real estate development and insurance sales activities that are impermissible for bank holding companies. North Fork has committed that within two years of increasing its interest in the voting shares of Bancorp to 5 percent or more it will either acquire control of Bancorp and cause Bancorp to cease all impermissible activities or reduce its interest in the voting shares of Bancorp to below 5 percent. 12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8). These commitments are set forth in the Appendix. Bancorp and ICP allege that North Fork violated the passivity commitments provided in connection with previous minority investments made by North Fork in Suffolk Bancorp, Inc., Riverhead, New York ("Suffolk"), and Sunrise Bancorp, Inc., Farmingdale, New York ("Sunrise"), and took actions inconsistent with the passivity commitments initially offered to the Board in connection with North Fork's proposed acquisition of more than 5 percent of the voting shares of Haven Bancorp, Woodside, New York ("Haven"). The Board considered similar allegations regarding the commitments that North Fork made in connection with its passive investment in Suffolk and determined that no violations occurred. See North Fork Bancorporation, Inc., 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 338, 339 (1996). The Board also has considered commenters' allegations regarding the commitments made by North Fork in connection with its application to acquire up to 9.9 percent of Sunrise. On the basis of all the facts of record, including confidential supervisory information, the Board concludes that commenters' allegations do not reflect adversely on the managerial resources of North Fork or warrant enforcement action by the Board. The Board notes that North Fork did not acquire more than 5 percent of the voting shares of Haven and did not make any binding passivity commitments to the Board with respect to Haven. Bancorp maintains that North Fork intends to control Bancorp because North Fork has discussed potential business combinations with Bancorp's management. The Board previously has noted that general expressions of interest in negotiating a business combination with an institution do not violate the passivity commitments or the BHC Act's prohibition against exercising a controlling influence over the management or policies of a banking organization. See GB Bancorporation, 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin 115 (1997). See Emigrant Bancorp Inc., 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 555 (1996), Mansura Bancshares, Inc., 79 Federal Reserve Bulletin 37 (1993) (" Mansura "); and SunTrust Banks, Inc., 76 Federal Reserve Bulletin 542 (1990). It is possible, for example, that the acquisition of a substantial ownership interest in a competitor or a potential competitor of the acquiring firm might alter the market behavior of both firms in such a way as to weaken or eliminate independent action at each organization and increase the likelihood of cooperative operations. See Mansura at 38. The Metropolitan New York/New Jersey banking market includes New York City; Nassau, Orange, Putnam, Rockland, Suffolk, Sullivan, and Westchester Counties in New York; Bergen, Essex, Hudson, Hunterdon, Middlesex, Monmouth, Morris, Ocean, Passaic, Somerset, Sussex, Union, Warren, and a portion of Mercer Counties in New Jersey; Pike County in Pennsylvania; and portions of Fairfield and Litchfield Counties in Connecticut. If North Fork was deemed to control Bancorp, the HHI for the Metropolitan New York/New Jersey banking market would decrease from 796 to 786 on consummation of the proposal. Market share data are as of June 30, 1996, and are based on calculations in which the deposits of thrift institutions, other than Savings Bank, are included at 50 percent. The Board previously has indicated that thrift institutions have become, or have the potential to become, significant competitors of commercial banks. See WM Bancorp, 76 Federal Reserve Bulletin 788 (1990); National City Corporation, 70 Federal Reserve Bulletin 743 (1984). Because the Board has analyzed the competitive factors in this case as if North Fork and Savings Bank were a combined entity, the deposits of Savings Bank are included at 100 percent in the calculation of pro forma market share. See Norwest Corporation, 78 Federal Reserve Bulletin 452 (1992); First Banks, Inc. 76 Federal Reserve Bulletin 669 (1990). Bancorp contends that the proposal would adversely affect its financial condition because Bancorp would be forced to redeem the shares held by North Fork at a premium. The Board has considered Bancorp's comments in light of confidential examination and supervisory reports assessing the financial condition of Bancorp. Bancorp also maintains that Suffolk's financial condition was adversely affected by its redemption of the shares acquired by North Fork. The Board notes that Suffolk remained well capitalized after the transaction. ICP argues that allegations regarding the activities of a senior executive of NFB and North Fork contained in two lawsuits raise adverse managerial considerations. Documents filed in connection with these lawsuits asserted that certain business transactions between NFB and acquaintances of the senior executive were not handled in accordance with the bank's normal procedures. The Board notes that these lawsuits were resolved in favor of NFB and that no findings of improper activities were made against NFB or its management. The Board also has considered ICP's contentions in light of confidential reports of examination and other supervisory information from NFB's appropriate federal supervisor, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ("FDIC"), and the New York State Banking Department ("NYSBD"), regarding the managerial resources of NFB. The Board notes that ICP submitted similar comments to the FDIC in connection with NFB's application to merge with North Side Savings Bank, New York, New York, in 1996, and that the FDIC found that the managerial resources of NFB were consistent with approved of that transaction under the Bank Merger Act (12 U.S.C. § 1828(c)). See Banc One Corporation, 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin 602 (1997). The Statement of the Federal Financial Supervisory Agencies Regarding the Community Reinvestment Act provides that a CRA examination is an important and often controlling factor in the consideration of an institution's CRA record and reports of these examinations will be given great weight in the applications process. See 54 Federal Register 13,742 and 13,745 (1989). See N.Y. Banking Law § 28-b. ICP also maintains that North Fork charges higher fees for banking services and pays lower interest rates on deposits than other depository institutions in New York. There are no facts in the record indicating that North Fork's pricing for bank services is based on any factor that would be prohibited under law. The Board previously has concluded, moreover, that the CRA does not impose any limitation on the ability of a depository institution to price its products and services. See North Fork Bancorporation, Inc., 84 Federal Reserve Bulletin 290 (1998) (" N.Y. Bancorp Order "). The data, for example, do not provide a basis for an independent assessment of whether an applicant who was denied credit was, in fact, creditworthy. Credit history problems and excessive debt levels relative to income (reasons most frequently cited for a credit denial) are not available from HMDA data. As noted in the N.Y. Bancorp Order, FDIC examiners noted certain technical violations of the fair lending laws during the 1997 Examination, but stated that these matters were addressed by the bank's management during the examination. The Board continues to expect NFB to address the areas for improvement in its lending performance discussed in the N.Y. Bancorp Order, and will consider North Fork's progress in this regard in connection with future applications by North Fork to acquire deposit-taking facilities. See, e.g. Mercantile Bancorporation Inc., 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin 683, 688 (1997); South Central Texas Bancshares, Inc., 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin 47, 51 n. 20 (1997). ICP requests that the Board hold a public hearing or meeting to investigate and resolve disputed issues of fact involving the allegations contained in the lawsuits against NFB and its senior management. The Board's rules provide for a hearing on notices under section 4 of the BHC Act to acquire a savings association only if there are disputed issues of material fact that cannot be resolved in some other manner. See 12 C.F.R. 225.25(a)(2). After a careful review of all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that ICP's contentions amount to a dispute concerning the weight that should be accorded to, and the conclusions that the Board should draw from, the facts of record, but do not identify disputed issues of fact that are material to the Board's decision. The Board also notes that interested parties have had an ample opportunity to present their views, and ICP has submitted substantial written comments that have been considered by the Board. ICP's request fails to demonstrate why a written presentation would not suffice and to summarize the evidence that would be presented at a hearing or meeting. For these reasons, and based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that a public meeting or hearing is not necessary to clarify the factual record on the notice and is not warranted in this case. Accordingly, ICP's request for a public hearing or meeting on this notice is hereby denied. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Phillips, Meyer, Ferguson, and Gramlich.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today conditionally approved the applications and notices of First Union Corporation, Charlotte, North Carolina, to merge with CoreStates Financial Corp, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, and thereby acquire CoreStates Bank, N.A., Philadelphia, and CoreStates Bank of Delaware, N.A., Wilmington, Delaware, and the nonbanking subsidiaries and foreign branches of CoreStates. The Board's approval is conditioned on the divestiture of 23 branches in the Philadelphia banking market and 9 branches in the Lehigh Valley banking market. First Union must also report any changes in its preliminary plans to close branches in low- and moderate-income census tracts to the Federal Reserve System for a period of two years. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
Remarks by Governor Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. Before the Urban Bankers Coalition, Inc., New York, New York April 16, 1998 Are Banks Safe for the World and Is the World Safe for Banks? Thank you for your kind invitation to speak to you this evening. Your topic, banking in the global market place, is obviously timely. Given the role of international capital flows, I expect that this is a topic that will continue to be the focus of a great deal of attention. The current crisis in Asia, which is both a banking crisis and a macroeconomic crisis, is the starting point of my talk this evening. As I considered the Asian crisis, I became curious to know whether it is a unique problem due to a unique set of circumstances, or an accident that happened in a few Asian countries this time, but could occur in other countries at almost any time. I would like to share with you the results of my inquiries. Banks Continue To Be Important in a Global Context The starting point of my research was to confirm the critical role banks continue to play in global finance, particularly for countries with relatively underdeveloped capital markets. For example, the Bank for International Settlements estimates that the stock of international bank loans had grown to $8.5 trillion at the end of September 1997--almost 30 times the level 25 years earlier. Importantly, loans to developing countries now total about $1 trillion. While it is true that international bond and equity flows have grown during the period, new issues of bonds only exceeded bank lending 10 years ago, and the stock of outstanding loans is still considerably greater. This flow of capital has been critical in increasing the standard of living around the globe. Funds have flowed internationally from savers to borrowers, who generally tend to be entrepreneurs and others in business who need capital to build businesses and serve customers, both in their home countries and overseas. This international flow moves capital toward its most productive use, in principle, from the higher saving industrialized world to the high return, capital-short developing nations. Are there issues that should give us concern in this benign picture? Unfortunately, there are many. I would like to turn now to the question of whether banks are safe for the world economy and if the world economy is safe for banking. Are Banks Safe for the Global Economy? The current crisis in Asia led me to ask how many other countries have experienced banking crises, either domestic or cross-border? The answer I found may surprise you. Research done by economists of the International Monetary Fund indicates that 133 of the 181 countries who are members of the Fund, more than two-thirds, have experienced significant banking problems at some time since 1980. Thirty-six of those instances would be described as banking "crises" in that there were runs or other portfolio shifts, collapses of financial firms, or massive government intervention. Several countries experienced multiple banking crises. Banking crises have affected developed countries, such as the United States, Sweden, France, and Norway, as well as rapidly developing or "transitional" countries, including now Korea, Indonesia and Malaysia, but earlier Mexico, Argentina, and Chile. Banks fail for a number of reasons, including poor management, excessive risk taking, fraud and a poor operating environment. Individual bankers too often forget the fundamental tenets of banking, which are universal and apply to internationally active banks in Amsterdam as well as to community banks here in New Amsterdam. These tenets include: know your customer; understand the legal framework in which you are working; thoroughly understand the sources of repayment and the risk of nonperformance; and price your services accordingly. We know that in Asia banks violated some of these rules. Banks often engaged in directed lending, either directed by government bureaucrats or commercial enterprises under shared ownership with the bank. Because of government intervention in the lending process, Asian banks had not developed the necessary credit risk skills, and bank supervisors were incapable of enforcing reasonable standards of behavior on the part of local banks. In the international context, the interbank lending problem that emerged in Asia arose in part because of a lack of transparency in the financial system, making it difficult for foreign bank lenders to know the quality of the ultimate credit. More importantly, however, foreign banks that funded Asian banks may have assumed an implicit government guarantee of inter-bank counter-parties because a history of supporting troubled institutions may have left that impression. What is the impact of a banking crisis? First, the financial cost of fixing an insolvent banking system is high, and that cost is ultimately borne by the taxpayer. For example, in Australia's banking crisis of 1989-1992, the IMF estimates the cost of rescuing state-owned banks to be nearly 2% of GDP. In Mexico, the overall cost of several programs to support the banking system is estimated (in present value) at 6.5% of GDP. Currently in Japan, the government has announced an intention to spend as much as 30 trillion yen, 6% of GDP, to support its banking system. For Finland, Chile, and Argentina, the IMF estimated the fiscal impact of banking crises to have been between 4% and 8% of GDP. Finally, in the United States, resolution of the S&L crisis is estimated to have cost $150 billion, approximately 3% of GDP in 1990. In addition to the cost imposed upon society, an unsound banking system cannot carry out its credit-creation function and can distort macroeconomic performance. Unsound banks, ones with sufficient liquidity but a high percentage of nonperforming loans and a deteriorating capital base, act on a different set of incentives than do sound banks. First, unable to declare loans in default unless they admit their own insolvency, such banks may continue to lend to nonperforming borrowers or, alternatively, capitalize unpaid--and uncollectible--interest. That is, they may act to defer recognition of their problems. At the same time, they might seek riskier investments to try to offset their problems with higher earnings. In addition, such banks may attempt to attract depositors by paying higher interest rates than their solvent competitors. A high percentage of nonperforming loans may also lead to a contraction of credit, a "credit crunch," as banks turn away sound borrowers in order to continue to support unsound ones or unduly raise underwriting standards in fear of making more weak loans. Finally, a banking system that is unsound cannot perform its role as a transmitter of monetary policy. Particularly in emerging economies, in which other financial markets are not well developed, banks transmit monetary policy by expanding or contracting their balance sheets, i.e., engaging in more or less lending. An economy which is relatively stagnant cannot easily recover using monetary policy if it is saddled with an unsound banking system, because efforts to stimulate growth by lowering interest rates may not lead to a sufficient expansion of lending. In an international context with cross-border lending, the same issues may apply. Banks that are saddled with a large number of nonperforming loans from another country, either private or public debt, will have a need to work out those loans, and continue to support those borrowers rather than engage in new lending, either domestic or cross-border. Similarly, such banks are unlikely to be as efficient as they otherwise would be in transmitting the monetary policy of their home country central bank into their home country macroeconomy. So it is clear that an insolvent banking system is bad for a local, and indeed, the global economy. The costs to fix such as system can be substantial, the credit function cannot be carried out properly by such a system, and monetary policy may be hampered. Is the Global Economy Safe for Banking? Obviously, however, the record of banking crises around the globe does not prove that banking is the source of all problems. Macroeconomic policy and the performance of policymakers also have the potential to create systemic problems. Macroeconomic conditions or policies that undergo sufficiently significant and unexpected changes impact all banks, well managed and poorly managed alike. Unfortunately, the current Asian crisis and previous bank crises, including our own, indicate that a range of macroeconomic mistakes can lead to an unsound banking system. Put another way, there are many macroeconomic roads to ruin. First, let's start with Asia. The countries currently in crisis followed traditional macroeconomic policies that in the main were sound. They avoided fiscal deficits, and in some cases ran surpluses. In addition, they avoided a general inflation in the prices of goods and services. However, notwithstanding responsible macroeconomic policies, strong increases in private spending, much of it financed by bank credit and capital inflows, turned out ex post to have been unwarranted. Much of the increased investment spending was concentrated in stocks and real estate, and asset price bubbles emerged. Moreover, exchange rates were in some cases allowed to get out of line with fundamental forces in the economy, leading to sharp increases in imports and a widening of trade deficits. To some extent this effect was a result of pegging exchange rates to the U.S. dollar, or to a basket of currencies in which the dollar had a large weight, at a time when the value of the dollar was rising against the yen. Exchange rate and capital flow problems could similarly be assigned blame in several earlier banking crises, as well. For example, in the late 1970s, the Chilean government followed a policy of rapid exchange rate appreciation, culminating in a fixed exchange rate in 1979. Credit to the private sector rose sharply as massive capital inflows followed. An international slowdown in the early 1980s resulted in a collapse in the price of copper, Chile's major export, an increase in the country's trade deficit, and a sudden reversal of its capital flows. Recession followed and banks were left with unserviceable, foreign-currency-denominated debts. However, exchange rate problems are only one type of macroeconomic concern. Other countries, such as Finland, Sweden and Norway, experienced banking crises following explosions in central bank credit and bubbles in asset prices or in credit creation by banks. Fiscal and monetary policy, and the need to reverse policy unexpectedly, can also lead to banking crises if bubbles arise in asset markets and banks are heavily exposed to assets with inflated values through their lending practices or balance sheets. Other countries, particularly those that rely heavily on a single international commodity export, such as oil, have experienced banking crises following rapid adjustment in the prices for those commodities. Often in these cases, the government attempts to use fiscal or monetary stimulus to offset the loss of standard of living that results from a decline in commodity prices. This policy generally only succeeds in inducing a cycle of strong inflation, perhaps accompanied by pressures on exchange rates, followed by a steep correction. Finally, here in the United States, the S&L crisis was due in part to deregulation of interest rates on deposits, that left S&Ls with low returns on assets but a high cost of funds. In a scramble for new sources of revenues and an effort to generate earnings, S&Ls took on greater and greater risk. Potential Solutions Given this history of banking crises throughout the world--some the result of poor banking practices, some tied to the rapid ebb and flow of cross-border capital, and some due to internal macroeconomic policies--what should one recommend? I would like to focus on three sets of solutions designed to minimize the risk of future cross-border banking crises: (1) improvements in supervision and basic banking skills; (2) international transparency, including sound accounting standards; and (3) ways to avoid potential problems in capital flows. This analysis also points to a responsible policy for countries faced with unsound banking systems. First, with respect to banking supervision, the faster pace and increasing complexity of financial services mean that banking supervision has had to change its methods to rely more heavily on market forces as a means of regulating banks. For example, the Federal Reserve has become more focused on how individual institutions, including community banks, manage the risks of banking. In the international arena, the Federal Reserve is working with the Basle Committee on Banking Supervision, which was established by the central banks of the major industrial countries, to increase outreach to emerging-market countries. The Basle Committee has recently published a set of core principles for effective banking supervision. The implementation of these core principles should aid many countries in making their supervision more effective. I believe that adopting these principles, or something like them, is an important first step as countries move to participate more actively in global financial markets. The time is probably near when we have to determine how to encourage more countries to adopt and fully comply with these principles, or their equivalents. The world should not be subject to weak bank supervision in any country. Having sound banking practices may also be a necessary condition for having fully open capital markets. In general, the skill building and training problem for banks in transitional countries is immense. I believe that governments should probably spend as much time determining how to transfer solid banking skills into domestic banks as they spend trying to determine whether to open capital markets. To date debate has probably centered a bit too much on the latter and not enough on the former. Second, with respect to transparency, the Basle Committee is now exploring the possibility of setting benchmarks for information about individual financial institutions that should be available to both supervisors and markets. More broadly, the time may be appropriate to hasten the adoption of widely accepted international accounting and disclosure principles that raise the standard for accounting treatments in all countries. These standards might focus on four key areas: (1) complete financial statements; (2) management disclosure about risk profiles, risk management practices and performance; (3) timeliness of disclosure and (4) control and audit environment. The goal would be three-fold. First, any international accounting principles should provide the basis for depicting a clear and fair picture of the condition of the bank and of corporate creditors. Second, any principles should provide a means by which firms identify and disclose their major risks, such as funding, foreign exchange or concentrations. Finally, compliance with these principles should be sufficient to support market confidence in the basic integrity of a firm's published financial statements and other disclosures. Such transparency is important because, ultimately, the market is the best regulator. However, adequate market discipline can be brought to bear only if investors have information that is sufficient in quantity, reliability and timeliness. As my colleague Susan Phillips has said: "Well-managed firms can benefit if better disclosure enables them to obtain funds at risk premiums that accurately reflect lower risk profiles. Inadequate financial disclosures, on the other hand, could penalize well-managed firms, or even countries, if market participants do not trust their ability to assess firms' or countries' fundamental financial strength." I indicated that historical experience teaches that volatile short-term capital flows, particularly those involving banks, are often at the heart of banking crises. A third policy challenge, therefore, is how to minimize the impact of these flows without attempting to limit them altogether, which is neither beneficial nor feasible. One approach advocated by many is the so-called Chilean model. This includes a system in which firms and banks that borrow funds from abroad maintain a non-interest-bearing cash reserve at the central bank for one year. The one-year term of the reserve deposit makes the requirement most onerous for short-term positions, which is of course the intent. Proponents argue that these controls encourage longer-term, more stable investments. However, there are downsides. Over time, controls can, and almost certainly will, be circumvented, which might encourage even more controls. Also controls, if successful, tend to perpetuate or create distortions and inefficiencies--including the protection of weak and poorly managed domestic financial institutions. On balance, even recognizing these potential problems, I believe that short-term capital controls may be appropriate, if they are a temporary part of an orderly entry by a small country into the global capital market. All of the above initiatives and approaches are aimed at avoiding an insolvent banking system. Nevertheless, since we know that banking accidents will happen in the global market place, what is the best solution for countries that face an insolvent banking system? The best solution to emerge from these crises and significant banking problems appears to be to remove the nonperforming loans from the bank system, even if only through government (or quasi-governmental) purchases, and then resell them to private market participants at the best prices available. To the extent that the government is involved, a number of questions arise. First, should nonperforming loans be purchased at par to help recapitalize banks? This approach has been followed in some countries, but providing such a subsidy to banks does not deal with the issue of removing excess banking capacity nor does it discourage the repetition of similar mistakes. Second, what process should be used to determine which banks need to be closed, or merged, and which can continue to operate on a recapitalized basis, probably with new owners and managers? Third, how much support should the government provide, through guarantees for example, to purchasers of nonperforming loans? Our experience in the United States indicates that the scale of such support, however structured, must be commensurate to the problem. Finally, and by no means least important, we must consider how official assistance can be structured, if at all, to minimize moral hazard. Do we understand how to achieve burden sharing with the private sector? A critical point, though, is to act decisively to restore market mechanisms and place nonperforming assets in the hands of those capable of putting them to greatest use. Allowing a serious problem to languish can be a great and costly mistake. Conclusion In conclusion, we know that the banking industry plays and will continue to play an important role in the global market place. Unfortunately, a combination of poor banking practice, weak supervision and a number of macroeconomic shocks can destabilize a banking system. The solutions might include bank supervision at the best international levels, greater transparency, and, perhaps, some interference with capital flows. When a banking system becomes insolvent, however, there is no substitute for stripping away the bad assets in order to allow banks to once again perform their special role in society. Who bears the costs and how to ensure market discipline may be the most important issues to be addressed in that solution. Unfortunately, given changes in technology and global economic forces, I am sure that we will not stop discussing the issue of banking crises. I appreciate the chance to share these thoughts with you this evening. Footnotes See Bank Soundness and Macroeconomic Policy, Carl-Johan Lindgren, Gillian Garcia, and Matthew I. Saal (International Monetary Fund, 1996).
Remarks by Governor Laurence H. Meyer Before the Spring 1998 Banking and Finance Lecture, Widener University, Chester, Pennsylvania April 16, 1998 The Federal Reserve and Bank Supervision and Regulation It is a pleasure to continue what is becoming a tradition of Federal Reserve Governors speaking at Widener University. When you think of the Federal Reserve, I am pretty sure that, in addition to speakers at your university, most of you think of monetary policy, interest rates, international finance, and the Fed's macroeconomic responsibilities in all of these areas. And, of course, macroeconomics lies at the core of what any central bank does. However, for a variety of reasons that I will discuss shortly, the Federal Reserve plays a major role in the supervision and regulation of banks. Moreover, I believe that the connections between bank supervision and macroeconomic policy are not only little understood, but also quite close. No economy can grow and provide an increasing standard of living for its citizens without also having a stable and efficient banking system. Recent events in Asia are just the most current reminder of this truth. I will begin my remarks today by summarizing, very briefly, why and how banks are regulated in the United States. Then I will outline the key trends that I see affecting the banking and financial sector, and the challenges that these trends pose for bank supervisors. In the final portion of my remarks, I will suggest some directions that I believe we should consider when thinking about how bank supervision should evolve over time. Bank Supervision and Regulation in the United States Why do we supervise and regulate banks? The reasons are very straightforward. First and foremost, problems in only a small number of banks can, under the right circumstances, become problems in the entire banking and financial systems, with potentially major risks to the real economy. Traditionally, this meant protecting against a panic-driven flight to currency otherwise known as a contagious series of bank runs, that caused a catastrophic decrease in the money supply and the collapse of financial intermediation. Today, largely because of deposit insurance and the Federal Reserve discount window, flights to currency are not a real concern in the United States. Rather, the stability of the electronic, large dollar payments system, which moves trillions of dollars a day and in which banks play a pivotal role, is critical in limiting systemic risk. Other potential pressure points, in all of which banks play a key role, include the liquidity of securities, financial derivatives, and interbank funding markets. Our very success at virtually eliminating the risk of bank runs in the United States has led to a second major reason for supervising and regulating banks. Deposit insurance, the discount window, and Federal Reserve payment system guarantees -- the very things that have eliminated bank runs -- create what is called a "safety net" for banks. The existence of this safety net gives the government a direct stake in keeping bank risks under control, just as a private insurance company has a stake in controlling the risks of policyholders. Because deposit insurance and other parts of the safety net can never be fully and accurately priced, it is necessary for us to monitor and sometimes to act to control bank risks in order to protect the potential call on taxpayer funds. An equally important, if unintended, consequence of the safety net is that it creates what economists term "moral hazard" incentives for some banks to take excessive risks. That is, the safety net creates incentives for banks to take larger risks than otherwise, because the safety net, and potentially taxpayers, may absorb most of the losses if the gamble fails. Such incentives are especially strong if the bank is close to failure since, at this point, bank stockholders have virtually nothing to lose. Moral hazard is surely not much of a problem today, when banks are healthy and bank capital ratios are high. But back in the late 1980s when over 200 banks were failing each year, moral hazard was a serious concern. All right, you may say, I understand why we supervise and regulate banks. But why do both the federal and state governments regulate banks, and why do three federal government agencies have bank supervisory responsibilities? And, I hesitate to even ask, why are there separate federal and state supervisors for thrift institutions and credit unions? Just in case even the questions confused you, let me step back and outline the structure of the bank supervisory system in the United States. If you want to open a bank in the United States, you must get permission -- that is, a charter -- from a government agency. There are two ways to do this: state governments charter "state banks," and the federal government, through the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, charters "national banks." Thus, each state has a state bank supervisor. At the federal level, things get a bit more complicated. The Comptroller of the Currency supervises national banks. But since the FDIC insures certain deposits of both state and national banks, the FDIC also has supervisory authority over the state and national banks that it insures. Moreover, national banks must be, and state banks may be, members of the Federal Reserve System. In addition, most banks are organized in bank holding companies, and the Federal Reserve is the exclusive supervisor of bank holding companies. Savings and loans and credit unions get separate charters, and each has its own state or federal supervisor. In reality, the supervisory system is not quite as complex as it sounds, because, believe it or not, both statutes and agreements among supervisors divide up supervisory authority so that regulatory overlap is, to a significant degree, minimized. This division of labor involves the allocation of primary federal regulator to the Federal Reserve for state member banks, to the OCC for national banks, and to the FDIC for insured state non-member banks. In addition, the coordination among the federal regulators in the interest of consistent treatment of banks is facilitated by the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFEIC). Still, despite the division of labor and the coordination through the FFEIC, the U.S. system is rather complicated. Why do we have such a "Balkanized" structure of bank chartering and supervision and regulation? In large part, it is not so much by design as it is the result of reacting to many individual problems. But I believe that there is at least one systematic factor -- the long-standing desire of many Americans for a decentralized banking system. An important theme in American political philosophy has been distrust of concentrations of power, especially concentrations of financial power. Thus, from the start of our republic individual states insisted on being able to charter their own banks, and were suspicious of the federal government's efforts to do so. It was not until the trauma of the Civil War that Congress passed a National Bank Act that allowed for extensive federal chartering and supervision of banks. Even after passage of the National Bank Act, virtually all banks were severely restricted in their ability to operate across state lines. Indeed, until passage of the McFadden Act in 1927 national banks could only have one office. While this restriction was relaxed in 1933, national banks and state banks that were members of the Fed were prohibited from branching outside of their home state. Restrictions on interstate banking were viewed as important for maintaining a "dual" banking system in which both federal and state governments could charter banks, and in which no one bank, or group of banks, could gain too much power. Restrictions on interstate banking only began to be dismantled within the last two decades, and were pretty much entirely gone by the end of 1997. However, concerns about preserving a viable dual banking system are still very much alive. Today, bank supervision and regulation focus on three primary areas of public policy concern. Safety and soundness supervision attempts to ensure that banks are managed prudently and in ways that maintain the stability of the banking system. Enforcement of the antitrust laws in banking seeks to foster open and competitive markets that provide high quality banking services at minimum prices. Consumer protection laws and the Community Reinvestment Act are aimed at making sure consumers are fully informed about the most critical characteristics of banking products and services, and that banks meet the financial services needs of their local communities, with particular attention to the needs of low and moderate income neighborhoods. Congress has required the Federal Reserve to play an active role in all of these areas. The fact that the Federal Reserve has responsibilities in all of these areas is sometimes strongly questioned. There has been more than one proposal over the years to remove the Fed from bank supervision and regulation. I must confess that sometimes when I am involved in a complicated supervision issue, I am tempted to feel that someone else should do it. But in my saner and more reflective moments, I remain convinced that removing the Fed from bank supervision and regulation would be a serious mistake. Let me try to explain why. The central bank, in my experience, needs direct, hands-on involvement in the supervision and regulation of a broad cross-section of banks in order to carry out the Fed's core responsibilities of conducting monetary policy, ensuring the stability of the financial system, acting as the lender of last resort, protecting the payments system, and managing a financial crisis. Meeting all of these responsibilities is not just an academic exercise, it requires practical knowledge of financial institutions and markets, knowledge that comes with being deeply involved in supervising individual banking organizations. Without such involvement, the Federal Reserve would be much less able to maintain both its practical knowledge of banking and other financial markets, and the influence and authority necessary for macroeconomic policy and crisis management. Ivory towers are great for universities, but they are not desirable for central banks. While our supervisory responsibilities make us a better macroeconomic policymaker, I believe that our macroeconomic policy responsibilities make us a better bank supervisor. In the course of designing and implementing our supervisory policies, we must weigh safety and soundness concerns against the potentially adverse effects on the economy of excessively rigid regulations. As Chairman Greenspan has observed, the optimal rate of bank failure is not zero. Banks must be allowed to perform their economic functions of measuring, accepting, and managing risk. Taking and managing risk mean that sometimes risk will have costs, including failure. In my judgement, the central bank is in a unique position to balance the complex and sometimes conflicting objectives of financial stability and a growing economy. The Fed is less likely to engage in an unnecessarily restrictive or, for that matter, excessively loose, supervisory policy than is an agency focused either solely on bank safety and soundness or solely on growth. Finally, the U.S. central bank, because of its extensive and well-established relationships with foreign central banks is ideally positioned to engage in coordinated action in managing international financial crises and in supervising institutions that have a substantial international presence. The on-going crisis in Asian financial markets is our most recent example of the need for such coordination of supervision. The Federal Reserve is the primary bank regulator of only 5 of the largest 25 banks, the large, complex and internationally active banks that are the major sources of systemic risk. The Federal Reserve is able, nevertheless, to maintain a flow of information about the risk profiles and risk management practices of all large banking organizations through its responsibilities as exclusive supervisor of all bank holding companies. It is for this reason that the Federal Reserve places such a great emphasis on maintaining its role as supervisor of bank holding companies. Key Trends Challenging Bank Supervisors Let me turn now to a discussion of the key trends in banking and financial markets that are challenging bank supervisors. Surely the most profound force that has been transforming the financial, and other sectors of our economy, is the rapid growth of computer and telecommunications technology. In finance, a critical and complementary force has been the development of intellectual "technologies" that enable financial engineers to separate risk into its various components, and price each component in an economically rational way. Indeed, Nobel Prizes have been awarded for some of these discoveries. Implementation of financial engineering strategies typically requires massive amounts of cheap data processing; and the cheap data processing would not be useful without the formulas required to compute prices. The combination of the two has led to a virtual explosion in the number and types of financial instruments. Key examples include virtually all types of financial derivatives, such as interest rate and currency swaps and, more recently, credit derivatives. Asset-backed securities, from mortgage-backed securities to credit card receivables to collateralized loan obligations, provide additional examples of what can result from the mixing of technological and intellectual innovation. Such products have lowered the cost and broadened the scope of financial services, making it possible for borrowers and lenders to transact directly with each other, for a wide range of financial products to be tailored for very specific purposes, and for financial risk to be managed in ever more sophisticated ways. Financial innovation has been the driving force behind a second major trend in banking -- the blurring of distinctions among what were, traditionally, very distinct forms of financial firms. One of the first such innovations, with which we are all now very familiar, was money market mutual funds. Money market mutual funds took off in the late 1970s as market interest rates rose above rates that banks were allowed to pay on deposits. Eventually the entire system of interest rate controls, known as Federal Reserve Regulation Q, was dismantled by market realities and then, as a result, by the law. In the 1980s, banks began to challenge whether the Glass-Steagall Act prohibited combinations of commercial and investment banking. Today, both the regulators and the courts agree that Glass-Steagall does not imply a total prohibition, and bank supervisors have allowed a substantial blending of commercial and investment banking in the form of so-called Section 20 subsidiaries of bank holding companies. More recently, traditional separations of banking and insurance sales have also begun to fall, with support from the supervisors and the courts. A major result of the continued blurring of distinctions among commercial banking, investment banking, and insurance is a tremendous increase in competition in markets for many financial services. Greatly intensified competition has also led to increasing pressure for revisions to many of the banking laws and regulations, such as the Glass-Steagall Act, that, despite some successful efforts at relaxing them, continue to exert outdated and costly restraints on the banking and financial system. However, the issues involved are often complex and highly political, and so far efforts to achieve "financial modernization" have been more piecemeal than I would desire. Nevertheless, deregulation has been a major force for change in the banking and financial services industries. Two decades ago we still had Regulation Q, the Glass-Steagall Act was widely viewed as requiring a virtual prohibition of combinations of commercial and investment banking, and interstate banking and branching were barely fantasies even at the state level, let alone applications for combinations of insurance and banking. Just a few days ago, the House of Representatives almost voted on a massive re-write of the laws on permissible bank holding company activities and is now scheduled to consider the issue early next month. It is difficult to predict the outcome of that bill, and I will not. But I will note that the pressures of market developments for changes in the rules set up during the Great Depression are immense. If Congress does not act, loopholes and regulatory changes will continue to be exploited -- with or without bank participation. The forces of technology and globalization will deregulate in one way or another. I and my colleagues would prefer that the Congress would guide those changes in the public interest, but legislative deadlock will not do the job because the status quo will not hold. The fourth major force transforming the banking landscape is the globalization of banking and financial markets. Indeed, globalization has been reshaping not only the financial, but also the real economy for at least the last three decades. The interactions of developments in both the financial and real economies have expanded cross-border asset holdings, trading, and credit flows. In response, financial intermediaries, including banks and securities firms, have increased their cross-border operations. Once again, a critical result of this rapid evolution has been a substantial increase in competition both at home and abroad. Today, for example, almost 40 percent of the U.S. domestic commercial and industrial bank loan market is accounted for by foreign-owned banks. The final significant trend I will highlight is the on-going consolidation of the U.S. banking industry. I think that it is fair to say that the American banking system is currently in the midst of the most significant consolidation in its history. As I mentioned earlier, in the last two decades nearly all of the traditional barriers to geographic expansion of U.S. banks have crumbled. While the states took the lead in eliminating these barriers beginning in the late 1970s, the final step was taken by the federal government with passage of the Riegle-Neal Act in 1994. Under this Act, virtually full interstate branch banking became possible in June 1997. A few facts will perhaps give you a feel for the profound changes occurring in the structure of the U.S. banking system. In 1980 there were about 14,400 banks in the U.S. organized into about 12,300 banking organizations. By the end of 1997, the number of banks had fallen to just under 9,100, and the number of banking organizations to not quite 7,200. This 42 percent decline in the number of banking organizations was due in part, but only in part, to the large number of bank failures in the late 1980s and early 1990s. A more important factor was mergers among healthy banks. Since the early 1980s, it has not been unusual to see 400 or more mergers among healthy banks each year. While mergers have occurred, and continue to occur, among banks of all sizes, I would emphasize three aspects of the current bank merger movement. First is the high incidence of "mega mergers," or mergers among very large banking organizations. Several mergers of the last few years have been either the largest at the time, or among the largest bank mergers in U.S. history. Examples include the combining of Chase Manhattan and Chemical Bank, Wells Fargo and First Interstate, NationsBank and Barnett, and, most recently, First Union and CoreStates. Second, despite all of the merger activity, a large number of medium to small banks remain in the United States. Moreover, by most measures of performance these small banks are more than a match for their larger brethren for many bank products and services. Indeed, when a mega merger is announced it is not uncommon to read in the press how small banks in the affected markets are licking their chops at the business opportunities created thereby. Research seems to support their optimism. Lastly, while the overall number of banking organizations has fallen since 1980, this does not mean that new, or de novo, entry has not occurred. From 1980 through 1997 some 3,600 new banks were formed in the United States. My bottom line? The U.S. banking structure is highly dynamic, is adjusting to a variety of forces, and defies easy generalizations. The current wave of bank mergers has led to a substantial increase in bank concentration at the national level. For example, the percentage of banking assets controlled by the top 10 banking organizations rose from about 22 percent in 1980 to 34 percent in 1997. The percentage held by the top 25 increased from 33 to 53 percent. Are these increases in national concentration a public policy concern? In my view, the answer to this question is "no," at least at this time, because virtually all the evidence we have strongly suggests that competition problems almost always arise in banking at the local level. That is, to the extent that banks are able to exert market power, the exercise of such power tends to occur in retail markets that are relatively narrow in geographic scope, and for a fairly well-defined set of customers, usually households and small businesses. However, a special influence on local market competition may develop as bank consolidation and interstate branching continue, resulting in the largest banks competing with each other in an increasing number of local markets. Such widespread competitive contacts may cause these firms to temper their competitive behavior in individual markets in recognition of the potential for responses by their rivals in other common markets and in recognition of their widespread mutual interests. So, what has happened to banking concentration in local markets since 1980? The answer is, "not much." For example, the average three-bank deposit concentration ratio in Metropolitan Statistical Areas, a common measure of local urban markets, hovered between 65 and 68 percent between 1980 and 1997. Concentration measures for rural counties show similar results, with the average three-bank concentration ratio remaining at about 89 percent throughout the period. Other measures of local market concentration show similar results for both urban and rural areas. The stability of local market concentration in the face of such a large consolidation of the banking industry is remarkable. While there is no single reason for this stability, I would point to two factors as being of particular importance. Many mergers, including some mergers of very large banks, involve institutions that do not compete in the same local markets. In such cases, local market concentration is obviously not affected. Where the merging banks do compete in the same local markets, enforcement of the antitrust laws has been an important factor limiting the growth of local market concentration. Moreover, antitrust enforcement has no doubt deterred some highly anti-competitive mergers from even being proposed. Why have banks been consolidating in number and expanding in size and geography? Again, no one answer is appropriate, and each merger is somewhat unique and reflects more than one factor. In recent years many banks have been responding to the removal of barriers to interstate banking and branching that restricted entry and divided markets. In such cases, the twin desires to diversify risk geographically and to expand sources of "core" deposits have surely been important motivating forces. Moreover, geographic barriers had constrained natural market developments; in an important sense their removal has simply allowed the market to adjust to a new economic equilibrium from a previously legally mandated equilibrium. Beyond such adjustments, scale economies are mentioned frequently by bankers as a causal factor in bank consolidation, although academic research has not tended to find much evidence of overall economies of scale in banking. Still, economies of scale certainly exist for some bank operations, such as many back office functions. In addition, some lines of business, such as securities underwriting and market making, require large levels of activity to be viable. Increased competitive pressures caused by rapid technological change and the resulting blurring of distinctions between banks and other types of financial firms, lower barriers to entry due to deregulation, and increased globalization are also important factors. For example, greater competition forces inefficient banks to become more efficient, accept lower profits, close up shop, or -- in order to exit a market in which they cannot survive -- merge with another bank. Other possible motives for mergers include the simple desire to achieve market power, or efforts by management to build empires and enhance compensation. Some mergers probably occur as an effort to prevent the acquiring bank from itself being acquired, or, alternatively, to enhance a bank's attractiveness to other buyers. No matter why banks are merging, the bottom line is that the United States is well on its way to developing a truly national banking structure for the first time in its history. We are not quite there yet, but I do not think it will take too many more years. What will this structure look like? Well, that is obviously a very complex question, the answer to which involves forecasting years in advance. And I can tell you from many years of experience, forecasting the economy even one year in advance is a very risky and humbling business. Thus, any prognostications about future banking structure should be taken with very many grains of salt. Still, some economists at the Fed have tried to look through this dark glass to see the future United States banking structure. For all of the reasons I have discussed, it seems reasonable to expect a continued high level of merger activity for the foreseeable future. Very large mergers will not be uncommon. Studies based on historical experience suggest that in around a decade there will likely be about 3,000 to 4,000 banking organizations, down from about 7,000 today. Although the top 10 or so banking organizations will almost certainly account for a larger share of U.S. banking assets than they do today, the overall size distribution of banks will probably remain about the same. That is, there will likely be a few very large organizations, and an increasing number of firms as we move down the size scale. Importantly, a large number of small banks is expected to remain. Future Directions in Bank Supervision What do all of these changes mean for how we supervise and regulate banks? Analysis of competition Clearly, as the banking industry consolidates we need to maintain competitive markets. Competitive markets are our best assurance that consumers receive the highest quality products at the lowest possible prices. As I discussed earlier, there are many reasons to believe that in recent years competition has increased greatly in markets for a large number of financial products and services. This is true for many products purchased in local, regional and national markets. However, in some cases we still observe potential competitive problems with a proposed bank merger. Fortunately, the antitrust laws, as written into the banking statutes, give us the means to maintain competition in such situations. These laws require that the Board approve only those mergers that are not expected to substantially harm competition. When implementing this policy, the Board may require changes to a merger proposal, and may even deny an application, if the merger or acquisition would result in a highly concentrated market, or an excessively large increase in concentration. As I indicated a few minutes ago, the focus of our analysis is normally on local retail markets for banking products and services. Over the past year or so, quite a few applicants have pushed very hard at the Board's frontier for approving merger applications. Some applicants appear to have held the view that almost any merger could be approved, even if it violated the screening guidelines that both the Federal Reserve and the Department of Justice use to decide which mergers require close examination. In response, the Board has occasionally felt compelled to remind applicants, especially those proposing a merger that would affect a large number of local markets, that substantial changes in market concentrations will receive careful review. Moreover, when mergers would exceed the screening guidelines, "mitigating" factors must be present. By mitigating factors I mean conditions that tend to create a more competitive market than is suggested by market concentration alone. These would include characteristics that make a market highly attractive for new entry, or situations where nonbank providers of financial services are unusually strong. The greater the deviation from the screening guidelines, the more powerful and convincing the mitigating factors must be. I have been particularly concerned with cases where a large number of local markets are affected. In such cases, even if the adverse effect is fairly small in each of several local markets, it seems to me that the cumulative, or total, adverse effect might be significant. Thus, when a large number of markets are affected adversely, I believe that we should be especially careful to assure ourselves that there are substantial mitigating factors. In addition, when a merger would cause a large change in concentration in a market that is, or becomes, highly concentrated, I think we need to give special attention to the impact on competition. The reason for this is that I think when the change in concentration is large, the effect on interfirm relationships, market dynamics and thus competition is likely to be more pronounced, other things equal. Assessing safety and soundness Technological change, financial innovation, the acquisition of new powers by banking organizations, the increasing geographic scope of banks, and the globalization of financial markets all challenge our ability to examine and assess the safety and soundness of individual banking firms. One way that examiners are adapting to this changed world is to focus much of their attention on the information and risk management systems of banks. The key question they ask is: How effectively are these systems measuring and controlling an institution's rapidly changing risk profile? The emphasis on risk management is most critical at our largest, most sophisticated, and most internationally active banks. Many of these banks use advanced economic and statistical models to evaluate their market and credit risks. These models are used for a variety of purposes, including allocating capital on a risk adjusted basis and pricing loans and credit guarantees. The development by some banks of increasingly accurate models for measuring, managing, and pricing risk has called into question the continuing usefulness of one of the foundations of bank supervision -- the so-called risk-based capital standards, or the Basle Accord. The Basle Accord capital standards were adopted in 1988 by most of the world's industrialized nations in an effort to encourage stronger capital at riskier banks, to include off-balance sheet exposures in the assessment of capital adequacy, and to establish more consistent capital standards across nations. The Accord was a major advance in 1988, and has proved to be very useful since then. But in recent years calls for reform have begun to grow. I will outline briefly one of the key problems we are currently facing with the Basle Accord. The Basle Accord capital standards divide bank on- and off-balance sheet assets into four risk buckets, and then apply a different capital weight to each bucket. These weights increase roughly with the riskiness of the assets in a given bucket. The basic idea is that more capital should be required to be held against riskier assets. However, the relationship is rough. Perhaps most troublesome, the same risk weight is applied to all loans. Thus, for example, a loan to a very risky "junk bond" company gets the same weight as a loan to a "triple A" rated firm. While the Accord has the virtue of being relatively easy to administer and enforce, it also clearly gives banks an incentive to find ways to avoid the regulatory capital standard for loans that their internal models say need less capital than is required by the Basle Accord. Conversely, banks should want to keep loans which their models say require more capital than does the Basle standard. And, guess what, banks have been doing just that. This so-called "regulatory arbitrage" may not be all bad, but it surely causes some serious problems as well. For one thing, it makes reported capital ratios -- a key measure of bank soundness used by supervisors and investors -- less meaningful for government supervisors and private analysts. Finding ways around this problem is a high priority at the Federal Reserve. The arbitraging of regulatory capital requirements is but one of a host of similar conflicts between banks and bank supervisory rules and regulations. Indeed, one can view much of the long history of bank supervision and regulation as something of a battle between supervisors who want to deter excessive risk taking and banks who seek ways around sometimes inefficient, or just plain uneconomic, regulations. This long history leads me to seek supervisory strategies that are, in the economist's jargon, incentive compatible. By incentive compatible, I mean supervisory policies and procedures that give banks strong internal incentives to manage their risks prudently and minimize the exploitation of moral hazard. Put differently, we need to design strategies that encourage banks, in their own self-interest, to work with us, not against us. One promising possibility for incentive compatible regulation is what has come to be called the "pre-commitment" approach to bank capital standards. The basic idea is to allow the bank to pre-commit to the supervisor its capital allocation for risks in the bank's trading account -- those assets held as part of the bank's securities dealing activities. If the bank's losses for that portion of its total risk exceed the pre-committed amount of capital over some fixed time period, the bank would pay a penalty, or perhaps have to disclose to the market its violation of its pre-commitment. Such an approach would utilize the bank's own internal models and risk management procedures to achieve supervisory goals, and give the bank a strong incentive to improve its risk management, since by doing so it could lower its pre-committed capital requirement and not increase the risk of paying a penalty. There are both benefits and difficulties with the approach that we are discussing with other supervisors both in the U.S. and abroad. It may well be that some form of an incentive compatible strategy might be linked with a regulatory minimum capital as a modification to the Basle standard for market risk. Such a modification would be to the existing standard that, it is important to emphasize, already uses a bank's internal risk management models to help achieve supervisory goals. U.S. bank supervisors began last year to require large, internationally active American banks to meet the Basle Accord's capital requirements for market risk in trading accounts using their own internal models, with appropriate review and monitoring by supervisors. As I suggested at the beginning of my remarks, the possibility of a systemic failure of the banking system, and the moral hazard incentives created by the safety net that is designed to contain systemic risk, require some government supervision of banks. But we should always remember that the first line of defense against excessive risk-taking by banks is the market itself. Market discipline can be, and often is, highly effective at deterring excessive risk. Indeed, a primary goal of many of the bank regulatory reforms implemented in the wake of the banking and thrift crises of the 1980s and early 1990s was either to increase market discipline or to make supervisors behave more like the market would behave. Market discipline was increased by raising capital standards, thus giving the owners of the firm a greater incentive to control risk, and by mandating greater public disclosure by a bank of its financial condition. Prompt closure rules that required supervisors to impose increasingly severe penalties on a bank as its financial condition deteriorated, and the adoption of risk-based deposit insurance premiums are examples of encouraging supervisors to act like the market. The reforms of the early 1990s were a good start. But I believe that there may well be more that we can do here. Such comments may sound out of place today. Times are good, and almost everyone seems quite satisfied with the current deposit insurance system. But good times may be precisely when we should develop ideas for an even more effective system. The crucible of a crisis is not always the best time to think up reforms -- witness the error we made in passing the Glass-Steagall Act, an error we have yet to correct after 65 years! Indeed, it is in part for this very reason that the Board continues to urge Congress to pass financial modernization legislation. So, in the spirit of being forward looking, let me attempt to give you the flavor of what I am thinking about. It may, for example, be possible to increase market discipline by requiring large, internationally active banks to issue a minimum amount of certain types of uninsured subordinated debt to the public. Holders of such debt would have a strong incentive to require the bank to manage its risk prudently. In addition, it would be highly desirable if this debt were traded on the open market, thereby providing a clear signal of the market's evaluation of the bank's financial condition. Another possibility is further reforms of the deposit insurance system. For example, most observers believe that the current risk-based premiums do not adequately reflect risk differences between banks, in part because current law limits the growth of deposit insurance reserves. Loosening this constraint might allow for more accurate pricing of deposit insurance. Dealing with globalization The final area I will highlight today is a potentially critical implication of financial globalization for the supervision of large, internationally active banking organizations. In this world of financial globalization, complexity, and rapid telecommunications, it is extremely important that all of the large banking institutions in the developed nations strive to keep up with the state-of-art in risk measurement and management. If a group of important institutions in only one or two countries fails to keep pace, all banking systems are placed at increased risk. This risk, moreover, is not simply that a large bank failure in one country can cause counter-party failures in other nations. Systematic underestimation of credit and other risks can result in underpricing those risks, which can be damaging to all players, not only to the banks making the risk measurement errors. Fortunately, the free market dissemination of best practices appears to be functioning fairly well. No single developed nation has a monopoly on best practice risk measurement and management, if innovations in complex financial products are any indication. For example, European banks were market leaders in introducing collateralized loan obligations. In the field of asset-backed commercial paper facilities, U.S. banks were the initiators, but European and Japanese institutions are now significant players. And, the ubiquitous consulting firms around the world can be relied upon to spread the word on advances in risk management techniques. Still, individual banks in each country, not just the U.S., must face the proper incentives to keep up with an ever changing technology. Lax supervisory practices -- or, worse, government support of banks with poor risk practices -- do not provide proper incentives. Thus, each supervisory authority in each developed nation must be vigilant that the disparities between the world's best practice institutions and those large banks inside the best practices frontier do not grow wider. Indeed, I believe that an important function of supervisors is to act as something of a clearinghouse for best practices. Internationally, supervisors from the major industrialized nations have been performing this function more and more through their joint efforts. In the United States, the clearinghouse function is an important component of the on-site examination. Conclusion In conclusion, I hope that my remarks have helped you to better understand the forces affecting our banking and financial system. Equally important, I hope that I have given you a good feel for the challenges these forces have created for bank supervision, how we are meeting these challenges today, how we may deal with them in the future, and the role of the Federal Reserve in these complex, dynamic, and exciting issues. All of us have a very big stake in the continued health, stability, and competitiveness of our banking system. I encourage each of you to think deeply about what is required to achieve these goals.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice of U.S. Bancorp to acquire all the voting shares of Piper Jaffray Companies, Inc., both in Minneapolis, Minnesota, and thereby engage in various nonbanking activities, including underwriting and dealing in, to a limited extent, all types of debt and equity securities, other than interests in open-end investment companies. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. U.S. Bancorp Minneapolis, Minnesota Order Approving Notice to Engage in Nonbanking Activities U.S. Bancorp, Minneapolis, Minnesota ("USB"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8)) and section 225.24 of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.24) to acquire all the voting securities of Piper Jaffray Companies, Inc. ("Piper Jaffray"), and thereby acquire control of its subsidiaries, including Piper Jaffray, Inc. ("Company"), all in Minneapolis, Minnesota. USB would thereby engage in the following nonbanking activities: extending credit and servicing loans, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(1) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(1)); engaging in activities related to extending credit, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(2)(ii), (vi) and (vii) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(2)(2)(ii), (vi) and (vii)); providing leasing services, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(3) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(3)); performing functions or activities that may be performed by a trust company, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(5) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(5)); providing financial and investment advisory services, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(6) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(6)); providing securities brokerage, riskless principal, private placement, futures commission merchant, and other agency transactional services, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(7) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(7)); underwriting and dealing in government obligations and money market instruments in which state member banks may underwrite and deal under 12 U.S.C. §§ 335 and 24(7) ("bank-eligible securities"), and engaging in investing and trading activities, and buying and selling bullion and related activities, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(8) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(8)); providing management consulting and employee benefit consulting services, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(9) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(9)); engaging in general insurance agency activities, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(11)(vii) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(11)(vii)); underwriting and dealing in, to a limited extent, all types of debt and equity securities other than interests in open-end investment companies ("bank-ineligible securities"); providing administrative and other services to open-end investment companies ("mutual funds"); and acting as the general partner of private investment limited partnerships that invest in assets in which a bank holding company is permitted to invest. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (63 Federal Register 11,682 (1998)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the notice and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. USB, with total consolidated assets of approximately $71.3 billion, is the 15th largest banking organization in the United States. USB operates subsidiary banks in 17 states, and engages through other subsidiaries in a broad range of permissible nonbanking activities. Company is, and following consummation of the proposal will continue to be, registered as a broker-dealer with the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. § 78a et seq. ), a member of the National Association of Securities Dealers, Inc. ("NASD"), and registered as a futures commission merchant with the Commodity Futures Trading Commission ("CFTC") under the Commodity Exchange Act (7 U.S.C. § 2 et seq. ). Accordingly, Company is, and will continue to be, subject to the record-keeping and reporting obligations, fiduciary standards, and other requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the Commodity Exchange Act, the SEC, CFTC, and NASD. USB recently received Board approval to establish U.S. Bancorp Investments, Minneapolis, Minnesota ("USB-Investments"), and thereby engage in underwriting and dealing, to a limited extent, in certain types of bank-ineligible securities and other permissible nonbanking activities. USB intends to merge USB-Investments into Company by March 31, 1999, with Company surviving the merger. Underwriting and Dealing in Bank-Ineligible Securities The Board has determined that -- subject to the framework of prudential limitations established in previous decisions to address the potential for conflicts of interests, unsound banking practices, or other adverse effects -- underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities is so closely related to banking as to be a proper incident thereto within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. The Board also has determined that underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities is consistent with section 20 of the Glass-Steagall Act (12 U.S.C. § 377), provided that the company engaged in the activity derives no more than 25 percent of its gross revenues from underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities. USB has committed that Company will conduct its underwriting and dealing activities using the methods and procedures and subject to the prudential limitations established by the Board in the Section 20 Orders. USB also has committed that Company will conduct its bank-ineligible securities underwriting and dealing activities subject to the Board's revenue restriction. As a condition of this order, USB is required to conduct its bank-ineligible securities activities subject to the revenue restrictions and Operating Standards established for section 20 subsidiaries ("Operating Standards"). Other Activities Approved by Regulation or Order The Board previously has determined that the proposed credit and credit-related activities; leasing activities; trust company activities; financial and investment advisory activities; securities brokerage, riskless principal, private placement, futures commission merchant, and other agency transactional activities; bank-eligible securities underwriting and dealing, investment and trading, and buying and selling bullion and related activities; management and employee benefits consulting services; and insurance agency activities to be conducted by USB after consummation of the proposal are closely related to banking within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. In addition, the Board previously has determined by order that the proposed mutual fund administration services and private investment limited partnership activities are permissible for bank holding companies. USB has committed that it will conduct these activities in accordance with the limitations set forth in Regulation Y and the Board's orders and interpretations relating to each of the activities. Other Considerations In order to approve this notice, the Board also must determine that the proposed activities "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public, such as greater convenience, increased competition, or gains in efficiency, that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices." As part of its review of these factors, the Board considers the financial and managerial resources of the notificant and its subsidiaries and the effect the transaction would have on such resources. In considering the financial resources of the notificant, the Board has reviewed the capitalization of USB and Company in accordance with the standards set forth in the Section 20 Orders and finds the capitalization of each to be consistent with approval. This determination is based on all the facts of record, including USB's projections of the volume of Company's underwriting and dealing activities in bank-ineligible securities. The Board also has reviewed the managerial resources of each of the entities involved in this proposal in light of examination reports and other supervisory information. In connection with the proposal, the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis ("Reserve Bank") has reviewed the policies and procedures of Company to ensure compliance with this order and the Section 20 Orders, including Company's operational and managerial infrastructure, computer, audit, and accounting systems and internal risk management procedures and controls. On the basis of the Reserve Bank's review and all other facts of record, including the commitments provided in this case and the proposed managerial and risk management systems of Company, the Board has concluded that financial and managerial considerations are consistent with approval of the notice. The Board has carefully considered the competitive effects of the proposal. USB represents that USB-Investments and Company offer largely complementary services with few significant overlaps. USB has indicated that USB-Investments has focused on bank-eligible securities underwriting, private placement, and fixed-income debt trading activities, and has not developed the type of merger and acquisition advisory and equity underwriting, dealing, research, and distribution services offered by Company. To the extent that USB-Investments and Company offer different types of products and services, the proposed acquisition would result in no loss of competition. In those markets where the product offerings of USB's nonbanking subsidiaries and Piper Jaffray overlap, such as securities brokerage, investment advisory, trust and insurance agency activities, there are numerous existing and potential competitors. Consummation of the proposal, therefore, would have a de minimis effect on competition in the market for these services, and the Board has concluded that the proposal would not have any significantly adverse competitive effects in any relevant market. In order to approve the proposal, the Board also must find that the performance of the proposed activities by Applicant can reasonably be expected to produce benefits that would outweigh possible adverse effects under the proper incident to banking standard of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Under the framework established in this and prior decisions, consummation of the proposal is not likely to result in any significantly adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices. The Board expects that consummation of the proposal would provide added convenience to the customers of USB and Piper Jaffray. USB has indicated that consummation of the proposal would expand the range of products and services available to its customers and those of Piper Jaffray. USB also has stated that the acquisition would permit it to further diversify its nonbanking operations, thereby making it less vulnerable to economic fluctuations in individual business lines. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that performance of the proposed activities by USB can reasonably be expected to produce public benefits that outweigh any adverse effects of the proposal. Accordingly, the Board has determined that the performance of the proposed activities by USB is a proper incident to banking for purposes of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Conclusion On the basis of all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the notice should be, and hereby is, approved, subject to all the terms and conditions described in this order. The Board's approval of the proposal extends only to activities conducted within the limitations of this order, including the Board's reservation of authority to establish additional limitations to ensure that Company's activities are consistent with safety and soundness, avoidance of conflicts of interests, and other relevant considerations under the BHC Act. Underwriting and dealing in any manner other than as approved in this order is not within the scope of the Board's approval and is not authorized for Company. The Board's determination is subject to all the terms and conditions set forth in Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.25(c) (12 C.F.R. 225.7 and 225.25(c)), and to the Board's authority to require modification or termination of the activities of a bank holding company or any of its subsidiaries as the Board finds necessary to ensure compliance with, or to prevent evasion of, the provisions and purposes of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders issued thereunder. The Board's decision is specifically conditioned on compliance with all the commitments made in connection with this notice, including the commitments discussed in this order and the conditions set forth in this order and the Board regulations and orders noted above. The commitments and conditions are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision, and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. This proposal shall not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or the Reserve Bank, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective April 20, 1998. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Appendix List of Administrative Services Maintaining and preserving certain records of the Funds, including financial and corporate records; Computing dividends, performance data and financial information regarding the Funds; Furnishing statistical and research data; Preparing and filing with the SEC and state securities regulators registration statements, notices, reports and other materials required to be filed under applicable laws; Preparing reports and other informational materials regarding the Funds including proxies and other shareholder communications; Providing legal and other regulatory advice to the Funds in connection with their other administrative functions; Providing office facilities and clerical support for the Funds; Developing and implementing procedures for monitoring compliance with regulatory requirements and compliance with the Funds' investment objectives, policies, and restrictions as established by the Funds' boards; Providing routine fund accounting services and liaison with outside auditors; Preparing and filing tax returns, and monitoring tax compliance; Reviewing and arranging for payment of Fund expenses; Providing communication and coordination services with regard to the Funds' investment adviser, transfer agent, custodian, distributor and other service organizations that render recordkeeping or shareholder communication services; Reviewing and providing advice to the distributor, the Funds and the investment adviser regarding sales literature and marketing plans for the Funds; Providing information to the distributor's personnel concerning fund performance and administration; Providing marketing support with respect to sales of the Funds through financial intermediaries, including participating in seminars, meetings and conferences designed to present information concerning the operations of the Funds; Providing reports to the Funds' board with regard to the activities of the Funds; and Providing telephone shareholder services through a toll-free number. Footnotes USB is authorized to engage in insurance agency activities pursuant to section 4(c)(8)(G) of the BHC Act, which authorizes those bank holding companies that engaged in insurance agency activities prior to 1971 with Board approval to engage in insurance agency activities. A list of the administrative services that USB would provide is included in the Appendix. Asset and ranking data are as of December 31, 1997. See U.S. Bancorp, 84 Federal Reserve Bulletin 62 (1998). See J.P. Morgan & Co. Inc., et. al., 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 192 (1989), aff'd sub nom. Securities Industry Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 900 F.2d 360 (D.C. Cir. 1990); Citicorp, 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 473 (1987), aff'd sub nom. Securities Industry Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 839 F.2d 47 (2d Cir.), cert. denied, 486 U.S. 1059 (1988), as modified by Review of Restrictions on Director, Officer and Employee Interlocks, Cross-Marketing Activities, and the Purchase and Sale of Financial Assets Between a Section 20 Subsidiary and an Affiliated Bank or Thrift, 61 Federal Register 57,679 (1996), Amendments to Restrictions in the Board's Section 20 Orders, 62 Federal Register 45,295 (1997); and Clarification to the Board's Section 20 Orders, 63 Federal Register 14,803 (1998) (collectively, "Section 20 Orders"). Compliance with the revenue limitation shall be calculated in accordance with the method stated in the Section 20 Orders, as modified by the Order Approving Modifications to the Section 20 Orders, 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 751 (1989); 10 Percent Revenue Limit on Bank-Ineligible Activities of Subsidiaries of Bank Holding Companies Engaged in Underwriting and Dealing in Securities, 61 Federal Register 48,953 (1996); and Revenue Limit on Bank-Ineligible Activities of Subsidiaries of Bank Holding Companies Engaged in Underwriting and Dealing in Securities, 61 Federal Register 68,750 (1996) (collectively, "Modification Orders"). In light of the fact that USB proposes to acquire a going concern, the Board believes that allowing Company to calculate compliance with the revenue limitation on an annualized basis during the first year after consummation of the acquisition and thereafter on a rolling quarterly average basis would be consistent with the Section 20 Orders. See Dauphin Deposit Corporation, 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 672 (1991). The Board also believes that, in light of the fact that USB-Investments recently began operations, permitting USB-Investments to calculate compliance with the revenue limitation on an annualized basis during the first year of its operations and thereafter on a rolling quarterly average basis is consistent with the Section 20 Orders. As noted above, USB intends to merge USB-Investments into Company by March 31, 1999. Until such merger occurs, USB will operate Company as a separate corporate entity and both USB-Investments and Company will be independently subject to the 25-percent revenue limitation on underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities. See Citicorp, 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 473, 486 n. 45 (1987), aff'd sub nom. Securities Industry Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 839 F.2d 47 (2d Cir.), cert. denied, 486 U.S. 1059 (1988). 12 C.F.R. 225.200. Company may provide services that are necessary incidents to the proposed underwriting and dealing activities. Unless Company receives specific approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act to conduct the activities independently, any revenues from the incidental activities must be treated as ineligible revenues subject to the Board's revenue limitation. See 12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(1), (2), (3), (5), (6), (7), (8), (9), and (11)(vii). See Mellon Bank Corporation, 79 Federal Reserve Bulletin 626 (1993); Commerzbank AG, 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin 678 (1997) (" Commerzbank "); Bankers Trust New York Corporation, 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin 780 (1997) (" Bankers Trust "); Meridian Bancorp, Inc., 80 Federal Reserve Bulletin 736 (1994). Company also would provide transfer agency services to the funds that are provided advisory or administrative services by Company or an affiliate. See 12 C.F.R. 225.125(i). USB has committed that it will engage in the proposed mutual fund advisory and administrative activities in a manner consistent with previous orders, and has committed that Company will cease its mutual fund distribution activities prior to consummation. See Commerzbank; Bankers Trust. USB does not propose to have any officer or director interlocks with the mutual funds to which Company or its affiliates provide advisory or administrative services. USB also has provided the commitments previously relied on by the Board to address the potential adverse effects that could arise from USB's proposal to serve as general partner of private investment limited partnerships that invest in assets in which a bank holding company may invest, and to assure that such activities are conducted in accordance with applicable law. See Dresdner Bank AG, 84 Federal Reserve Bulletin 361 (1998). 12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8). See 12 C.F.R. 225.26. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Phillips, Meyer and Ferguson. Absent and not voting: Governor Gramlich.
Remarks by Vice Chair Alice M. Rivlin Before the Hyman P. Minsky Conference on Financial Structure, The Levy Institute, Annandale-on-Hudson, New York April 23, 1998 Toward A Better Class of Financial Crises: Some Lessons from Asia Drawing lessons from the Asian financial crisis has become a minor industry, partially offsetting the impact of the crisis on developed economies -- at least for economists. It contributes to conference budgets, airline revenues, bar tabs, and the length of academic resumes. The opining classes can turn almost any bad news into an excuse for more meetings in beautiful settings like Bard College. Some of the talk has been devoted to the blame game. Was the crisis (or rather the rolling set of interrelated crises) home-grown, that is, brought on by ill-conceived investment, over-leveraged companies, lax banking supervision and crony capitalism in the borrowing countries? Was it the greed, inattention, or herd instinct of the lenders? Or was it the inherent instability of international capital flows? Did the IMF step in just in time to avert total meltdown or did it fail to provide early enough warning? Did the conditions imposed on borrowers help restore investor confidence or further undermine it? The quick answer is that all of the alleged culprits bear part of the responsibility. International flows of capital can be unstable -- what flows in can quickly flow out -- and fast. The enormous escalation in the volume of private capital flows, coupled with the advent of simultaneous communication in all the world's markets, has greatly increased the exposure of economies to rapid turnarounds in cross border flows. Decades of rapid growth and apparently unending capital inflow had made the Asian emerging markets, until recently known as "tigers," believe they were immune from the reversals of investor confidence that beset other parts of the world and produced an incaution that led to over investment in some sectors, inflated equity and real estate prices, and some ill-thought-out projects, public and private. Close relations between companies, banks and governments created false senses of security, as well as uneconomic "policy" loans and investments. Weak supervision of financial institutions and markets, on top of traditions of secrecy in business and governmental transactions, aggravated the crises when things turned down. At the same time, foreign investors and creditors asked too few questions, were hesitant to reign in the galloping goose that had laid so many golden eggs, and reinforced each other's reluctance to be the first to pull back. As tensions were developing, the IMF pointed to some of the dangers without getting much response, and missed some others, as did the much-vaunted market gurus and rating agencies. When the crises hit, the IMF quickly crafted rescue packages that imposed serious structural reform as conditions of aid, inevitably making some mistakes in the process, but arresting the spreading downward spiral and restoring enough confidence to allow the countries to get their policies in shape to support the climb back to economic health. No one thinks the climb will be easy, but the best bet is that the worst is over. Now the talk has shifted to the more difficult subject of what the international community can do to prevent, mitigate and manage financial crises in the future. The stakes are high, for industrial and emerging market countries alike. When international capital markets function well, they help achieve rising standards of living for both creditor and debtor countries. When the markets crash, they bring incredible hardship to ordinary workers and their families -- often people who have been pulled out of their traditional occupations and communities by economic change and may have nothing to fall back on. Two sets of prescriptions are relatively uncontroversial, albeit deceptively hard to achieve. First, the world's capital markets and the machinery designed to stabilize them would function better with more complete, accessible and timely information flows. Investors can make better decisions and lenders can exercise more discipline over borrower behavior if they have more accurate and more complete information and have it sooner. Both international and domestic officials can monitor, supervise and warn of impending danger only if they know the facts. Improving transparency should apply not only to businesses and banks, but to official bodies, both national and international. It's important to know what a country's budget deficit really is (on budget and off budget) and what its exchange reserves really are, including any operations in the forward markets. The Asian crisis was certainly exacerbated by lack of information of many sorts, including accurate data on reserves. There is currently a great flurry of activity in various international fora to raise standards of accounting and reporting on business, banking and governmental activity and balance sheets. Progress will be made. But one should not expect too much. Although post mortems on financial crises, especially reviews of investor decisions that went sour, feature a great deal of if-only-we-had-known rhetoric, in actual fact a great deal of information usually turns out to have been available which no one ever looked at or effectively analyzed. For transparency to be useful, people need to actually want to look -- and too often those who are making high profits would rather not hear bad news. Second, a major sustained international effort is needed to strengthen the structure, functioning and supervision of financial systems in emerging market countries. A clear lesson of recent economic history (and not just in emerging market countries) is the crucial importance of strong banks and other financial institutions, adequately capitalized and able to manage risk, overseen by serious prudential supervision and an independent well managed central bank. Industrial countries can ill-afford to be sanctimonious on this score -- many of us have experienced the adverse effects of poor prudential supervision or lack of political will to close failing financial institutions -- but good management and strong supervision of financial institutions is clearly a key to withstanding economic shocks. Here, too, consensus is strong and serious activity is underway under the aegis of a variety of international bodies, perhaps too many, to evolve clear rules for financial supervision and help countries implement them. The task will require time, patience and resources. It is not just bank examiners, but bankers who need training in how to do their jobs in modern, fast moving internationally exposed economies. Strengthening financial systems, including improving corporate governance, goes hand in hand with efforts to improve transparency and information flows -- to investors, shareholders, supervisors and international agencies -- and both will require sustained effort and run into significant resistance. The first two prescriptions are preventive, designed to reduce the frequency and amplitude of financial crises. But no one with a sense of history -- or reality -- believes that crises can be eliminated. Hence, a third prescription also appears on everybody's list, albeit with far less agreement on what it means, namely, private creditors should take on a greater portion of the burden of resolving future international financial crises. Sharing the burden is a far more difficult issue to come to grips with conceptually than either the need for greater transparency or the need for stronger, better supervised financial systems. Not much intellectual structure yet exists for thinking about burden-sharing in international financial crises. Moreover, cross-border financing is growing so rapidly and market instruments are morphing so fast that designing ways of sharing the burden is like changing the tires on a moving car -- pretty exciting and not obviously doable. The task cannot be set aside, however, for at least two reasons. First, the cost of resolving international financial crises is outrunning the likely resources available for that purpose. The volume of cross-border flows has grown precipitously and the cost of breakdown has escalated with it. High speed traffic on a six lane freeway moves a lot of people to their destinations fast, but the pile-up in a wreck is a lot more expensive than on a winding two lane road. If recent trends continue, managing the next crisis will call for more resources than taxpayers in the U.S. and other developed countries are likely to feel comfortable turning over to the IMF and other international organizations, even if they are reasonably confident that the borrowing countries will pay the loans back, as experience indicates they will. Second, and far more important, the perception that official resources can be counted on to bail out creditors (directly or indirectly) arguably generates moral hazard. It could lead to excessive risk-taking by lenders and funding of less economically defensible projects. It may also channel financing into less stable forms whose overuse makes crises more likely to occur. In recent episodes, direct investors and holders of equity and long-term debt have taken serious losses, but short-term lenders, especially interbank lenders, have been largely protected. While a country in trouble has understandable reasons for not wanting to cut itself off from short-term bank credit and for using its scarce international resources to keep this lifeline attached, the result may be to reinforce excessive dependence on debt rather than equity and on short, rather than longer-term financing. Both reasons combine to create an urgent need for serious and creative thought on the part of the international community about how to "bail in" private sector financiers, in order to reduce the impact on the financial resources of official institutions like the IMF, the World Bank and the regional development banks, to reduce moral hazard leading to excessive risk-taking, especially short term inter-bank borrowing, and to improve risk assessment. Designing mechanisms for appropriate burdensharing among private sector investor/creditors is inherently hard because it runs into some very sticky and fundamental dilemmas. The basic principle from which all borrowing and lending must proceed is that people who use other people's money have a firm obligation to pay it back. Hence, a suspension of payments or a work-out arrangement must be clearly rare and exceptional, resorted to only in extreme situations. Raising fears that suspensions are likely or work-outs normal could unnecessarily increase the cost of capital, cause drastic reductions in cross border flows and diminish future incomes of debtors and creditors alike. Yet having no known or understood process for dealing with default can, as has been seen in Asia, lead to inequitable burden sharing, high official cost and potential future moral hazard. A related basic dilemma involves the timing of a suspension of payments. Authorities have to hold off long enough to be sure there is no other choice, but not wait so long that creditors are running for the doors and irreversible damage is already done. The problem is, of course, not entirely new. International borrowers have gotten into trouble before, and precedents for workouts have been developed -- Paris Club procedures for resolving sovereign debts to public creditors; London Club for resolving sovereign debts to private banks. But each crisis is different from the last. A critical element in the Mexican crisis of 1994-95 was the threat of default on dollar-indexed Mexican short-term bonds (tesebonos ) for which no work-out process existed. Dealing with bond holders (who are likely to be numerous and scattered) is more complex than dealing with lending governments or a relatively small (and known) group of international banks. The recent Asian crises posed still another problem. The borrowers were not governments, but private banks and corporations, a situation that may be typical of future crises, and one that adds greatly to the legal and organizational complexities of sharing the burden of financial distress. When the debt in question is sovereign debt, whether to banks or other lenders, it may not be hard to reestablish stability and confidence in the sovereign. The IMF can lend enough to solve the borrowing government's immediate liquidity problem while the government works out a debt restructuring with its creditors. IMF rules permit "lending into arrears" in these circumstances. If the creditors are bondholders, as they were in Mexico, the situation is more difficult. IMF rules do not at present permit a government borrowing from the IMF when it is unable to pay its bondholders. Even a small minority of the bondholders can use their bargaining power to obstruct a resolution of the crisis in hopes of getting a better deal. After the Mexican crisis had been resolved with the help of significant new official lending to Mexico, the international community focussed on how to improve the bargaining position of the debtor government with its bondholders if such a crisis should arise in the future. The "Rey Report" on Sovereign Liquidity Crises (named for its author, Jean-Jacques Rey of the Central Bank of Belgium) was a major effort by the G-10 countries to learn the lessons of Mexico. It recommended two new steps: First, the IMF should expand its willingness to lend into arrears to cover the situation in which a sovereign was making a good faith effort to work out a debt restructuring with its bondholders. Second, it recommended that bonds issued in international markets contain clauses that would facilitate debt restructuring if it became necessary. Clauses could be added to provide for debtholder representation in negotiations with the sovereign or qualified majority voting on changes in terms. Such clauses would make it harder for minority creditors to block restructuring or exact a higher price than necessary to satisfy the majority. Neither of these recommendations received much official attention until the Asian crisis hit. Although the recommendations were not actually germane to the situation in Asia, the IMF reviewed the recommendations at its Interim Committee meeting in April 1998 and action in the near future seems more likely than a year ago. Perhaps the official community will always be one crisis late. Unlike the sovereign debt crises in Latin America, the situation in Asia involved private debts (of banks in Korea, corporations in Indonesia, and some of each in Thailand) to private creditors, mostly banks. Hence, it was inherently harder, as currency values plummeted and reserves all but disappeared, to design ways either to restore stability or to organize work-outs. An additional complication was the fact that, although the debts were private, some of them involved varying types of implied government guarantees. In Korea, the Finance Minister ill-advisedly volunteered that the Korean government would honor foreign debts of Korean banks. When the Korean banks experienced difficulty rolling over their international bank loans, the Bank of Korea provided the reserves they needed to repay the loans, in effect delivering on the guarantee, but rapidly depleting the central bank's reserves in the process. Guarantees of this sort clearly create moral hazard. Pre-crisis, they result in more bank lending than would otherwise have taken place, and when trouble begins they may accelerate a bank run. But much less explicit guarantees can be trouble as well. Where governments are heavily intertwined with banks and companies, as has been normal throughout much of Asia, foreign lenders and investors may well assume that the government will not allow favored operations to fail. One of the challenges of mitigating and managing future crises, therefore, is finding ways to discourage emerging market governments from guaranteeing private debts or being so closely involved with private enterprises that these enterprises are seen as immune from market forces. The expectation that future borrowers in international markets will be mostly private enterprises, greatly increases the importance of the first two prescriptions -- increasing transparency and strengthening financial system surveillance -- not just to prevent and mitigate crises, but to manage them when they happen. In an economy that tolerates secrecy in business and financial dealings and where information disclosures are limited, firms with fairly shaky fundamentals may be able to borrow easily in a boom. They will be carried along by the general optimism, since everyone wants to believe the best and there is no tradition of asking hard questions anyway. But in a crisis, market participants tend to believe the worst. To contain the crisis and restore confidence, it is necessary both for managers and public authorities to be able to deliver the bad news and be believed by the markets. If there is no tradition of accurate, high quality information that can be relied on, market participants and bank depositors are likely to believe that things are substantially worse than they really are and proceed to prove it by their actions. A culture of transparency and timely, accurate information can serve as an economic stabilizer in both directions. It can restrain the boom by enabling investors to assess risk more accurately, and it can cushion over-reaction once a downward slide begins. But such a culture cannot be built quickly, and even where it exists, has to be assiduously maintained. Similarly, prudential supervision of financial institutions may be thought of as primarily valuable for crisis prevention -- useful for ensuring that financial institutions are adequately capitalized, don't take unacceptable risks with other people's money, and that the weak ones are required to shape up or go under. Once a crisis hits, however, it is important to be able to distinguish strong from weak institutions, those that ought to be rescued from those that ought to be closed. Unless supervision has been effective on an ongoing basis, however, the supervisors will not be able to tell strong from weak and will not be able to find out fast enough to prevent a rout. Good institutions then go down with the bad. It is actually in the long-run interest of financial institutions that aspire to be the survivors of a shake-out to insist that supervisors are well informed and applying a high standard. Another lesson of recent events in Asia has been the importance of clear, enforceable bankruptcy laws in dealing with a crisis, as well as helping to prevent one. Bankruptcy provides an opportunity, not only for closing down truly insolvent enterprises in an orderly way, but for rescuing troubled ones by allowing them to cut a deal with their creditors, restructure their obligations, and go on operating on a sounder basis. But bankruptcy procedures cannot be rapidly invented or first tested in a crisis. For bankruptcy procedures to mitigate crises effectively and help to get survivors on their feet, there has to be a "culture of bankruptcy" which operates in good times as well as bad. Debtors, creditors, lawyers and courts have to be used in the process, know what to do, be able, because they have done it before, to cut the deals that will minimize the damage and keep potentially profitable enterprises afloat. Asian countries, most obviously Indonesia, found that since their modern market experience had been primarily one of boom and growth, they had inadequate bankruptcy laws and little "culture of bankruptcy" to help manage a sudden negative turn of events. Improving transparency, supervision and bankruptcy procedures will help emerging market economies grow more sustainably (albeit perhaps slower) and manage downturns better when they happen. But the conceptually hard questions involve international collective action and how it can manage major crises more effectively. Once a crisis hits one country, especially a country of significant size and linkage with others, the whole international community has a strong interest in rapid action to isolate markets and prevent the contagion from spreading and engulfing others. At this moment, the community looks to the IMF to act quickly, provide liquidity and restore confidence, especially the confidence that the crises has bottomed out and will not be part of a continuing downward spiral. Asia in 1997 was a demonstration of how fast the dominoes could fall. When the root cause of the problem is inappropriate macro-economic policy, especially big budget deficits and easy money combined with a pegged exchange rate, it may not be difficult for the IMF to restore confidence by injecting enough liquidity to pay short-term claims in foreign currency in return for rapid changes in policy. When macro policy is not obviously the chief culprit, restoring confidence may be harder and more expensive. Injecting new money in exchange for reforms may still be the primary answer, but the patience of taxpayers wears thin as amounts escalate and it is perceived that some classes of creditors are being bailed out with official international resources -- creditors who should have calculated the risks more accurately and should bear the cost of not having done so, so they won't do it again. Some have asked whether official resources could be saved and moral hazard reduced by designing an automatic international bankruptcy-like process, known in advance, by which a standstill could be triggered, followed by a set procedure for sharing the burden among all the relevant creditors. Serious thought is being devoted to this issue. It is not hard to imagine such an approach, but all crises are different and applying a cooky cutter solution could well do more harm than good. The next few years will be a testing time for what I think of as the "cross border community," meaning the organizations, public and private, dedicated to making the cross border relationships (especially business and financial ones) work better. The "cross border community" includes mega firms that produce goods and deliver financial services on a worldwide scale, and associations of accountants, lawyers, bankers, securities dealers, insurance underwriters and various kinds of financial regulators as well as general international financial institutions (the IMF and the World Bank) and more specialized ones such as the Bank for International Settlements, and the regional development banks -- to mention only a few of the more obvious members of a burgeoning species. The benefits of cross border trade and capital flows for raising the world standard of living are clear, but so are some of the costs -- especially the costs to ordinary people of being caught in the backwash when there is a crisis. If these costs are not taken seriously and methods designed to mitigate and manage financial crises better, a wave of political backlash against capitalism, foreigners and what we all think is "progress" could result. One lesson of recent crises is that factories, banks, shiny buildings, and eager investors do not by themselves create the underpinnings of modern economic society able to withstand shocks with minimal damage. That takes -- in addition to good fiscal, monetary and other public policies -- an infrastructure of laws and traditions and expectations that cannot be built overnight or imposed from the outside. The challenge for the cross-border community will be to work closely with emerging market economies to help them build this infrastructure in ways that work for them. Wading in and saying, "do it our way" won't work. The process will involve continuous interaction and adaptation and may well result in better functioning economies in the so-called developed world, as well. Footnotes Tesebonos were technically denominated in pesos.
The Federal Reserve Board today published a revised list of over-the-counter (OTC) market stocks that meet the margin criteria in Regulation T (OTC List). Also published today is a revised list of foreign equity securities that meet the margin criteria in Regulation T (Foreign List). The Lists are effective May 11, 1998, and supersede the previous Lists published effective February 9, 1998. The changes that have been made to the revised OTC List, which now contains 4,852 OTC stocks, are as follows: 160 stocks have been included for the first time, 120 under National Market System (NMS) designation; 53 stocks previously on the List have been removed for substantially failing to meet the requirements for continued listing; 105 stocks have been removed for reasons such as listing on a national securities exchange or involvement in an acquisition. Lenders subject to Regulation T and borrowers subject to Regulation X who are required under Section 224.3(a) to conform credit they obtain to Regulation T must use the OTC List until publication of the next OTC List, anticipated for August 1998. An amendment to Regulation T that will make all stocks trading in the Nasdaq Stock Market marginable at brokers and dealers will be effective January 1, 1999. The Board will cease publication of the OTC List at that time. The Foreign List is composed of foreign equity securities that are eligible for margin treatment at broker-dealers. Effective July 1, 1996, foreign stocks that have a "ready market" for purposes of the Securities Exchange Commission's (SEC) net capital rule may be included on the Foreign List. The SEC effectively treats all stocks included on the Financial Times/Standard & Poor's Actuaries World Indices (FT/S&P-AW Indices) as having a "ready market" for capital purposes. The Board is adding 73 foreign stocks and deleting 61, based on changes to the FT/S&P-AW Indices. The revised Foreign List now contains 1,942 securities displayed in country order. It is unlawful for any person to cause any representation to be made that inclusion of a stock on the OTC List or the Foreign List indicates that the Board or the Securities and Exchange Commission has in any way passed upon the merits of any such stock or transaction therein. Any references to the Board in connection with these Lists or any stocks thereon in any advertisement or similar communications is unlawful.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today its approval of the application of PAB Bankshares, Inc., Valdosta, Georgia, to merge with Investors Financial Corporation, and thereby acquire Bainbridge National Bank, both in Bainbridge, Georgia. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. PAB Bankshares, Inc. Valdosta, Georgia Order Approving Merger of Bank Holding Companies PAB Bankshares, Inc. ("PAB"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 3 of the BHC Act to merge with Investors Financial Corporation ("Investors"), and thereby acquire Bainbridge National Bank, both in Bainbridge, Georgia. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (63 Federal Register 11,446 (1998)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the proposal and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 3 of the BHC Act. PAB owns three depository institutions in Georgia and is the 28th largest depository institution in the state, controlling approximately $247.3 million in deposits, representing less than 1 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in Georgia. Investors is the 130th largest depository institution in Georgia, controlling approximately $64.3 million in deposits, representing less than 1 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in the state. On consummation of the proposal, PAB would become the 20th largest depository institution, controlling deposits of $311.6 million, representing less than 1 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in Georgia. Competitive Considerations The BHC Act prohibits the Board from approving a proposal if it would result in a monopoly or if the effect of the proposal may be substantially to lessen competition in any relevant market, unless the Board finds that the anticompetitive effects of the proposed transaction are clearly outweighed in the public interest by the probable effect of the transaction in meeting the convenience and needs of the community to be served. PAB and Investors compete in the Bainbridge banking market, which is defined by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta ("Reserve Bank") as an area approximated by Decatur and Seminole Counties in Georgia. PAB contends that the area delineated by the Reserve Bank should be expanded to include adjacent areas that encompass Tallahassee, Florida ("Tallahassee"); Dothan, Alabama ("Dothan"); and Albany and Cairo, Georgia. The Board concludes, however, that the appropriate market for analyzing the competitive effects of the proposal is the Bainbridge banking market as previously defined. The Board bases its conclusion on an analysis of employment opportunities, commuting data, shopping patterns, check clearing and deposit data, interviews with local bankers, and other facts of record indicating that there is substantial commuting, travel, and commercial interaction between Decatur and Seminole Counties. Decatur County has a significantly larger population than Seminole County, and some of the area's largest employers are in Bainbridge, which is in Decatur County. Commuting data from the Census Bureau for 1990 show that more than 20 percent of Seminole County residents commute to Decatur County for employment. Decatur County also offers area residents the opportunity to purchase products and services at six shopping centers, several major department stores, and a number of restaurants. Data from the Georgia Highway Department for 1996 show that approximately 22 percent of Seminole County's residents travel daily to Decatur County. Residents of Decatur and Seminole Counties also have access to the same newspapers and radio stations. Check clearing data for a two-day period from the subsidiary banks of PAB and Investors in Decatur County also show that approximately 10 percent of the checks processed were drawn on banks in Seminole County. In addition, deposit data from PAB's subsidiary bank in Decatur County show that the bank has a deposit relationship with approximately 8 percent of the households in Seminole County. Interviews with senior managers of banks in Decatur County and in Seminole County, moreover, indicated that the banks in each county substantially compete for customers in the other county and that the banks have significant customer bases in the other county. The facts of record, however, do not support expanding the banking market as suggested by PAB. Bainbridge is approximately 42 miles northwest of Tallahassee; 52 miles southeast of Dothan; and 57 miles southwest of Albany. Commuting data indicate that approximately 4 percent of the employees in the Bainbridge area commute to jobs in the Tallahassee Metropolitan Statistical Area ("MSA"), and data from the Georgia Highway Department indicate that less than 3.5 percent of residents in the Bainbridge area travel daily to Tallahassee. Neither the Tallahassee MSA nor the Tallahassee Ranally Metropolitan Area ("RMA") include either Decatur or Seminole Counties, confirming that there is insufficient economic integration to warrant considering these counties to be within the same banking market as Tallahassee. Commuting data also indicate that a de minimis percentage of Bainbridge area residents commute to the Dothan MSA, the Albany MSA, or Cairo, Georgia, and there are no other indications of economic integration to support including these areas within the Bainbridge banking market. In light of these, and all facts of record, the Board concludes that the Bainbridge banking market reflects commercial and banking realities and represents an area where local customers can practicably turn for alternatives. Accordingly, the relevant banking market for considering the competitive effects of the proposal is the Bainbridge banking market as defined above. Consummation of the proposal would exceed the Department of Justice Merger Guidelines ("DOJ Guidelines") in the Bainbridge banking market. In the Bainbridge banking market, PAB is the third largest depository institution, controlling $52.9 million in deposits, representing 15.1 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in the market ("market deposits"). Investors is the largest depository institution in the market, controlling $64.3 million in deposits, representing 18.4 percent of market deposits. On consummation of the proposal, PAB would become the largest depository institution in the market, controlling $117.2 million in deposits, representing 33.6 percent of market deposits. The HHI would increase by 557 points to 2036. The Bainbridge banking market presents unique considerations in analyzing the competitive effects of the proposal. Although it is a small rural banking market with total market deposits of approximately $350 million, seven competitors would remain in the market after consummation of the proposal. Five competitors each would control significant shares of market deposits after consummation of the proposal that range from approximately 10 percent to approximately 18 percent of market deposits. Given the size of the market, the number of competitors and the relative size of the remaining competitors are significant and unique factors that substantially mitigate the potential competitive effects of the transaction. The Bainbridge banking market also has some characteristics that make it attractive for entry. Data for 1997 show that deposits per office in the Bainbridge banking market are greater than the averages for other non-MSA counties in Georgia. In the Bainbridge banking market, total banking deposits have increased by 39.6 percent between 1993 and 1997, compared to 20.9 percent in other non-MSA counties in Georgia. Since 1995, three bank holding companies, including PAB, have entered the banking market by acquiring banks that only operated in the Bainbridge banking market. The Board concludes that the potential adverse competitive effects of the proposal would be substantially mitigated by these considerations. The Justice Department reviewed the proposal and advised the Board that consummation of the proposal would not likely have any significantly adverse competitive effects in the Bainbridge banking market or any other relevant banking market. Based on all the facts of record, and for the reasons discussed above, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposal is not likely to result in any significantly adverse effects on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in the Bainbridge banking market or any other relevant banking market. Other Considerations The BHC Act requires the Board, in acting on an application, to consider the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the companies and banks involved, the convenience and needs of the communities to be served, and certain supervisory factors. The Board has reviewed these factors in light of the record, including supervisory reports of examination assessing the financial and managerial resources of the organizations. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that the financial and managerial resources and the future prospects of PAB, Investors, and their respective subsidiary banks are consistent with approval, as are the other supervisory factors the Board must consider under section 3 of the BHC Act. In addition, considerations related to the convenience and needs of the communities to be served, including the records of performance of the institutions under the Community Reinvestment Act, are consistent with approval of the proposal. Conclusion Based on the foregoing, and in light of all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the application should be, and hereby is, approved. The Board's approval is specifically conditioned on compliance by PAB with all the commitments made in connection with the application. For the purposes of this action, the commitments and conditions relied on by the Board in reaching its decision are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The acquisition of the banks shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day following the effective date of this order, or later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Reserve Bank, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective April 27, 1998. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Deputy Secretary of the Board Footnotes State deposit data are as of June 30, 1997. In this context, depository institutions include commercial banks, savings banks, and savings associations. 12 U.S.C. § 1842(c)(1)(B). Decatur and Seminole Counties are adjacent rural counties in the southwestern corner of Georgia. Both counties border Florida, and Seminole County also borders Alabama. The Board and the courts have found that the relevant banking market for analyzing the competitive effects of a proposal must reflect commercial and banking realities and should consist of the local area where local customers can practicably turn for alternatives. See St. Joseph Valley Bank, 68 Federal Reserve Bulletin 673, 674 (1982). See also United States v. Philadelphia Nat'l Bank, 374 U.S. 321, 374 (1963); United States v. Phillipsburg Nat'l Bank, 399 U.S. 350 (1969). Data from the United States Census Bureau for 1990 show that Decatur County has a population of approximately 26,500 and Seminole County has a population of approximately 9,250. Bainbridge has a population of 11,231 and is the largest town in the two counties. Employers in Bainbridge include one manufacturer that employs more than 1000 workers and four organizations that each employ 400 workers. A free weekly newspaper published in Bainbridge circulates to a significant percentage of households in Seminole County. In addition, two radio stations in Decatur County broadcast to surrounding areas, including Seminole County. Decatur and Seminole Counties also are in the same local telephone calling area. An MSA designation is made by the Office of Management and Budget on the basis of an area's population and includes surrounding counties with strong economic and social ties to a central county. An RMA is a privately defined compact geographic area with relatively high population density that is linked by commuting, retail, and wholesale trade patterns. The MSA designations for Albany and Dothan do not include Decatur or Seminole Counties. The RMA designations that include these cities also do not include Decatur or Seminole Counties. Under the revised DOJ Guidelines, 49 Federal Register 26,823 (June 29, 1984), a market in which the post-merger Herfindahl-Hirschman Index ("HHI") exceeds 1800 is considered highly concentrated. The Department of Justice has informed the Board that a bank merger or acquisition generally will not be challenged (in the absence of other factors indicating anticompetitive effects) unless the post-merger HHI is at least 1800 and the merger increases the HHI by more than 200 points. The Department of Justice has stated that the higher than normal HHI thresholds for screening bank mergers for anticompetitive effects implicitly recognize the competitive effect of limited-purpose lenders and other non-depository financial entities. Market share data used to analyze the competitive effects of the proposal are as of June 30, 1997. These data are based on calculations in which the deposits of thrift institutions are included at 50 percent. The Board previously has indicated that thrift institutions have become, or have the potential to become, significant competitors of commercial banks. See Midwest Financial Group, 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 386 (1989); National City Corporation, 70 Federal Reserve Bulletin 743 (1984). Thus, the Board has regularly included thrift deposits in the calculation of market share on a 50-percent weighted basis. See, e.g., First Hawaiian, Inc., 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 52 (1991). Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Phillips, Meyer, Ferguson, and Gramlich.
Testimony of Governor Edward W. Kelley, Jr. The Federal Reserve's efforts to address the Year 2000 computer problem Before the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation, U.S. Senate April 28, 1998 I am pleased to appear before the Committee today to discuss the Year 2000 computer systems issue and the Federal Reserve's efforts to address it. The stakes are enormous, nothing less than the preservation of a safe and sound financial system that can continue to operate in an orderly manner when the clock rolls over at midnight on New Year's Eve and the millennium arrives. So much has been written about the difficulties ascribed to the Year 2000 challenge that by now almost everyone is familiar with the basic issue -- specifically, that information generated by computers may be inaccurate or that programs may be terminated because they cannot process Year 2000 dates. The Federal Reserve System has developed and is executing a comprehensive plan to ensure its own Year 2000 readiness, and the bank supervision function is well along in a cooperative, interagency effort, to promote timely remediation and testing by the banking industry. This morning I shall first focus on the potential macroeconomic consequences of the Year 2000 issue. Then I shall discuss actions being taken by the Federal Reserve System to address its internal systems, including Reserve Bank testing with depository institutions, and its bank supervision efforts. The Macroeconomic Effects of the Millennium Bug The Year 2000 ("Y2K") problem will touch much more than just our financial system and could temporarily have adverse effects on the performance of the overall U.S. economy as well as the economies of many, or all, other nations if it is not corrected. The spectrum of possible outcomes is broad, for the truth of the matter is that this episode is unique. We have no previous experiences to give us adequate guideposts. A few economists already are suggesting that Y2K-related disruptions will induce a deep recession in the year 2000. That is probably a stretch, but I do not think that we shall escape unaffected. Some of the more frightening scenarios are not without a certain plausibility, if this challenge were being ignored. But it is not being ignored. While it is probable that preparations may in some instances prove to be inadequate or ineffective, an enormous amount of work is being done in anticipation of the rollover of the millennium. It is impossible today to forecast the impact of this event, and the range of possibilities runs from minimal to extremely serious. In that spirit, let me review with you some of the ways in which the millennium bug already is influencing the U.S. economy and discuss some of the possible outcomes for economic activity early in the next century. Corporate business is spending vast amounts of money to tackle the Y2K problem. To try to get a handle on the magnitude of these Y2K expenditures, we have reviewed the most recent 10-K reports filed with the SEC by approximately 95 percent of the firms in the Fortune 500. These are the largest businesses in our economy, with revenues of around $5-1/2 trillion annually, and are likely to be on the cutting edge of efforts to deal with the millennium bug. Before the end of the decade, these firms report that they expect to spend about $11 billion in dealing with the Y2K problem. (Of this total, financial corporations are planning expenditures of $3-1/2 billion, while companies in the nonfinancial sector have budgeted funds of around $7-1/2 billion.) These estimates undoubtably understate the magnitude of the Y2K reprogramming efforts. In culling through the 10-K reports, we found that many companies reported incurring no additional costs associated with Y2K remediation efforts. I doubt such firms are unaware of the problem. Rather, I suspect that some firms did not view their Y2K spending as having a "material" effect on their bottom line, and some companies probably have funded Y2K programs with monies already budgeted to their information technology functions. Making an allowance for all costs--whether explicitly stated or not--and recognizing that these Fortune 500 firms are only part of the picture, an educated guess of the sunk cost of Y2K remedial efforts in the U.S. private sector might be roughly $50 billion. To put this number into perspective, the Gartner Group has estimated that Y2K remediation efforts will total $300 to $600 billion on a worldwide basis. The U.S. economy accounts for about one-fifth of world output, and thus our estimate seems broadly consistent with the lower end of their range. Given the experience of our own Y2K efforts to date, I would expect to see costs rise further once all these Y2K programs are fully under way--ultimately pushing costs up within the Gartner Group range. Corporate efforts to deal with the Y2K problem are affecting economic activity in a variety of ways. On the positive side, an important element in some Y2K programs is the replacement of aging computer systems with modern, state-of-the-art hardware and software. Such capital expenditures--which I should note are not included in the $50 billion cost estimate--will raise the level of productivity in those enterprises, and, in general, the need to address the Y2K problem has increased the awareness on the part of senior executives of the complexity and importance of managing corporate information technology resources. The increased replacement demand also has contributed to the spectacular growth recently in this country's computer hardware and software industries--a process that I would expect to continue for a while longer. But, ultimately, we are largely shifting the timing of these investment expenditures: Today's added growth is likely "borrowed" from spending at some time in the future. And, if analyzing the dynamics of this situation were not already complicated enough, some firms may "freeze" their systems in the middle of 1999--effectively forgoing the installation of new hardware and software systems just before the millennium. This, too, could influence spending on computer equipment--shifting some of it from 1999 into 2000. While Year 2000 remediation efforts may give a temporary boost to economic activity in some sectors, the net effect probably is negative. I suspect the majority of Y2K expenditures should be viewed as increased outlays for maintenance of existing systems, which are additional costs on businesses. Other than the very valuable ability to maintain its operations into the year 2000, few quantifiable benefits accrue to the firm---and overall productivity gains are reduced by the extra hours devoted to reprogramming and testing. Conservative estimates suggest that the net effect of Y2K remediation efforts might shave a tenth or two a year off the growth of our nation's overall labor productivity, and a more substantial effect is possible if some of the larger estimates of Y2K costs are used in these calculations. The effects on real gross domestic product are likely to be somewhat smaller than this but could still total a tenth of a percentage point or so a year over the next two years. The United States is not alone in working to deal with the millennium bug. Efforts by our major trading partners also are under way, although in many cases they probably are not yet at so advanced a stage as in this country. In Europe, the need to reprogram computer systems to handle the conversion to the Euro seems to have taken precedence over Y2K efforts, although there may be efficiencies in dealing with the two problems at once. The financial difficulties of Japan and other Asian economies certainly have diverted attention and resources in those countries from the Y2K problem, increasing the risk of a Y2K shock from one or more of these countries. But, on the positive side, large multinational corporations are acutely aware of the Y2K problem, and their remediation efforts are independent of national boundaries. There also are anecdotal reports that many of these companies are extending their influence by demanding that their extensive networks of smaller suppliers prepare themselves as a condition of maintaining their business relationship. Obviously, a great deal of work either is planned or is under way to deal with the Year 2000 problem. But what if something slips through the cracks, and we experience the failure of some "mission critical" systems? How will a computer failure in one industry affect the ability of other industries to continue to operate smoothly? The number of possible scenarios of this type is endless, and today no one can say with any confidence how severe any Y2K disruptions could be or how a failure in one sector would influence activity in others. We have many examples of how economic activity was affected by disruptions to the physical infrastructure of this country. Although the Y2K problem clearly is unique, some of these disruptions to our physical infrastructure may be useful in organizing our thinking about the consequences of short-lived interruptions in our information infrastructure. In early 1996, a major winter storm paralyzed large portions of the country. Commerce ground to a halt for up to a week in some areas but activity bounced back rapidly once the roads were cleared again. Although individual firms and households were adversely affected by these disruptions, in the aggregate, the economy quickly recovered most of the output lost due to the storm. In this instance, the shock to our physical infrastructure was transitory in nature, and, critically, the recovery process was under way before any adverse "feedback" effects were produced. Last summer's strike by workers at the United Parcel Service is a second example. UPS is a major player in the package delivery industry in this country, and the strike disrupted the shipping patterns of many businesses. Some sales were lost, but in many instances alternative shipping services were found for high-priority packages. Some businesses were hurt by the strike, but its effect on economic activity was small in the aggregate. Hopefully, any Y2K shock to our information infrastructure would also be transitory and would share the characteristics of these shocks to our physical infrastructure. What can monetary policy do to offset any macroeconomic effects? The truthful answer is "not much." Just as we were not able to plow the streets in 1996 or deliver packages in 1997, the central bank will be unable to reprogram the nation's computers for the year 2000. The Y2K problem is primarily an issue affecting the aggregate "supply" side of the economy, whereas the Federal Reserve's monetary policy works mainly on aggregate "demand." We all understand how creating more money and lowering the level of short-term interest rates gives a boost to interest-sensitive sectors (such as homebuilding), but these tools are unlikely to be very effective in generating more Y2K remediation efforts or accelerating the recovery process if a company experiences some type of Year 2000 disruption. We will, of course, be ready if people want to hold more cash on New Year's Eve 1999, and we will be prepared to lend to financial institutions through the discount window under appropriate circumstances or to provide needed reserves to the banking system. But there is nothing monetary policy can do to offset the direct effects of a severe Y2K disruption. As a result, our Year 2000 focus has been in areas where we can make a difference: conforming our own systems, overseeing the preparations of the banking industry, preparing the payments system, and contingency planning. Additionally, we are doing all we can to increase awareness of this problem and to energize preparations both here at home and in other parts of the world. Background on Federal Reserve Year 2000 Preparations The Federal Reserve operates several payments applications that process and settle payments and securities transactions between depository institutions in the United States. These systems are critical national utility services, moving funds much as the national power grid moves electricity. Fedwire is a large-value payments mechanism for U.S. dollar interbank funds transfers and U.S. government securities transfers primarily used by depository institutions and government agencies. These applications, as well as the supporting accounting systems and other payment applications such as the Automated Clearing House (ACH), run on mainframe computer systems operated by Federal Reserve Automation Services (FRAS), the internal organizational unit that processes applications on behalf of the Federal Reserve Banks and operates the Federal Reserve's national communications network. The Reserve Banks also operate check processing systems that provide check services to depository institutions and the U.S. government. In addition to centralized applications on the mainframe, the Reserve Banks operate a range of applications in a distributed computing environment, supporting business functions such as currency distribution, banking supervision and regulation, research, public information, and human resources. The scope of the Federal Reserve's Year 2000 activities includes remediation of all of these processing environments and the supporting telecommunications network, called FEDNET. Our Year 2000 preparations also address our computerized environmental and facilities management systems, such as power, heating and cooling, voice communications, elevators, and vaults. Year 2000 Readiness of Internal Systems The Federal Reserve is giving the Year 2000 its highest priority, consistent with our goal of maintaining the stability of the nation's financial markets and payments systems, preserving public confidence, and supporting reliable government operations. The Federal Reserve completed assessment of its applications in 1997; our most significant applications have been renovated; and internal testing is underway using dedicated Y2K computer systems and date-simulation tools. Changes to mission critical computer programs, as well as system and user-acceptance testing, are on schedule to be completed by year-end 1998. Further, systems supporting the delivery of critical financial services that interface with the depository institutions will be Year 2000 ready by this July and a depository institution test program will be in place at that time. This schedule will permit approximately 18 months for customer testing, to which we are dedicating considerable support resources. Our Y2K project is being closely coordinated among the Reserve Banks, the Board of Governors, numerous vendors and service providers, approximately 13,000 customers, and government agencies. We are stressing effective, consistent, and timely communication, both internal and external, to promote awareness and commitment at all levels of our own organization and the financial services industry, more generally. A significant challenge in meeting our Y2K readiness objectives is our reliance on commercial hardware and software products and services. Much of our information processing and communications infrastructure, as well as our administrative functions and other operations, is composed of hardware and software products from third-party vendors. As a result, we must coordinate with numerous vendors and manufacturers to ensure that all of our hardware, software, and services are Year 2000 ready. In many cases, compliance requires upgrading, or, in some cases, replacing, equipment and software. We have a complete inventory of vendor components used in our mainframe, telecommunications, and distributed computing environments, and vendor coordination and system change are progressing well. We are particularly sensitive to telecommunications, an essential infrastructure element in our ability to maintain a satisfactorily high level of financial and business services. We have been working with our financial institutions and our telecommunications servicers to find ways to facilitate preparations and testing programs that will ensure Y2K readiness. Nonetheless, this is an area that many financial institutions regard as needing attention. We strongly support the FCC's program to draw increased attention to the Y2K issue and the progress of the telecommunications companies in the United States. Oversight of Banking Industry Preparations Ultimately, the boards of directors and senior management of banks and other financial institutions must shoulder the responsibility for ensuring that the institutions they manage are able to provide high quality and continuous services beginning on the first business day in January of the Year 2000 and beyond. This critical obligation must be among the very highest of priorities for bank management and boards of directors. Nevertheless, bank supervisors can provide guidance, encouragement, and strong incentives to the banking industry to address this challenge. Accordingly, the Federal Reserve and the other banking supervisors that make up the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council, the FFIEC, have been working closely to orchestrate a uniform supervisory approach to supervising the banking industry's efforts to ensure its readiness. Detailed information about our supervisory program is attached as an Addendum to this testimony and is readily available on a web site maintained by the Federal Reserve on behalf of these agencies. Preparing the Payments Systems In order to ensure the readiness of the payments system, the Federal Reserve has prepared a special central environment for the testing of high-risk dates, such as the rollover to the Year 2000 and leap year. Testing will be conducted through a combination of future-dating our computer systems to verify the readiness of our infrastructure, and testing critical future dates within interfaces to other institutions. Internal testing is expected to be completed by July, and external testing with customers and other counterparties will then commence and continue throughout 1999. Network communications components are also being tested and certified in a special test lab environment. We have published a detailed schedule of testing opportunities for Fedwire, ACH transactions and other services provided by the Federal Reserve. Our test environments have been configured to provide flexible and nearly continuous access by customers. The Reserve Banks are implementing processes to identify which depositories have tested with us, so that we may follow up on any laggards. We are also researching, in conjunction with our counterparties, the benefits of Y2K testing that would span the entire business process. As part of this effort, the Federal Reserve is coordinating with the Clearing House for Interbank Payment Systems (CHIPS) and the Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication (SWIFT) to provide a common test day for customers of all three systems on September 26, 1998. The New York Clearing House is coordinating an effort to establish common global test dates among major funds transfer systems during April and May 1999. We are also coordinating with the international community of financial regulators to help mobilize global preparations more generally. These efforts are discussed more fully in the Addendum. In particular, through the auspices of the Bank for International Settlements, international regulators for banking, securities, and insurance along with global payments specialists recently jointly hosted a Year 2000 Round Table, which was attended by over 50 countries. A Joint Council was formed that will promote readiness and serve as a global clearing house on Year 2000 issues. In the final analysis, however, the regulatory community recognizes that it cannot solve the problem for the financial industry. Every financial institution must complete its own program and thoroughly test its applications with counterparties and customers if problems are to be avoided. Contingency Planning Despite our intensive efforts to prepare our computer systems, we must also make plans for dealing with problems that might occur at the Year 2000 rollover. As you know, the Federal Reserve has been involved in contingency planning and has dealt with various types of emergencies for many years. In response to past disasters we worked closely with the affected financial institutions to ensure that adequate supplies of cash were available to the community, and that backup systems supported our operations without interruption during the crisis period. These efforts primarily focused on the orderly resumption of business operations resulting from hardware failures or processing-site problems. In addition to disruptions to hardware or processing sites, Y2K contingency planning must be directed at potential software failures and interdependency problems with financial and non-financial counterparties. Within this context, business resumption is made more difficult because we cannot fall back to an earlier version of a software package as this version itself may not have been readied for the Year 2000. Y2K disruptions to utility services or depository institutions can also directly affect the Federal Reserve's ability to conduct business. So, in order to plan for the continuity of services, it may be necessary to consider available alternate ways to provide services if a Year 2000 problem is identified. The Federal Reserve has formed a task force to address the contingency readiness of our payments applications. Although we have no grounds for anticipating that specific failures could occur and we cannot act as an operational backstop for the nation's financial industry, we view it as our responsibility to take action to ensure that we are as well positioned as possible to address major failures should they occur. We are currently focusing on contingency planning for external Y2K-related disruptions, such as those affecting utility companies, telecommunications providers, large banks, and difficulties abroad that affect U.S. markets or institutions. The Federal Reserve has established higher standards for testing institutions that serve as the backbone for the transactions that support domestic and international financial markets and whose failure could pose a systemic risk to the payments system. We recognize that, despite their best efforts, some depository institutions may experience operating difficulties, either as a result of their own computer problems or those of their customers, counterparties, or others. These problems could be manifested in a number of ways and could involve temporary funding difficulties. The Federal Reserve plans to be prepared to provide information to depository institutions on the balances in their accounts with us throughout the day, so that they can identify shortfalls and seek funding in the market. The System will also be prepared to lend in appropriate circumstances and with adequate collateral to depository institutions when market sources of funding are not reasonably available. Our preparations for possible liquidity difficulties extend as well to the foreign bank branches and agencies in the U.S. that may be adversely affected directly by their own computer systems or through difficulties caused by the linkage and dependence on their parent bank. Such circumstances would necessitate coordination with the home country supervisor. Moreover, consistent with current policy, foreign central banks will be expected to provide liquidity support to any of their banking organizations that experience a funding shortfall. Closing Remarks To sum up, the macroeconomic effects of Year 2000 preparations are quite complex. As I have discussed, some industries may benefit in the near term from increased sales associated with the accelerated pace of replacement of obsolete computer systems, and their customers presumably will have more productive systems in place sooner than might otherwise have been the case. But, in the aggregate, preparing for the Y2K problem is likely exerting a slight drag on the U.S. economy. The Y2K problem, in effect, raises the rate of depreciation of the nation's stock of plant and equipment. It forces businesses to devote additional programming resources simply to maintain the existing flow of services from its computers. As a provider of financial services to the economy, we are on schedule with our own internal remediation efforts and will shortly begin testing our interfaces with financial institutions. While we have made significant progress in our Year 2000 preparations, our challenge now is to ensure that our efforts remain on schedule and that problems are addressed in a timely fashion. In particular, we shall be paying special attention to the testing needs of depository institutions and the financial industry and are prepared to adjust our support for them as required by experience. As a bank supervisor, the Federal Reserve will continue to address the financial services industry's preparedness, monitor progress, and target for special supervisory attention those institutions that are most in need of assistance. In addition, we shall track the Y2K progress of external vendors and critical infrastructure suppliers, such as telecommunications and electrical power utilities. The problems presented to the world by the potential for computer failures as the millennium arrives are real and serious. Because these problems are unique to our experience in many ways, and because the impact of computer-driven systems has become so ubiquitous, the event is unlikely to be trouble free. While we can't predict with any certainty, there clearly is the potential for problems to develop, but these need not be traumatic if we all do our part in preparation. As the world's largest economy, the heaviest burden of preparation falls on the U.S. But it is truly a worldwide issue and, to the extent that some are not adequately prepared and experience breakdowns of unforeseeable dimension, we shall all be affected accordingly. There is much work to be done. We intend to do our utmost, and hope and trust that others will do likewise. In this spirit, Mr. Chairman, I want to commend the Committee for inviting this panel to testify together on Y2K issues. This is the first time that the Board has testified next to representatives of the Departments of Commerce and Transportation, and the FCC. This is wholly appropriate because our success in preparing for the millennium will ultimately depend very much on one another's efforts. Addendum Supervisory Elements of the Federal Reserve's Year 2000 Preparations Interagency Statements and Other Guidance The Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC)--composed of the Federal Reserve, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Office of Thrift Supervision, and the National Credit Union Administration--has issued a series of six advisory statements since June 1996, including statements on the Year 2000 effect on computers, project management, business risk, readiness of service providers, guidance to address customer risk, and testing for readiness. An advisory on contingency planning is being prepared. As a result of these advisory statements, the industry's awareness and the extent of its remediation efforts have significantly increased over the past two years. The FFIEC is considering additional guidance to financial institutions on the development of customer awareness programs and the need to communicate with and address questions of retail customers regarding Year 2000 issues. Supervisory Reviews In May 1997, the banking agencies committed to conduct a supervisory review by June 30, 1998, of all insured depositories to assess the state of their Y2K readiness. Subsequent reviews and examinations will continue throughout 1999. Through March 31, 1998, the Federal Reserve has conducted reviews of approximately 1,100 organizations. The Federal Reserve and the other agencies appear to be on schedule to meet their stated goal. These reviews have resulted in a significant focus of attention on the subject matter within the industry and the agencies as well. Deficient organizations are subject to increased monitoring and supervisory follow-up including more frequent reviews. Restrictions on expansionary activities by organizations that are deficient in their Year 2000 preparations have also been put into place. Assessment of Supervision Review Results The Federal Reserve has been conducting Year 2000 supervisory reviews of financial organizations subject to our supervisory authority, coordinating closely with state banking departments and other federal banking agencies that may share responsibility for the banking organizations. Based on these reviews, we conclude that management awareness of, and attention to, the Year 2000 problem has improved notably since the Federal Reserve and the other banking agencies escalated efforts in early 1997 to focus the industry's attention on ensuring Y2K readiness. Banking organizations are making substantial progress in renovating their systems and, with some exceptions, are on track to meet FFIEC guidelines. Most large organizations are actively engaged in the renovation and testing of their mission critical systems. Smaller organizations are working closely with their service providers in an effort to confirm the readiness and reliability of the services and products on which they depend. Similarly, many of the U.S. offices of foreign banks are heavily dependent on their parent bank for their Year 2000 readiness. Supervision Follow up To address deficient organizations, the Federal Reserve is issuing a confidential Deficiency Notification Letter to those rated less than satisfactory with respect to their Y2K readiness program. We call for a corrective action plan and put the organization on a 30-day reporting regimen to monitor its progress. Given our concern that the organization needs to use its resources to address its deficiencies, rather than expanding, the Federal Reserve also asks the organization for advance notification before entering into any contractual commitments or making public announcements pertaining to prospective acquisitions that require Federal Reserve approval. The agency can then determine the possible effects of the expansionary proposal on the organization's deficient Y2K readiness efforts, and possibly discourage or deny expansion if financial and managerial factors are inconsistent with approval of the application. Outreach Initiatives The Federal Reserve is actively participating in numerous outreach initiatives with the banking industry, trade associations, regulatory authorities and other groups that are hosting conferences, seminars and training opportunities that focus on the Year 2000 and help participants understand better the issues that need to be addressed. Throughout the country, the federal banking agencies have been working with state banking departments and local bankers associations in order to develop coordinated and comprehensive efforts to improve the local and regional programs intended to focus attention on the Year 2000. These efforts will continue consistent with the requirements contained in the Examination Parity and Year 2000 Readiness for Financial Institutions Act (Public Law 105-164), enacted March 20, 1998, which call, in part, for the banking agencies to conduct seminars for depository institutions on the implications of the Y2K problem on their ability to conduct safe and sound operations. International Scope The Federal Reserve has worked actively within the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) to ensure that financial regulators around the world are aware of the dangers posed by the Year 2000 and are working to see that the markets and institutions they oversee are ready for the century date change. Last September, the G-10 Governors issued a Year 2000 advisory that included a paper prepared by the Basle Committee on Banking Supervision (Basle Supervisors) describing the serious nature of the problem, identifying the issues that must be addressed, and outlining how programs to address the issue should be structured. The BIS Committee on Payment and Settlement Services (CPSS) has established a web site on which payment systems around the world are posting short reports describing the status of their readiness in order to promote the transparent sharing of Year 2000 information. We continue to participate in international meetings focusing on the Year 2000 issue in order to increase awareness and promote greater understanding and cooperation. Earlier this month, the BIS was the site for the Year 2000 Round Table sponsored jointly by the CPSS, Basle Supervisors, the International Organization of Securities Commissioners, and the International Association of Insurance Supervisors. This meeting, which was attended by financial supervisors and representatives from the private sector from more than 50 countries, highlighted cross-border dependencies and the need for international cooperation to ensure that the issue is managed to minimize any disruptions and possible economic ramifications. As a result of the Round Table, a Joint Year 2000 Council of financial regulators was formed with the First Vice President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York serving as the chair. The Council will serve as a contact point between the financial market regulators and market participants including private sector groups specifically focused on international issues. It will also promote readiness, identify sound practices for dealing with the issue, and serve as a global clearing house on Year 2000 issues more generally. A survey by the Basle Supervisors conducted late last year indicated that global awareness of the issue is increasing rapidly but that much work remains to be done. While most central banks and regulators express cautious optimism that their payments systems and financial institutions will generally be ready, there is increasing recognition that some problems are inevitable. To this end, increasing attention is being focused on the need to identify likely potential problems before reaching the century date change and to develop contingency plans to ensure the stability of global financial markets. The majority of foreign central banks are confident that payment and settlement applications under their management will be Y2K ready. Like the Federal Reserve, however, the operation of foreign central bank payment systems is dependent on compliant products from hardware and software suppliers and the readiness of telecommunication and electric power infrastructures. Foreign central banks consider Y2K readiness testing to be a critical and complex issue. The approach of foreign central banks toward raising banking industry awareness varies widely. We are aware that many European banks are stretched for resources as a result of the world-wide demand for information technology staff resources and their conversion to a single currency. Similarly, Asian financial institutions are focusing on their well-known problems, possibly placing full Y2K preparations in jeopardy. Communications Efforts We have been working intensively to address the issues faced by the industry and to formulate an effective communications program tailored to those issues. Our public awareness program concentrates on communications with the financial services industry related to our Y2K readiness, our testing efforts, and our overall concerns about the industry's readiness. We have inaugurated a Year 2000 industry newsletter, have published periodic bulletins addressing specific technical issues, and have established an Internet Web site that can be accessed at the following Internet address: http://www.frbsf.org/fiservices/cdc. In addition, we have published a set of guidelines for small businesses, including depository institutions, on Year 2000 issues and project management. On behalf of the FFIEC, the Federal Reserve has developed a Year 2000 information distribution system, including an Internet Web site and a toll free Fax Back service (888-882-0982). The Web site provides easy access to policy statements, guidance to examiners, and paths to other Year 2000 Web sites available from numerous other sources. It can be accessed at the following Internet address: . The Federal Reserve has also produced a ten-minute video entitled "Year 2000 Executive Awareness," intended for viewing by a bank's board of directors and senior management, that presents a summary of the Year 2000 five-phase project management plan outlined in the interagency policy statement. In introductory remarks on the video, it is stressed that senior bank officials should be directly involved in managing the Year 2000 project to ensure that it is given the appropriate level of attention and sufficient resources to address the issue on a timely basis. The video can be ordered through the Board's Web site: .
Testimony of Governor Edward M. Gramlich Improving the consumer price index Before the Subcommittee on Human Resources of the Committee on Government Reform and Oversight, U.S. House of Representatives April 29, 1998 Mr. Chairman and members of the Subcommittee, I am pleased to appear before you to discuss improving the Consumer Price Index. I begin by thanking this Subcommittee for holding today's hearing and for its past work in examining the issue of bias in the CPI. Although these issues are difficult and complex, your demonstrated interest has helped keep the focus on ways to improve the index further. The Consumer Price Index plays a central role in many aspects of private and public decision making: The CPI is the key price measure for indexation of federal spending and tax programs, and many contracts in the private sector are linked to the CPI. In addition, the CPI is used for inflation adjusting the Treasury's indexed bonds, which help to provide a reading on expectations of future inflation and on real interest rates. The CPI is also among the inflation measures examined in the conduct of monetary policy. Thus, it is essential that the nation strive for as accurate a measure as possible. In that regard, the Bureau of Labor Statistics has made laudable progress in the past several years. Sample rotation problems that were uncovered by BLS researchers have largely been eliminated. The measurement in the categories of rent, computers, pharmaceuticals, and health care services has been improved. Looking ahead, the recently announced decision to apply the geometric-mean aggregation procedure should largely rectify so-called lower-level substitution bias. The shift in emphasis from geography to product categories for sample rotation provides an opportunity for BLS to ameliorate some of the bias associated with new goods, provided that it actively rotates the sample for products undergoing rapid innovation. But while these steps are impressive, the hard work must continue if the CPI is to keep up with an ever-changing economy. The hearings that this Subcommittee held last year on the CPI provided a very clear summary of the arguments surrounding some of the difficult measurement problems confronting the BLS and the range of professional opinions concerning the quantitative significance of those problems. A useful categorization divides these issues into two parts. The first relates to the formula used by BLS for building up the overall CPI from the individual prices collected by field representatives. Although these issues are quite technical, they are fairly well understood by the BLS and by economists outside the statistical agencies. The second set of issues concerns the individual prices themselves, and in particular, how these prices are adjusted to account for quality change and the introduction of new goods. These issues are extremely difficult--both conceptually and practically--and there is much less consensus about the quantitative significance of the bias associated with new goods and quality change. Research into all of these questions has continued over the past year, but, to my knowledge, there have been few major developments that would alter significantly the opinions voiced by the witnesses at last April's hearing. Improving the CPI Rather than rehash arguments surrounding the difficult and controversial aspects of price measurement related to new goods and quality change, a more useful approach might be to seek common ground among the participants in this discussion. This means pushing forward where there is greater agreement on the set of issues related to the aggregation formulas used to build up the CPI. As some have put it, we should first go after the low-hanging fruit on our statistical trees. In that regard, a striking aspect of the hearings that the Subcommittee held last year was the virtual unanimity that a price index that tracks the cost of purchasing a fixed market basket of goods and services, such as the CPI now does, represents an upper bound on changes in the true cost of living. I doubt there exists a professor teaching microeconomics who doesn't routinely demonstrate this characteristic of fixed-weight price indexes to his or her classes. The reason is that consumers respond to changes in relative prices by altering the composition of their purchases, and this response lowers the cost to them of the price changes. Consider a couple of examples. If chicken goes on sale, some consumers would buy more chicken and less beef or pork. Also, as computer prices have fallen dramatically in recent years, consumers have increased their purchases of computers. At present, however, the market basket used in constructing the CPI changes only once every ten years. Although BLS has just updated this market basket, the current methodology for the CPI will lock this market basket in place for the next decade, implying that consumers are assumed not to do any substitution at all over this period. Under these procedures, the CPI will fail to capture the ways in which consumers adjust their spending patterns to take advantage of changes in relative prices. We should distinguish between two levels of substitution bias. In the discussion here, I am focusing on what has been termed upper-level substitution bias. Based on surveys of what consumers buy, the BLS has a list of 211 items in the typical consumers' market basket. Upper-level substitution bias arises from substitution among these items that is not captured by the CPI, such as between chicken and beef or between breakfast cereal and other breakfast items. In addition, consumers also make substitutions among different varieties of the same item in their market baskets, such as when consumers switch between different brands of breakfast cereal. By early 1999, the BLS will have largely accounted for this lower-level substitution when it implements a geometric-means formula to combine individual prices at the lowest level in the index. Although the CPI as currently constructed does not account for the upper-level substitution possibilities available to consumers, indexes that do take account of such substitutions can be calculated; economists refer to them as superlative indexes because of their desirable properties. Indeed, on an experimental basis, the BLS already produces superlative indexes, but these indexes are only available with a considerable lag. In any case, using data from recent decades, several studies have constructed indexes that take full account of consumer substitution and have used these indexes as benchmarks to compare to the actual CPI. Through such comparisons, it is possible to assess the amount of bias in the CPI arising from upper-level consumer substitution. Although estimates depend on the time period considered and other particulars of these studies, this research broadly suggests that correcting upper-level substitution bias could be expected to reduce the rate of change in the CPI by about 0.2 percentage point per year; for example, if the current CPI showed an increase of 2.0 percent over a year, then after correcting for this type of substitution bias, the CPI could be expected to show an increase of about 1.8 percent. Although this might not sound large, a bias of this size compounded over many years would have marked implications for any program or contract that is linked to the CPI. Reducing Upper-level Substitution Bias To correct fully for upper-level substitution bias it would be necessary to know how market baskets change on a regular basis in order to capture the substitution among different items. The expenditure data required for such calculations are obtained from the Consumer Expenditure Survey. And, because of collection and processing time, these data are only available with a lag, so that the figures for 1997 are not expected to be available until later this year. Thus, the data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey can not be used to construct a real time price index that fully captures consumers' substitution among items. This lag is the reason BLS's experimental superlative index is only produced with a delay. But, the important question should not be whether it is possible to construct a perfect index, but rather whether techniques are available for creating a monthly cost-of-living index that would represent an improvement over the CPI as currently constructed. The answer is yes. The Boskin Commission, which included my distinguished colleague Robert Gordon, suggested as a possible solution the use of a trailing Tornqvist price index. This index would use the Tornqvist index formula--which can capture substitution among items--and would update weights each year. To be operational in real time, this index would need to use lagged, or trailing, weights. For example, average weights from 1994-1995 could be used for calculating 1997 changes in the cost of living. Another approach has been suggested by Matthew Shapiro and David Wilcox. They have devised a so-called constant elasticity of substitution--or CES--index that appears to largely eliminate upper-level substitution bias. In contrast to the current setup that assumes no substitution among items, the class of CES indexes imposes a positive degree of substitution among all items, and alternative CES indexes would impose different degrees of substitutability. These authors searched to find the degree of substitutability that provided the closest approximation to a benchmark superlative index, but which can be implemented on a monthly basis in real time. There may well be other approaches worthy of serious consideration to rectify the problem of upper-level substitution bias. Moving Forward To spur progress on this issue, about which there appears to be considerable agreement, one approach that this Subcommittee could consider would be to commission a study of substitution bias to be undertaken by the staff of the BLS. The BLS could be asked to compare their current procedures with those that have been proposed by other researchers. Specifically, I would suggest that they determine which of these alternative approaches provides the most timely and accurate approximation to the superlative indexes published by the BLS, recalling that, while these superlative indexes may be the best, they are available only with a considerable lag. In evaluating the alternatives, the objective should not be to establish a perfect measure--such a goal is unattainable. Rather the objective should be to produce the best measure of the cost of living that can be constructed in real time from existing knowledge and data. At the same time, the Subcommittee could recommend the establishment of a formal panel of outside experts to review the BLS's evaluation of the alternatives and to provide an independent assessment of the BLS study to the Committee. The panel could also consult with the research staff of the BLS on the design of the study and the interpretation of the results. If differences remained after completion of the study, the panel of experts would provide a mechanism for independent assessment of alternative approaches that could be helpful to this Subcommittee's oversight responsibilities. A Two-Track Approach Let me raise one further issue that would inevitably arise from such a study. Even the best real-time approximation to a superlative index would not match the superlative index that ultimately could be constructed once expenditure share data ultimately became available. To deal with this problem, the Boskin Commission suggested pursuing a two-track approach. For the first track, BLS could continue to publish a monthly index in real time that would never be revised. This index would be much like the current CPI except that--going forward--it could be based on an aggregation formula that minimizes upper-level substitution bias. For the second track, BLS could publish, with a lag, a superlative index that incorporated full information on changing expenditure shares and could be revised subsequently to incorporate other improvements to the CPI as well. This two-track approach has advantages and disadvantages. On the positive side, the two track approach would provide indexes for users with diverse needs: a never-revised index for those for whom revisions would impose operational difficulties and a second revisable index that would be the best possible measure of changes in the cost of living. On the negative side, I am concerned that the publication of two different price indexes as part of the CPI program might generate some confusion. If this confusion were judged to be a serious problem, BLS could alternatively produce a single measure that was revised and, ultimately, incorporated all information on spending patterns in the best possible way. For example, the CPI for April could be initially constructed using one of the approximations to a superlative index that I described above, but when full data on consumer expenditure shares became available some months later, the level of the CPI for April could be revised to be an exact superlative index rather than a close approximation. Were this to be done, government and private contracts that are linked to the CPI would have to alter their indexation procedures. Returning to my primary message, a study of substitution bias and an outside review panel holds the promise of forming the basis of a reasonable professional consensus on limited technical changes that would correct substitution bias and make the CPI a more accurate measure of the cost of living. Such a consensus is critical for maintaining public support and confidence in our statistical programs. That confidence can only be enhanced when the government is striving to develop the most accurate measures possible.
Testimony of Governor Laurence H. Meyer Mergers and acquisitions in banking and other financial services Before the Committee on Banking and Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives April 29, 1998 Tables - Bank Mergers and Acquisitions, 1980-1997 - Number of Large Mergers, 1980-1997 - Number of Banks, Banking Organizations, and Offices, 1980-1997 - Entry and Exit in Banking, 1980-1997 - Shares of Domestic Commercial Banking Assets Held by Largest Banking Organizations, 1980-1997 - Average Three-firm Deposit Concentration Ratio (in percent) based on Insured Commercial Banking Organizations, 1976-1997 - Average Herfindahl-Hirschman Indexes (HHI) of Metropolitan Statistical Areas and Rural (Non-MSA) Counties, 1976-1997
No content found