Remarks by Governor Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. At the National Economic Association Forum, New York, New York January 3, 1999 Looking Forward, Looking Back: Thoughts on the Start of a New Year Thank you very much for giving me the chance to join you to start the New Year. While most of our fellow citizens are relaxing with family and friends, it is nice to know that the economic braintrust of the United States is busily and happily at work here in New York. I know that means the science of economics will be off to a fast start again this year, and in my remarks today I shall raise several important issues that I think warrant greater attention by our profession. The end of one year and start of another is a natural time to focus on accomplishments and also to create a list of things to do or understand better. In the spirit of old year endings and new year beginnings, I would like to review last year's economic performance, highlight some prospects for the upcoming year's economic performance, and, finally, raise some topics related to the underpinnings of macroeconomics and monetary policy. Of course, the views that I am about to express are my own, and do not reflect those of the FOMC nor those of the Board of Governors. Last Year's Economic Performance The last twelve months have been a most challenging time in general, and particularly from the standpoint of monetary policy. We started the first half of the year with a focus on the cross winds of strength and international weakness that seemed to be buffeting the United States economy. Domestic demand was particularly strong, led by consumption expenditures, which grew at a 6 percent annual rate in both the first and second quarters of the year. However, consumption was not the only engine driving the spectacular performance of the first half of 1998. Business fixed investment, paced by spending on producers' durable equipment, rose at more than a 22 percent annual rate in the first quarter and by nearly a 13 percent annual rate in the second quarter. Additionally, the housing sector expanded at a robust 15 percent annual rate or more in both the first and second quarters. These latter two sectors were undoubtedly supported by relatively accommodative financial conditions. During much of 1997, long-term interest rates had trended downward, and by early 1998 rates on fixed-rate mortgages were close to their lowest levels in twenty-five years. Similarly, the rise in equity prices over much of 1997 and the first half of 1998 provided ample incentive for consumption by raising the value of household assets and improving the general sense of financial well-being of our citizens, as well as lowering the cost of capital faced by businesses. This domestically driven good news was counterbalanced by a sense of foreboding from Asia. During the first half of 1998, the net export drag, due in large part to the turmoil in Asia, subtracted about 2 percentage points from GDP growth. The trade deficit grew to well over $200 billion, again at an annual rate. For the March through July FOMC meetings last year, the Committee maintained a bias toward raising interest rates, but did not actually take action. The sense of the FOMC was that the tightness in labor markets and general growth of demand would be likely to create upward pressures on wage growth and eventually on the rate of inflation. However, uncertainty regarding the degree and timing of impact from the Asian crises, and the fact that inflation was actually subdued, allowed us to adopt a "wait and see" posture. The second half of 1998 provided a very different configuration of events that, as you know, created the need for some monetary policy action. Interestingly, the catalyst for this monetary policy decision was not directly Asia or a slowing economy from net export drag. Rather, it was the indirect impact of Asia, working through a Russian debt moratorium and ruble devaluation, which provided the impetus for an easing in U.S. short-term interest rates. By the end of August, financial markets in the United States had become quite unsettled, with an open and obvious flight to quality and liquidity creating a risk of undue credit tightening for private sector borrowers. As we said in October in an inter-meeting rate reduction that brought the decline in the federal funds rate target to 50 basis points, "Growing caution by lenders and unsettled conditions in financial markets more generally are likely to be restraining aggregate demand in the future." The flight to liquidity, which was evidenced in unusually wide spreads between U.S. government securities of similar risk characteristics, and the flight to quality, which showed through in unusually wide spreads between securities of differing risk characteristics, were the defining factors for much of August, September and October. More recently, we have seen some signs of easing of financial market stresses and some unwinding of the associated flight to quality. These moves have been encouraged, in part, by policy actions of many central banks around the world, and, in part, by a stronger sense that the world's major industrial countries, the G7, are beginning to address a number of the factors that have contributed to uncertainty and volatility in financial markets around the globe. Outlook for 1999 At present the consensus view seems to be that growth in the second half of 1998 was probably a bit slower than the rapid pace of the first half, but that real GDP growth still averaged well above 3 percent on a fourth quarter to fourth quarter basis. The consensus is that this year's real growth will abate further, perhaps to about 2 percent, which would eventually produce a "soft landing" of sustained growth near the economy's potential and low inflation. It's not hard to imagine risks to both sides of this scenario, especially with financial markets still not having fully settled down, and I can see that 1999 will require a continued high level of vigilance for policy makers. One of the factors that I find most interesting as we start this year is the likely impact of the upcoming century date change. As you may know, I am Chairman of the Joint Year 2000 Council, which is a group of financial regulators from around the world that has spent the last nine months focusing on the Year 2000 computer problem. In an international context, the Year 2000 is likely to have differing impacts across different regions. Here in the United States, my colleague Governor Mike Kelley has stated that we are likely to see some disruptions to economic activity because of Year 2000 problems but the effects are likely to be temporary and quickly reversed. I believe businesses already are planning to manage their inventories with Year 2000 considerations in mind. Later this year, many firms will want to hold larger inventories of goods as insurance against Year-2000-related supply disruptions and these are likely to run off those stocks in the first half of 2000. Households concerned about the viability of some payment mechanisms could well desire to hold more cash, and both the Federal Reserve and depository institutions are preparing for this contingency. Overseas, Europe is about to convert to the euro, and we shall see tomorrow how successful their preparations have been. It is now important for senior management of major European institutions to turn their attention to preparations for the Year 2000. In Asia too, firms and markets should focus energy on preparing for Year 2000. The events of the last eighteen months have probably distracted their attention from this problem. However, as we get closer to the end of this year, market participants will require more information on the Year 2000 preparations of counterparties. Those that are not prepared, or do not disclose their state of preparedness, may find that credit is harder to obtain. It is in everyone's interest that we not become complacent as we face this last twelve months before the start of the new millennium. Observations and Open Issues From Recent Experiences Against this backdrop, I want to raise four issues important to the conduct of monetary policy for your consideration and study. The first two issues involve the supply side of the economy and grow out of the unusual conjuncture in recent years of rapid growth and high resource utilization with low, if not declining, inflation. One is the proper measurement of resource tightness. The two standard measures of resource tightness, capacity utilization in manufacturing and the rate of unemployment, have historically moved fairly closely together over the cycle. However, they have diverged in the past several years, in part as the surge in investment has helped to lower capacity utilization in the manufacturing sector while labor markets have become tighter and tighter. We need a better understanding of the causes of this divergence, and, if it persists, a clearer sense of which measure of resource utilization best foreshadows the emergence of price pressures. A second, and related, issue is whether the nature of "capacity" has changed. Many observers have argued that in the 1940s and 1950s manufacturing capacity was more normally characterized by large-scaled units of fixed machinery, such as blast furnaces and assembly lines. This capacity took long lead times to manufacture, test and install, so available capacity was easier to measure and slower to change. Therefore, high levels of capacity utilization were good predictors of resource tightness that was likely to translate into pricing pressure. Now, we hear, capacity in manufacturing is more technology intensive and can be adjusted more easily to reflect supply and demand conditions. This relatively "elastic" supply of manufacturing capacity implies that capacity utilization may not become "tight" by historical standards, and capacity utilization is therefore a less certain early warning signal of potential pricing pressure. I have seen no proof of the assertion that the nature of manufacturing capacity has changed, although the experience of the last several years suggests that this might be so. Any research that you can bring forth on this issue would be very beneficial. A third issue on my mind is valuations in equity markets, the role they should play in policy making, and whether old relationships have changed. Many observers have asked if I think that the Federal Reserve can or should have a fixed view on the proper level of equity markets. For me the answer is that the Fed cannot target specific levels in equity markets. Equity prices are set by the give and take of supply and demand, with participants buying and selling based on their own information. Investors can and should be influenced by several factors, including expectations of corporate earnings, attractiveness of alternative investments, both domestic and international, differing valuations of underlying assets, and differing appetite for "ownership" risk as opposed to "creditor" risk. I believe that the Federal Reserve's tools, primarily short-term interest rates, are too blunt to attempt to achieve specific levels of stock market valuations. Nor do I believe that policy makers should necessarily attempt to put their judgments of correct values above those of the market. However, equity markets send important signals to policy makers and have spillover effects into the real economy. As you know, economists often speak of the "wealth effect," and econometric modeling indicates that consumers ultimately tend to spend about 2-to-4 percent of incremental wealth. In addition, consumer sentiment is tied to feelings of financial well being. Through both of these channels, the so-called wealth effect and the more general impact on consumer sentiment, equity valuations can and do have an impact on consumption and on macroeconomic performance. Additionally, equity markets are an important source of investment capital, and valuations in the stock market are one determinant of the cost of capital for businesses. Therefore, equity prices have an impact on business fixed investment, a major driver of our economy. Finally, equity markets are of interest to policy makers because we have a responsibility for macro-stability. We have seen in other economies that bubbles and busts in financial markets can create unsettled conditions that affect real economic activity. Therefore, maintaining healthy market conditions are of concern to policy makers. The questions I have with respect to equity markets go to the issue of valuation and the wealth effect. Economists propose numerous approaches to determining the "correct" level of equity prices. One such approach compares equity market valuations (namely earnings/price ratios) to the return on fixed income securities, generally the ten-year U.S. Treasury bond. But many observers have suggested that this measure of "correct" stock market valuation may no longer be accurate. Some suggest that the nature of equity markets has changed, with the introduction of new instruments that allow for better management or sharing of risks. Therefore, these observers would assert, lower risk premia over risk-free returns are appropriate, and old relationships between E/P ratios and the return on Treasury instruments no longer hold. Others would argue that in this world of service firms and high-tech companies, and knowledge-intensive industries, our accounting treatments do not accurately reflect underlying asset values, and therefore measures of "correct" stock valuations do not capture economic reality that market participants see. These assertions need scientific investigation that perhaps someone in this room can perform. With respect to the "wealth effect," 1998 was unusual in having several months with a negative published savings rate. The existence and persistence of this phenomenon was widely reported in the financial press. Though the focus on this "negativity" of the savings rate is misplaced, in light of measurement issues, what is evident is that the savings rate is low and has declined substantially. This experience calls into question whether we have accurately measured the feedback of wealth on consumption. When we look back on this period, we may determine that there are periods in which the "wealth effect" is noticeably greater than the 2-to-4 percent that appears to be the norm. Economic research also might focus some attention on whether increases in wealth have a long lag time in reaching full impact on consumption, and the degree to which "long-term" wealth gains are treated differently from "shorter term" gains that might be thought to be more transitory. Finally, I will turn to the role of international developments and exchange rates in policy. Our mandate gives priority to price stability and maximum sustainable employment, which I think are the right elements for us to consider in policy deliberations. Therefore, I believe that international economic considerations, like stock market valuations, should receive only indirect focus. We are not a closed economy, so we should recognize that our actions have effects on other economies and that those effects might, in turn, spill back into the United States. However, we are not the world's central bank, and we cannot manage aggregate demand in all parts of the globe. However, exchange rates are clearly one transmission mechanism for monetary policy. Lower interest rates lead to a lower exchange rate for the U.S. dollar, making our products more competitive relative to those of other countries. This promotes exports, damps imports and leads to more rapid growth. In addition to those effects on real economic activity, exchange rates have an influence on inflation. As we saw last year, a strengthening U.S. dollar leads to lower domestic inflation by reducing the price of imports and restraining pricing power in import-competing industries. One might argue that a change in the foreign exchange value of the dollar should have a one-time effect on the price level, rather than a continuing impact on the inflation rate. But price level changes do become imbedded in the inflation rate when they alter inflation expectations. It seems likely to me that the persistent weakness in import prices of recent years has helped to damp inflation expectation and hence have had a persisting damping effect on the inflation rate. Recognizing the importance of exchange rate movements, there has also been much discussion and speculation of coordinated interest rate moves. Again, I believe that each central bank should focus on its own domestic economic setting, and structure monetary policy to maintain each economy at full, sustainable employment with stable prices. Any other approach, I believe, while attractive to those that write newspaper stories, is not realistic. Finally, in the international sphere, I note that several countries have an explicit exchange rate mandate in monetary policy. In effect, they have given up a measure of independence and sovereignty in their monetary policies. It is not clear whether these countries have a better or worse record with respect to inflation and growth than countries that do not put such a heavy weight on exchange rates in policy decisions. I suspect it varies widely across countries, and additional research on the circumstances in which such regimes are successes and failures would be welcome. I believe that the approach we follow currently, which puts greater weight on observations and projections of the direct measures of economic performance in the United States, is the best for us. However, if other countries have achieved better results by focusing on indirect measures, such as exchange rates, we should be aware of that success. Conclusion As you can see, these are interesting times to be a central banker. The macroeconomic challenges evolved quickly during the course of the last twelve months. The economic outlook is for slowing, but still positive, growth, but in the context of contained inflation and tight labor markets. To manage this complex set of forces requires continued vigilance on our part. Additionally, the last twelve months have raised an important set of questions regarding measures of real economic performance, the behavior of inflation, financial market indicators, and the growing globalization of today's economy. I have enjoyed immensely having to grapple with these issues, but recognize that we at the central bank do not have all the answers. As you consider you research agendas, I ask you to keep in mind the potential positive contribution you can make to the Nation's welfare by focusing some of your efforts on these policy-relevant puzzles, and sharing your results with me and my colleagues.
Remarks by Governor Laurence H. Meyer At the North American Economics and Finance Association Meetings, New York, New York January 4, 1999 Federal Reserve Policy and the Transformation of the U.S. Banking System Good evening. It is a pleasure to be here on the panel discussing the restructuring and integration of our financial system. I am delighted that the North American Economics and Finance Association (or NAEFA) has given me the opportunity to participate in honoring its distinguished past-president, Andy Brimmer. I am also honored and pleased to be on the panel with Ed Kane, Allen Sinai, and Ken Guenther, as well as the honoree himself. It seems apparent from the participant list and from the titles of this evening's talks that we will have a lively discussion, that we will cover the issues from a number of angles, and that we will have an interesting diversity of opinions. I will direct my remarks to the on-going transformation of the U.S. banking system, and suggest what I believe some of the key policy responses to this transformation should be. To be more specific, I will focus on two aspects of the transformation: consolidation and integration. By consolidation, I mean the concentration of banking resources into fewer and larger banking organizations, primarily through mergers and acquisitions, or M&As, among existing banks and bank holding companies. By integration, I mean the expansion of the scope or breadth of banking organizations into the provision of financial services not traditionally offered by banks, at least in this nation, such as securities underwriting and insurance. Integration often occurs through M&As between banking organizations and other financial service firms. For the most part, consolidation and integration of the banking system have been driven by similar economic motivations and the policy responses are based on the same principles. However, there are some important and interesting differences in the challenges posed by these two trends. It is clear that the consolidation of the banking industry has been well under way for some time. The number of U.S. banks and banking organizations fell by almost 30 percent between 1988 and 1997, while the share of total domestic banking assets held by the largest ten banking organizations rose from 20 percent to 34 percent, and the share of the top fifty organizations rose from 51 percent to 66 percent. Several hundred M&As occurred each year, about half of which were of the in-market type between banks with deposits in the same metropolitan area or rural county. The other half were of the market-extension variety between banks in different local markets. This distinction between in-market and market-extension M&As will be important for assessing both the consequences of and the policy responses to M&A activity. During recent years, there were a number of especially large bank M&As, several of them between institutions with assets over $100 billion each. These very large M&As also require some special policy attention. In contrast with this consolidation activity, the integration of banking with other financial services is somewhat more recent and has not progressed nearly as much. Since 1996, there have been significant acquisitions of investment banking firms by bank holding companies, but such M&As were rare before that time. I will discuss the reason for this temporal pattern of integration in a moment. What is causing the consolidation of the banking industry and the integration of banking with other financial services? Why have banking organizations been engaging in M&As with other banking organizations for some time now, and why have we observed M&As between banking and nonbanking financial services firms more recently? I want to distinguish between the goals of the firms participating in the M&A activity, which I believe have not changed over time, and the constraints they face in achieving these goals, which have changed dramatically. The main goal or motive behind most consolidation and integration activity is the same goal or motivation behind most corporate activity--maximizing shareholder value--although I acknowledge that the preferences of managers and government supervisors also often affect M&A decisions. Shareholder value may be increased through M&As primarily by improving the efficiency of the participating firms, by increasing their market power in setting prices, or in some cases by increasing their access to the safety net. As I will discuss further in a moment, I believe that policymakers should allow market participants to take advantage of opportunities to improve their overall efficiency, while at the same time policymakers must act to mitigate the social costs from potential increases in market power and increases in systemic risk or other expansions of the safety net. That is, we should leave the efficiency issues to the marketplace to decide, and try to prevent large increases in market power and risks that impose costs on others. Our role cannot be to micro-manage decisions that should take place in the market, but rather to prevent significant negative externalities to the banks' consumers, the financial system, and the taxpayers who provide the ultimate funding behind the safety net. Although the main goal behind consolidation and integration has remained constant, the constraints faced by banking organizations in achieving this goal have changed dramatically over time. I would argue that the reason we have seen such intense consolidation activity over the last decade, and some integration activity recently, are several major changes in the constraints faced by banking organizations in maximizing value. Many of these changes are driven by market developments that are not directly related to policy changes. Such developments include technological progress, improvements in financial condition, excess capacity or financial distress in some markets, and consolidation of markets across national boundaries. Nonetheless, perhaps the most important changes in constraints were policy related--the deregulation of geographical and product restrictions on banking organizations. Restrictions on banks' ability to expand geographically were relaxed in the 1980s and first half of the 1990s with a series of removals of restrictions on intrastate and interstate banking, concluding with the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act of 1994, which permits interstate branching into almost all states. The prior geographic restrictions on competition likely permitted some banks with relatively low shareholder value to survive. The removal of these constraints allowed some previously prohibited M&As to occur, which may have forced these poorly performing banks to become more efficient or otherwise increase shareholder value by acquiring other institutions, by being acquired, or by improving management practices internally. In short, the deregulation of geographical restraints on bank competition has been a powerful force behind bank consolidation. The limited deregulation of product restrictions has also undoubtedly led to the recent increase in the integration of commercial banking with investment banking. The Glass-Steagall Act and related legislation effectively limited banking organizations' abilities to underwrite securities. Significant liberalization of these powers began in 1987, when the Federal Reserve expanded bank holding companies' abilities to underwrite corporate debt and equity through "Section 20" affiliates, albeit with revenue and other restrictions. Following the last liberalization of these restrictions in 1996--which allows revenue from underwriting corporate debt and equity to be as much as 25 percent of the affiliate's total revenue--there have been several large M&As between bank holding companies and securities firms. Despite the geographic and bank powers deregulation, unless there are further actions the remaining regulations likely will continue to restrain consolidation and integration activity significantly relative to the bank shareholder and management preferences. For example, the Riegle-Neal Act caps the total amount of deposits that any banking organization may reach by M&A to 30 percent in a single state and 10 percent nationally. This cap is close to binding already on some organizations and may make it difficult for any banking organization to have deposit-taking branching operations in all 50 states. The remaining bank powers restrictions also appear to hamper integration. For example, most insurance underwriting remains prohibited for banking organizations, except on a temporary basis following M&As. The potential consequences of banking consolidation and integration are numerous, indeed far too many to discuss in one talk. Tonight, I will address three: efficiency, market power, and systemic risk/safety net issues. I will then conclude by suggesting further how policymakers should address these potential consequences. Consolidation and integration may increase bank efficiency in a number of different ways. M&As may allow the institutions to achieve a scale, scope, or mix of output that is more profitable. The gains may come as a result of cost savings, revenue increases, or both. M&As also may be a means to change organizational focus or managerial behavior to improve X-efficiency, or the ability to produce the highest value of outputs for the smallest value of inputs. Other potential efficiency gains include improvements in the institution's risk-expected return tradeoff. These gains may be particularly important in consolidations of banking organizations in different regions or nations, and in integrating banking with other financial industries with different return characteristics. Reductions in risk--from diversification gains or improved risk-management techniques--may increase shareholder wealth because financial distress, bankruptcy, and loss of franchise value are costly. The available evidence suggests that bank consolidation increases profit efficiency and helps diversify the portfolio risks of the participants, at least on average. Much of the improved profit efficiency appears to have come about because banks have taken at least part of their diversification gains not as reductions in their overall risk, but as higher expected returns by taking on additional high risk-high expected return investments in their portfolios. The data suggest that there was little or no cost efficiency improvement on average following M&As--most of the gains were on the revenue side. Until a few years ago, the empirical research on scale economies in banking suggested that increases in scale beyond a relatively small size did not improve efficiency and may even create diseconomies. However, recent studies suggest that there may be some scale, scope, and product mix efficiency gains available from consolidation, even among fairly large institutions, but there are not yet enough data on these large institutions to draw strong conclusions. There are also considerable potential positive and negative efficiency effects of combining banks with nonbanks, but there is little evidence to date on this topic. Put differently, there is still a lot we do not know about the potential efficiency effects of M&As among very large institutions. The consolidation of banks through in-market M&As--that is, M&As between institutions that have significant local market overlap ex ante--may increase local market concentration and allow the consolidated firm and other firms in the market to raise profits by setting prices less favorable to customers. In particular, this may affect rates and fees on retail deposits and small business loans, as these products are typically competed for on a local basis. The available evidence suggests that those in-market M&As that raise local market concentration substantially appear to result in less favorable prices for some retail customers and possibly less efficiency for the firms providing these products. Importantly, average concentration in local U.S. banking markets has not increased over time, even while large numbers of in-market M&As were occurring, suggesting that other market and regulatory actions have prevented large increases in local market power on a widespread basis. Perhaps the most important market development preserving competition has been the continued economic viability of small and medium-sized depository institutions. Indeed, new entry into U.S. banking, primarily by small institutions, has been truly impressive over this period of significant consolidation. For example, from 1980 through 1997, 3,621 new banks were chartered in the United States. In addition, I believe that the actions of the Federal Reserve, the other banking agencies, and the Justice Department have played important roles in keeping market concentration and the effects of local market power mostly under control. In my view, we should continue to prevent M&As that increase local market concentration substantially. In contrast, M&As of the market-extension type that join institutions in different parts of a state, different regions of the nation, or different nations are less likely to increase market power significantly. This is because households and small businesses almost always choose a local financial institution and the purchasers of wholesale financial services, such as large corporate loans, may shop for services in national or international markets. It seems unlikely that consolidation would create substantial market power against the large clients for these services, who typically can choose among many suppliers. It also seems unlikely that integration of banking with nonbank financial service providers would create significant market power. Consolidation and integration may increase systemic risk or otherwise expand the safety net in several ways. Consolidation and integration may affect systemic risk in part by changing the risks of individual institutions, particularly the risks of large institutions whose credit or liquidity problems may affect many other depositories. If the risk of an individual institution is higher, this raises the probability that the institution will fail or become illiquid before settling some of its payments obligations, exposing other institutions directly to risks as payees, or indirectly through contributing to panic runs or securities markets problems. M&As may either increase or decrease the risk of institutions, mostly depending upon whether any diversification gains are offset by the institutions' pursuit of additional risks. As I already mentioned, the research results suggest that in many cases consolidating banks appear to move along the risk-expected return frontier and take most of the benefits of diversification gains as higher returns by shifting their portfolios toward higher risk-higher expected return investments. Consolidation and integration may also affect systemic risk by increasing the sizes of the institutions. The systemic consequences of the failure of one or more very large players may be more severe, spreading problems to more counterparties, particularly for institutions that are heavily involved in clearing and settlement functions. Put differently, the creation of institutions that may be viewed by the market as too-big-to-fail is a real concern that policymakers must face directly. When dealing with such situations, I believe that we must be guided by some fundamental principles. The most basic of these is that any bank can fail in the sense that stockholders can lose all, existing management can be replaced, and uninsured creditors can suffer losses. If need be, the institution can be wound down and even eventually sold--in whole or in part--in an orderly way. In the case of very large institutions some of these actions may take considerable time, and certainly will take great care. To be sure, there could be macroeconomic circumstances or unusual market fragilities that require extended periods of government assistance--and even management--in order to assure economic and financial stability. But even in these cases stockholders and management should bear the maximum cost. Indeed, the realization of significant losses should be the expectation of owners, managers, and uninsured creditors of any failed institution. These principles have been advanced by the Board for many years, and their essence has been codified in the FDIC Improvement Act of 1991. If policies consistent with these principles are followed, then it seems to me that the moral hazard of too-big-to-fail will be reduced to manageable proportions, while the financial system is protected. The safety net may also be extended when M&As combine banking with nontraditional activities, activities that might not otherwise receive safety net protection. In my judgment, there is no fool proof way to completely prevent the risks from nonbanking activities from spreading to the insured bank and giving some of the benefits of the safety net to the nonbanking activity at the margin. However, this does not mean that we should not try to minimize these effects. A significant part of the minimization process is to assure by action no assistance or bail out of nonbank affiliates, and significant limits on bank exposure to these affiliates. Let me now turn specifically, but briefly, to my views regarding some additional policy responses to the developments I have just outlined. As I alluded to earlier, the appropriate responses to these potential consequences of consolidation and integration--efficiency, market power, and systemic risk/safety net expansion--are quite different. First, I believe that the best response to potential changes in efficiency from M&A activity is no response. We should allow banks to take advantage of perceived opportunities to increase profitability by improving efficiency, and leave it to the market to discipline errors made in this regard, so long as substantial externalities are not generated. With regard to the potential for increases in market power, our policy goal should be to prevent substantial increases in market power in much the same way that we have done so in the past. We need not worry much about market power except for in-market mergers between banking organizations. Our basic policy should be--and is--to deny or alter M&As that appear likely to result in substantial increases in local market power over locally limited customers, primarily retail depositors and small businesses. Here, we can and should continue to develop our tools for measuring market power potential and for defining local banking deposit and loan markets. For example, the growing roles of nonbank competitors and electronic banking must be monitored carefully and taken into account. However, in my view, the basic policy of preventing large increases in local market power should continue. Minimizing the potential for bank M&As to significantly increase systemic risk and to expand safety net subsidies requires a portfolio of policy responses. Since in my remarks tonight I only have time to suggest a few directions, I will limit my attention to some relatively new and developing areas. In my judgment, new policies must be formulated in three general areas: capital regulation, bank supervision, and market discipline. In the capital regulation area, it is clear that the current system of risk-based capital standards, or the Basle Accord, is increasingly out of date. Particularly critical is the way the Accord deals with a variety of credit risk issues, the treatments of which are currently rather crude. Indeed, plans are well under way in both the domestic and international arenas to revise the Basle Accord. And, while the exact nature of proposed revisions is unclear, I think that it is very clear that we need to view capital standards as an evolutionary process that must be reviewed and revised periodically in order to adapt to market developments. The same comment can be made with even more force with regard to bank supervisory policy. The rapid pace of technological and intellectual change in financial risk measurement and management requires that supervisors keep up, and change their own policies and procedures appropriately. A particularly important market development that has import for both supervision and capital regulation is the increasing use and sophistication of credit risk models at the largest and most complex domestic and foreign banks. Understanding, evaluating, and criticizing these models is quickly becoming a required skill of bank supervisors. But credit risk models are only the tip of an iceberg that includes ever new methods of securitization, credit derivatives, remote originations, financial guarantees, and many other financial innovations. Add to this the incredible speed with which financial transactions are now conducted, and one gets an idea of the many challenges bank supervisors face. I am optimistic, however, that--by working with the banking system--the supervisory process will adapt, as it has in the past. Indeed, the experience of the thrift industry hardly a decade ago reminds us there is really no alternative to adapting and maintaining an effective oversight process as bank activities become ever more sophisticated and complex. The potential costs of not changing are too great. To that end, supervisory practices of all the banking agencies are changing in order to adapt to new conditions. In particular, oversight has become much more continuous and risk-focused than before, especially for the largest institutions. We can no longer rely on periodic on-site examinations to ensure that these largest banking organizations remain sound, but rather must be confident that their risk management practices and internal controls are adequate and effective at all times. This approach places greater importance on an institution's own management process, from the top down. Boards of directors are required to be actively involved in setting the tone for risk taking, staying informed about the level of risks and how they are managed and controlled, and ensuring that senior management is competent and that it has the needed resources. Management is expected to develop and enforce the policies, procedures, and limits necessary to implement and conduct bank activities and to see that risks are adequately measured and identified. Follow-up controls, evaluated by an independent internal auditing function, must be sound. In its own efforts, the Federal Reserve is making greater use of stable, designated teams of examiners to evaluate activities of the largest and most complex institutions, with the teams structured to provide the skills and expertise most relevant to each bank. We are also designing and revising our computer systems to provide greater and more timely information about these institutions to appropriate supervisory personnel throughout the Federal Reserve System. As banking organizations expand throughout the country, we also need to draw on resources nationwide. I believe that the complexity of modern finance requires that we also move to strengthen the ability of market forces to discipline the potential for excessive risk taking at banks. Two general areas seem especially promising. First, greater transparency of bank balance sheets and risk exposures is, in my judgment, a must. Great progress could be achieved in this area with improved disclosures by banks and banking organizations. Possibilities include more frequent reporting and the disclosure of credit risk modeling procedures, risk positions, and perhaps even supervisory evaluations. The second strategy that may hold considerable promise for enhancing market discipline is to require banks to issue minimum amounts of subordinated debt to non-related parties. Such debt holders would have risk preferences similar to government supervisors, and thus would help to discipline excessive risk taking. Significant changes in the market prices or ratings of this debt might also provide useful signals to supervisory authorities, alerting them to examine a bank or inspect a holding company more quickly than they otherwise would. In closing, I hope that you agree that the modern world of banking policy is an extraordinarily challenging and important one. Indeed, I am positive that this is a well-known fact to our honoree Andy Brimmer and my other fellow panelists. I, for one, am confident that we will meet the challenges that confront us, and I look forward to hearing the opinions of the other panelists and audience members during the remainder of the session.
For immediate release Wayne-Kent A. Bradshaw President and Chief Executive Officer Family Savings Bank, FSB Los Angeles, California (1999) Philip Price, Jr. Executive Director The Philadelphia Plan Philadelphia, Pennsylvania (1999) Janet C. Koehler Senior Manager of Electronic Commerce AT&T Universal Card Services Jacksonville, Florida (1999) Marilyn Ross Executive Director Holy Name Housing Corporation Omaha, Nebraska (1999) Carol Parry Executive Vice President Chase Manhattan Bank New York, New York (1999) Gail Small Executive Director Native Action Lame Deer, Montana (1999) Walter J. Boyer President United Central Bank Garland, Texas (2000) Daniel W. Morton Vice President and Senior Counsel Huntington National Bank Columbus, Ohio (2000) Jeremy Eisler Director of Litigation South Mississippi Legal Services Corp. Biloxi, Mississippi (2000) Charlotte Newton Consumer Advisor Springfield, Virginia (2000) Robert F. Elliott Vice Chairman Household International Prospect Heights, Illinois (2000) David L. Ramp Attorney Legal Aid Society of Minneapolis Minneapolis, Minnesota (2000) Karla Irvine Executive Director Housing Opportunities Made Equal of Greater Cincinnati, Inc. Cincinnati, Ohio (2000) Robert G. Schwemm Professor of Law University of Kentucky Lexington, Kentucky (2000) Gwenn Kyzer Vice President Target Marketing Service Experian, Inc. Allen, Texas (2000) David J. Shirk Senior Vice President Frontier Investment Company Eugene, Oregon (2000) John C. Lamb Senior Staff Counsel Department of Consumer Affairs Sacramento, California (2000) Martha W. Miller President Choice Federal Credit Union Greensboro, North Carolina (2000)
For immediate release Preliminary figures indicate that operating income of the Federal Reserve Banks amounted to $28.147 billion during 1998. Net income before payment of dividends, additions to surplus, and payments to the Treasury totaled $27.623 billion. About $26.549 billion of this net income was distributed to the U.S. Treasury during 1998. Federal Reserve System income is derived primarily from interest earned on U.S. government securities that the Federal Reserve has acquired through open market operations. Income from the provision of financial services amounted to $817.1 million. Operating expenses of the 12 Reserve Banks and branches totaled $1.785 billion. In addition, earnings credits in the amount of $347.5 million were granted to depository institutions under the Monetary Control Act of 1980. Assessments to Reserve Banks for Board expenditures totaled $178 million and the cost of currency amounted to $408.5 million. Net additions to income amounted to $1.915 billion, resulting primarily from unrealized gains on assets denominated in foreign currencies revalued to reflect current market exchange rates. Statutory dividends to member banks were $343 million. Under the policy established by the Board of Governors at the end of 1964, all net income after the statutory dividend to member banks and the amount necessary to equate surplus to paid-in capital is transferred to the U.S. Treasury.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the applications of Union Planters Corporation and Union Planters Holding Corporation, both in Memphis, Tennessee, to acquire First Mutual Bancorp, Inc., and thereby acquire its wholly owned subsidiary, First Mutual Bank, S.B., both in Decatur, Illinois. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Union Planters Corporation Memphis, Tennessee Union Planters Holding Corporation Memphis, Tennessee Order Approving Acquisition of a Bank Holding Company Union Planters Corporation and Union Planters Holding Corporation (collectively, "Union Planters"), bank holding companies within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), have requested the Board's approval under section 3 of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1842) to acquire all of the voting shares of First Mutual Bancorp, Inc. ("First Mutual") and thereby acquire its wholly owned subsidiary, First Mutual Bank, S.B. ("Savings Bank"), both in Decatur, Illinois. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (63 Federal Register 65,209 (1998)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the proposal and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 3 of the BHC Act. Union Planters operates bank and thrift subsidiaries in Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kentucky, Louisiana, Mississippi, Missouri, Tennessee, and Texas. Union Planters controls the 11th largest depository institution in Illinois, controlling deposits of $3.3 billion, representing approximately 1.6 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in the state. First Mutual is the 80th largest depository institution in Illinois, controlling approximately $334.2 million in deposits, representing less than 1 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in the state. On consummation of the proposal, the banks controlled by Union Planters would represent the 10th largest depository institution in Illinois, controlling deposits of $3.6 billion, representing approximately 1.7 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in the state. Interstate Analysis Section 3(d) of the BHC Act allows the Board to approve an application by a bank holding company to acquire control of a bank located in a state other than the home state of such bank holding company if certain conditions are met. For purposes of the BHC Act, the home state of Union Planters is Tennessee and Union Planters proposes to acquire control of a bank in Illinois. All of the conditions for an interstate acquisition enumerated in section 3(d) are met in this case. In light of all the facts of record, the Board is permitted to approve the proposal under section 3(d) of the BHC Act. Competitive Considerations The BHC Act prohibits the Board from approving an application under section 3 if the proposal would result in a monopoly or would be in furtherance of any attempt to monopolize the business of banking. The BHC Act also prohibits the Board from approving a proposal that would substantially lessen competition or tend to create a monopoly in any relevant market, unless the Board finds that the anticompetitive effects of the proposed transaction are clearly outweighed in the public interest by the probable effects of the transaction in meeting the convenience and needs of the community to be served. Union Planters and First Mutual each compete in the Decatur and Lincoln banking markets, both in Illinois. The Board has carefully reviewed the competitive effects of the proposal in these markets in light of all the facts of record, including the projected increase in the concentration of total deposits in depository institutions in the market ("market deposits"), as measured by the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index ("HHI") under the Department of Justice Merger Guidelines ("DOJ Guidelines"), and the number of competitors that would remain in the market. In the Lincoln banking market, the change in market concentration, as measured by the HHI, would exceed the guidelines applied by the Board and the Department of Justice. Union Planters is the second largest depository institution in the Lincoln banking market, controlling deposits of $94.3 million, representing approximately 22.7 percent of market deposits. First Mutual is the eighth largest depository institution in the market, controlling deposits of $32.3 million, representing approximately 3.9 percent of market deposits when weighted at 50 percent. On consummation of the proposal, Union Planters would become the largest depository institution in the market, controlling deposits of approximately $126.7 million, representing approximately 29.3 percent of market deposits. The HHI would increase by 246 points to 1918. In evaluating the likely competitive effects of the proposed transaction, the Board has placed particular weight on the significant number of competitors that would remain in the market relative to the market's size. Eleven competitors, in addition to Union Planters, would remain in the market after consummation of the proposal. This represents a large number of competitors relative to the size of the market. Of these 11 competitors, five would each control more than 5 percent of market deposits, including one competitor that would control more than 9 percent of market deposits and one that would control approximately 28.5 percent of market deposits. Thus, a significant number of other institutions would have the market share and resources to compete effectively in the Lincoln banking market and the number of competitors reduces the likelihood of successful anticompetitive collusion in the market. Union Planters and First Mutual also compete in the Decatur banking market. Consummation of the proposal would be consistent with the DOJ Guidelines and prior Board precedent in this banking market. As in other cases, the Board sought comments from the Department of Justice and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ("FDIC") on the competitive effects of the proposal. The Department of Justice has reviewed the proposal and advised the Board that consummation of the proposal would not likely have a significantly adverse competitive effect in the Lincoln or Decatur banking markets or in any other relevant market. The FDIC has been consulted and has not objected to consummation of the proposal. Based on these and all other facts of record, and for the reasons discussed in this order, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposal is not likely to result in any significantly adverse effects on competition or the concentration of banking resources in the Lincoln or Decatur banking markets or in any other relevant banking market. Financial, Managerial, and Other Considerations The BHC Act also requires the Board to consider the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the companies and banks involved in the proposal, the convenience and needs of the communities to be served, and certain supervisory factors. The Board has reviewed these factors in light of all the facts of record, including supervisory reports of examination assessing the financial and managerial resources of the organizations. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of Union Planters, First Mutual, and their respective subsidiary depository institutions are consistent with approval, as are the other supervisory factors the Board must consider under section 3 of the BHC Act. Considerations related to the convenience and needs of the communities to be served also are consistent with approval of the proposal. Conclusion Based on the foregoing, and in light of all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the applications should be, and hereby are, approved. The Board's approval is specifically conditioned on compliance by Union Planters with all of the commitments made in connection with the application. These commitments are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The proposed acquisition of First Mutual shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day after the effective date of this order, or later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective January 11, 1999. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Footnotes Savings Bank is a state-chartered savings bank that has elected not to be supervised by the Office of Thrift Supervision as a savings association and, accordingly, is a bank for purposes of the BHC Act. Union Planters also has requested the Board's approval to hold and exercise an option to acquire up to 19.9 percent of First Mutual's voting shares. The option would expire on consummation of the proposal. In this context, depository institutions include commercial banks, savings banks, and savings associations. Asset and ranking data are as of June 30, 1997. 12 U.S.C. § 1842(d). A bank holding company's home state is the state in which the operations of the bank holding company's banking subsidiaries were principally conducted on July 1, 1966, or the date on which the company became a bank holding company, whichever is later. 12 U.S.C. §§ 1842(d)(1)(A) & (B) and 1842(d)(2)(A) & (B). Union Planters meets the capital and managerial requirements established by applicable law. On consummation of the proposal, Union Planters and its affiliates would control less than 10 percent of the total amount of deposits of insured depository institutions in the United States, and less than 30 percent of the total amount of deposits in Illinois. See Ill. Comp. Stat. Ann. 205/10-3.09(a) (West 1998). In addition, Savings Bank has been in existence and operated continuously for more than five years. See Ill. Comp. Stat. Ann. 205/10-3.071(i) (West 1998). All other requirements of section 3(d) of the BHC Act also would be met on consummation of the proposal. 12 U.S.C. § 1842(c)(1)(A). 12 U.S.C. § 1842(c)(1)(B). The Decatur banking market is approximated by Macon County; Dora, Lovington, Marrow Bone, Sullivan, and Jonathan Creek townships in Moultrie County; Moweaqua, Penn, Flat Branch, Pickaway, Todds Point, Ridge, and Okaw townships in Shelby County; and Willow Branch and Cerro Gordo townships in Piatt County, all in Illinois. The Lincoln banking market consists of Logan County, Illinois, excluding Corwin township. Market share data used to analyze the competitive effects of the proposal are as of June 30, 1997, and are based on calculations in which the deposits of thrift institutions are included at 50 percent. The Board previously has indicated that thrift institutions have become, or have the potential to become, significant competitors of commercial banks. See Midwest Financial Group, 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 386 (1989); National City Corporation, 70 Federal Reserve Bulletin 386 (1984). Thus, the Board has regularly included thrift deposits in the calculation of market share on a 50-percent weighted basis. See, e.g., First Hawaiian, Inc., 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 52 (1991). In light of the existing restrictions on the lending activities of Illinois-chartered savings banks, the Board has weighted the current market share of Savings Bank at 50 percent. See Ill. Comp. Stat. Ann. 205/1009 (West 1998). Because the deposits of Savings Bank would be acquired by a commercial banking organization, Savings Bank's deposits are included at 100 percent in the calculation of pro forma market shares. See Norwest Corporation, 78 Federal Reserve Bulletin 452 (1992); First Banks, Inc., 76 Federal Reserve Bulletin 669 (1990). See 49 Federal Register 26,823 (June 29, 1984). Under the DOJ Guidelines, a market in which the post-merger HHI is above 1800 is considered highly concentrated. The Department of Justice has informed the Board that a bank merger or acquisition generally will not be challenged (in the absence of other factors indicating anticompetitive effects) unless the post-merger HHI is at least 1800 and the merger increases the HHI by more than 200 points. The Department of Justice has stated that the higher than normal HHI thresholds for screening bank mergers for anticompetitive effects implicitly recognize the competitive effects of limited-purpose lenders and other non-depository financial entities. The Board previously has stated that the number and strength of factors necessary to mitigate the competitive effects of a proposal depend on the level of concentration and the size of the increase in market concentration. See NationsBank Corporation, 84 Federal Reserve Bulletin 129 (1998). The Lincoln banking market has total deposits of approximately $431 million. The number of competitors remaining in the Lincoln banking market after consummation would be 25 percent greater than the average number of competitors in the other 8 banking markets in Illinois that have between $350 million and $500 million in total market deposits. On consummation of the proposal, Union Planters would become the largest depository institution in the Decatur banking market, controlling deposits of $369 million, representing approximately 22 percent of market deposits. The HHI would increase by 201 points to 1289, and 22 other depository institutions would remain in the market. This action was taken pursuant to the Board's Rules Regarding Delegation of Authority (12 C.F.R. 265.4(b)(1)) by a committee of Board members. Voting for this action: Vice Chair Rivlin and Governors Kelley and Ferguson. Absent and not voting: Chairman Greenspan and Governors Meyer and Gramlich.
Remarks by Governor Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. Prepared for delivery at the East Hanover Area Chamber of Commerce, East Hanover, New Jersey January 15, 1999 The Making of Monetary Policy Thank you for inviting me to share lunch and a few thoughts with you today. I believe that it is important for the actions of this country's central bank to be as transparent as possible, and therefore I am happy to address this audience on the topic of the what the Federal Reserve actually does and how it does it. I will also try to give an assessment of the national and international issues affecting Federal Reserve policy. I hope that you will conclude from this discussion that, though the process of setting monetary policy is complex, it is nonetheless in many important ways accessible to the average citizen. I also hope that you will agree that there are really very few secrets; we attempt to be as open as is responsible, which is appropriate in a democracy. History of the Federal Reserve System and the FOMC The Federal Reserve was created by an Act of Congress on December 23, 1913. The Federal Reserve System consists of a seven-member Board of Governors (an independent agency of the federal government with headquarters in Washington, DC), plus a nationwide network of 12 Federal Reserve Banks and 25 branches. Congress established the Federal Reserve Banks as the operating arms of the nation's central banking system, and they have both public and private elements. Neither the Board nor the Reserve Banks receive appropriations from Congress. Therefore, they do not operate with tax revenues, but rather pay expenses out of earnings. Earnings of the Federal Reserve Banks are derived primarily from interest received on their holdings of U.S. government securities and the fees they charge to depository institutions for providing services. All of the net earnings of the Banks, after expenses, contributions to surplus and payment of other assessments, are aggregated and paid over to the U.S. Treasury. In 1998, for example, the Federal Reserve paid approximately $26.5 billion to the U.S. Treasury. The Federal Open Market Committee, or FOMC, is the most important monetary policy-making body of the Federal Reserve System. The FOMC makes the key decisions regarding the conduct of open market operations (purchases and sales of U.S. government securities) which affect the cost and availability of money and credit in the U.S. economy. The voting members of the Committee are the members of the Board of Governors and five Reserve Bank presidents. The president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York serves on a continuous basis; the presidents of the other Reserve Banks serve one-year terms on a rotating basis beginning January 1 of each year. All the Reserve Bank presidents participate fully in the various discussions, regardless of whether they currently have a vote in the policy decision. By law, the FOMC must meet at least four times each year in Washington, DC. Since 1980, eight regularly scheduled meetings have been held each year. If circumstances require consultation or consideration of an action between regularly scheduled meetings, members may be called upon to participate in a special meeting or a telephone conference. So what happens at these meetings? The order and structure of these meetings may change over time, but has been pretty much fixed during my term on the Board. Before each regularly scheduled meeting of the FOMC, System staff members prepare written reports on past and prospective economic and financial developments, which are sent to Committee participants. At the meeting itself, staff members present oral reports on the current and prospective business situation, conditions in financial markets and international economic and financial developments. After these reports, each Committee participant, voting and nonvoting, expresses his or her views on the current state of the economy and prospects for the future. After a short coffee break, we have a staff presentation on the alternatives we face in setting monetary policy. At that point, the Chairman gives his view of the economy and makes a suggestion for the appropriate direction of policy. Each Committee member then responds to the Chairman's suggestion, in the process setting out a preferred choice for policy. After this second "go-around," we take a formal vote on the target federal funds rate for the period until the next meeting. At this point, the focus is on the voting members, who, as I noted, include all of the Governors and five of the twelve Presidents. Generally, an announcement of a change in interest rates, if any, is made at about 2:15 in the afternoon. A full set of meeting minutes is made available after the subsequent meeting. Let me turn now to a discussion of monetary policy and the outlook for the U.S. economy. Of course, the views I shall be expressing are my own and are not necessarily shared by the FOMC or the Board of Governors. The Goals of Monetary Policy Federal law establishes the goals of monetary policy. The Federal Reserve and the FOMC are "to promote effectively the goals of maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates." Many analysts believe that achieving price stability should be the primary goal of a central bank because a stable level of prices appears to be the condition most conducive to maximum sustained output and employment, and to moderate long-term interest rates. This presumably is because in times of price stability the prices of goods, materials and services are undistorted by inflation and thus can serve as clearer signals and guides for the efficient allocation of resources. Also, a background of stable prices is thought to encourage capital formation because it reduces the distortion created by a tax system that is only partly indexed for inflation. Some would argue that the remarkable period of growth that we are experiencing is due in no small measure to the low rate of inflation that has prevailed for some time. The problem with the rather neat formulation that I have just given is that it does not include an element of time. In the long run, I have no doubt that price stability underpins efforts to achieve maximum output and employment. But, in the short run, some tensions can arise between efforts to reduce inflation and efforts to maximize employment and output. For example, the economy may at times be faced with adverse developments affecting supply, such as a bad agricultural harvest or a disruption in the supply of oil, which put upward pressure on prices and downward pressure on output and employment. In these circumstances, makers of monetary policy must decide the extent to which we should focus on defusing price pressures or on cushioning the loss of output and employment in the short run, in the context of our long-term objectives. At other times, policymakers may be concerned that expectations of inflation will get built into decisions about wages and prices, become a self-fulfilling prophecy, and result in temporary losses of output and employment. Countering this threat of inflation with a more restrictive monetary policy could risk small losses of output and employment in the short run but might make it possible to avoid larger losses later should expectations of higher inflation become embedded in the economy. The press tries to categorize FOMC members as "hawks" and "doves." These labels are an effort to simplify, in fact, oversimplify, the complex choices that each member of the FOMC must make in deciding how to trade off the risk that action, or inaction, on our part will lead to inflation heating up to unacceptable levels, as opposed to having an inadequate creation of jobs. But I believe that all members of the Committee recognize that the major contribution the Federal Reserve can make to higher standards of living over time is to promote price stability. It is generally thought that monetary policy takes many months to have most of its effect on growth and employment, while of course it has an immediate impact on financial markets. Because of the long time frame for effect on the real economy, I believe that it is important for policy to look ahead one to two years as it aims at promoting stable prices and a sustainable GDP growth path, along which the economy is at full potential. Given that we need to be forward-looking, or "preemptive," as it is often put, one potentially important element in making monetary policy is the forecast or likely outlook for economic growth, unemployment and the price level for the next year or two. Fortunately, as we make monetary policy we have the advantage of several forecasts. The staff of the Board of Governors, private sector economists, and the staffs of the Federal Reserve Banks all make forecasts. Some individual Governors and Reserve Bank Presidents also have considerable experience and expertise in forecasting. To be useful for monetary policy, forecasts of the future health of the economy need to be reasonably reliable. Good forecasts rest on the identification of empirical regularities that can be confidently relied upon to provide guidance. Regrettably, some previously reliable empirical relations have not proven so of late. As one example, the failure of price inflation to pickup as labor markets have become tighter is not consistent with older empirical observations. Moreover, factors outside of economists' models have provided some surprises, such as the Asian economic and financial turmoil and the collapse of oil prices. If forecast relationships are less certain, it becomes more challenging to be "preemptive." In these circumstances, I believe, it is appropriate to put greater weight on incoming data to determine whether the stance of monetary policy should be changed. Some of the variables relevant in this regard are: 1) the level of unemployment and the rate of job creation, 2) the rate of change in wages or prices or early signs of emerging inflation, 3) the rate and composition of GDP growth (inventory, trade flows, consumption, investment, residential and commercial construction, etc.), and 4) international developments. Economists refer to these variables as being from the "real" side of the economy. Another set of variables to be considered in making monetary policy are financial variables, such as money supply, interest rates, exchange rates, credit flows, and conditions in bank lending or in the debt and equity markets. The last two years, 1997 and 1998, gave an interesting case study of the interplay between these different variables and the degree of forward-looking behavior in the making of monetary policy. From March of 1997 through much of 1998, pleasant surprises in the performance of inflation and the general absence of early signs of inflation, and uncertainty about the relationship of inflation to changes in the level of production, kept the FOMC from tightening. We did not tighten despite the economy being beyond most estimates of its potential and despite many forecasts of rising inflation. Put another way, the FOMC could have "preemptively" tightened monetary policy, based on forecasts, but recognizing the uncertainties about empirical relationships chose not to do so. But in the fall of 1998, you may recall, there was concern regarding the performance of the debt markets, especially the bond market and market for commercial paper. These concerns were centered around the fact that corporate borrowers could no longer raise funds in the bond or commercial paper markets at reasonable prices or, at some times and for some borrowers, at all. In this case, we were reasonably confident that constraints on the ability of corporations to borrow would eventually have a negative effect on their willingness to invest in productive capacity and therefore on their ability to provide goods and services and to create jobs. A related concern was that weakened foreign economies might have adverse consequences on future domestic activity. Under those circumstances, the FOMC thought it appropriate to ease to offset a likely significant impact on future domestic spending and growth. Finally, no discussion of monetary policy and financial markets would be complete without reference to the equity markets. I believe that the Fed cannot target specific levels in equity markets. However, equity markets have spillover effects into the real economy and hence send important signals to policymakers. As you know, economists often speak of the "wealth effect," and econometric modeling indicates that consumers tend to raise the level of their spending about 2-to-4 percent of incremental wealth, after 2 or 3 years. Through the so-called wealth effect, equity valuations can and do have an effect on consumption and on macroeconomic performance. Additionally, equity markets are a source of investment capital, and valuations in the stock market are one determinant of the cost of capital for businesses. Therefore, equity prices have an influence on business fixed investment, along with consumption, the major drivers of our economy. Finally, equity markets are of interest to policymakers because we have a responsibility for macro-stability. We have seen in other economies that bubbles and busts in financial markets can create unsettled conditions that impair real economic activity. Therefore, while it would be incorrect to say that policymakers target the equity markets or that market concerns "tie the hands" of the Fed, the markets are an important consideration in macroeconomic analysis. These are just some of the factors that might go into making monetary policy. The interesting part of the job is that the relative importance of these factors--forecasts, current macroeconomic conditions, financial market conditions and others--are often in flux. For those who seek to monitor our actions, the good news is that through a reading of FOMC announcements and minutes, speeches by Governors and Presidents, and interviews, an observer can get a pretty good handle on which variables are uppermost in each policymaker's mind at any given time. Often, however, many factors are relevant, and we cannot indicate precisely the relative weights the FOMC may be applying to them in making policy. After all, the economy is influenced by all of the factors I have outlined, and the FOMC's emphasis on specific factors varies over time as economic conditions change. Outlook for 1999 With this general statement of the factors that go into setting monetary policy, let me turn to the outlook for 1999. Recent economic data have been stronger than many had expected. It now appears to many forecasters that real GDP growth for 1998 was 3.5 percent or more on a fourth-quarter-to-fourth-quarter basis. The consensus, as represented by the most recent Blue Chip Economic Indicators, is that real growth in 1999 will moderate, perhaps to slightly over 2 percent, again on a fourth-quarter-to-fourth quarter basis (nearly 2.5 percent on a year-over-year basis). This consensus outlook, if accurate, would eventually produce a "soft landing" with growth near the economy's potential and inflation remaining low. The range of forecasts that compose this so-called consensus is large, perhaps indicating that forecasters are cognizant of the fact that it's not hard to imagine risks to both sides of this scenario. I should also note that this is a repeat of earlier forecasts that growth will moderate, and the economy has surprised many forecasters with its resilience. I can see that 1999 will require a continued high level of vigilance for policymakers. Not surprisingly, many of the forces and uncertainties that seemed to shape so much of last year's discussion are present in the outlook. Tight labor markets are putting pressures on wages, but competitive markets are limiting pricing leverage and causing profits to be squeezed. Under these circumstances, will businesses become more cautious in their spending and hiring plans? Rising stock prices continue to point to strong consumer demand, but valuations are high by historical standards and one wonders whether this stimulus will remain so strong. The downturns in some of the troubled economies of Asia seem to be bottoming out, at least outside of Japan, but the risk of spreading distress in Latin America creates another element of international uncertainty. Recent events in Brazil have made this concern more evident. It is now even more important that Brazil move as quickly as possible to implement a clearly sustainable fiscal position and regain the confidence of international markets and investors. The Federal Reserve will continue to monitor closely international developments and their potential effect on domestic activity. At the same time, U.S. inflation has been contained, at least until recently, by a number of factors, such as a rising exchange rate for the U.S. dollar through much of last year, well-contained health care costs, and declining prices for oil and other commodities, which may prove to be short-lived. The ability of businesses to pass on price increases has been constrained, in part, by international competition. Will the restraint on pricing power remain as strong or weaken? If the latter, at what pace? Will the special factors I mentioned above continue to mitigate inflationary pressures arising from labor markets? Are there other, longer-term forces at work damping price pressures that we have not yet identified? A new factor that I find most interesting as we start this year is the likely impact of the upcoming century date change. As you may know, I am Chairman of the Joint Year 2000 Council, which is a group of financial regulators that has spent the last nine months focusing on the Year 2000 computer problem. In an international context, the Year 2000 is likely to have differing impacts across different regions. Here in the United States, my colleague Governor Mike Kelley has stated that we are likely to see some disruptions to economic activity because of Year 2000 problems but the effects are likely to be temporary and quickly reversed. This outcome also seems likely to me. Overseas, the early signs are that Europe has successfully converted their computer systems to the euro, but there were some periods early in the transition when the settlement of some cross-border transactions in Europe did experience end-of-day glitches. It is now important for senior management of major European institutions to turn their attention to preparations for the Year 2000. Asian financial and other business firms, too, should focus energy on preparing for Year 2000 even as they are restoring fundamental financial soundness. Indeed, the events of the last eighteen months have probably distracted their attention from this problem. It is in everyone's interest that we not become complacent as we enter this last twelve months before the start of the new millennium. Conclusion The Federal Reserve has an important role to play in our economy. However, our role in the economy should be kept in perspective. We control just a few of the levers that drive the economy. We observe consumption, investment and labor market decisions and try to adjust monetary policy to the signals that we receive so that our nation's economic welfare is not threatened by inflation or by growth that is below the economy's potential. However, it is the decisions and actions that you take as consumers and business managers that ultimately determine the health of the United States economy. Despite difficult periods, 1998 turned out to be a very good year because of a mix of private action and economic policy. I hope that 1999 will be as good to us all.
Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan State of the economy Before the Committee on Ways and Means, U.S. House of Representatives January 20, 1999 The American economy through year-end continued to perform in an outstanding manner. Economic growth remained solid, and financial markets, after freezing up temporarily following the Russian default, are again channeling an ample flow of capital to businesses and households. Labor markets have remained quite tight, but, to date, this has failed to ignite the inflationary pressures that many had feared. To be sure, there is decided softness in a number of manufacturing industries as weakness in many foreign economies has reduced demand for U.S. exports and intensified competition from imports. Moreover, underutilized production capacity and pressure on domestic profit margins, especially among manufacturers, are likely to rein in the rapid growth of new capital investment. With corporations already relying increasingly on borrowing to finance capital investment, any evidence of a marked slowing in corporate cash flow is likely to induce a relatively prompt review of capital budgets. The situation in Brazil and its potential for spilling over to reduce demand in other emerging market economies also constitute a possible source of downside risk for demand in the United States. So far, markets seem to have reacted reasonably well to the decisions by the Brazilian authorities to float their currency and redouble efforts at fiscal discipline. But follow through in reducing budget imbalances and in containing the effects on inflation of the drop in value of the currency will be needed to bolster confidence and to limit the potential for contagion to the financial markets and economies of Brazil's important trading partners, including the United States. While there are risks going forward, to date domestic demand and hence employment and output in the United States certainly has remained vigorous. Though the pace of economic expansion is widely expected to moderate as 1999 unfolds, signs of an appreciable slowdown as yet remain scant. But to assess the economic outlook properly, we need to reach beyond the mere description of America's sparkling economic performance of eight years of record peacetime expansion to seek a deeper understanding of the forces that have produced it. I want to take a few moments this morning to discuss one key element behind our current prosperity--the rise in the value markets place on the capital assets of U.S. businesses. Lower inflation, greater competitiveness, and the flexibility and adaptability of our businesses have enabled them to take advantage of a rapid pace of technological change to make our capital stock more productive and profitable. I will argue that the process of recognizing this greater value has produced capital gains in equity markets that have lowered the cost of investment in new plant and equipment and spurred consumption. But, while asset values are very important to the economy and so must be carefully monitored and assessed by the Federal Reserve, they are not themselves a target of monetary policy. We need to react to changes in financial markets, as we did this fall, but our objective is the maximum sustainable growth of the U.S. economy, not particular levels of asset prices. As I have testified before the Congress many times, I believe, at root, the remarkable generation of capital gains of recent years has resulted from the dramatic fall in inflation expectations and associated risk premiums, and broad advances in a wide variety of technologies that produced critical synergies in the 1990s. Capital investment, especially in high-tech equipment, has accelerated dramatically since 1993, presumably reflecting a perception on the part of businesses that the application of these emerging technological synergies would engender a significant increase in rates of return on new investment. Indeed, some calculations support that perception. They suggest that the rate of return on capital facilities put in place during recent years has, in fact, moved up markedly. In part this may result from improved capital productivity--that is, the efficiency of the capital stock. In addition, we may be witnessing some payoffs from improved organizational and managerial efficiencies of U.S. businesses and from the greater education--in school and on the job--that U.S. workers have acquired to keep pace with the new technology. All these factors have been reflected in an acceleration of labor productivity growth. Parenthetically, improved productivity probably explains why the American economy has done so well despite our oft-cited subnormal national saving rate. The profitability of investment here has attracted saving from abroad, an attraction that has enabled us to finance a current account deficit while maintaining a strong dollar. Clearly, we use both domestic saving and imported financial capital in a highly efficient manner, apparently more efficiently than many, if not most, other major industrial countries. While discussions of consumer spending often continue to emphasize current income from labor and capital as the prime sources of funds, during the 1990s, capital gains, which reflect the valuation of expected future incomes , have taken on a more prominent role in driving our economy. The steep uptrend in asset values of recent years has had important effects on virtually all areas of our economy, but perhaps most significantly on household behavior. It can be seen most clearly in the measured personal saving rate, which has declined from almost six percent in 1992 to effectively zero today. Arguably, the average household does not perceive that its saving has fallen off since 1992. In fact, the net worth of the average household has increased by nearly 50 percent since the end of 1992, well in excess of the gains of the previous six years. Households have been accumulating resources for retirement or for a rainy day, despite very low measured saving rates. The resolution of this seeming dilemma illustrates the growing role of rising asset values in supporting personal consumption expenditures in recent years. It also illustrates the importance when interpreting our official statistics of taking account of how they deal with changes in asset values. With regard first to the statistical issues, capital gains themselves are not counted as income, but some transactions resulting from capital gains reduce disposable household income as we measure it, while having no effect on consumption. As a consequence, as capital gains and these associated transactions mount, published saving rates are decreased. For example, reported personal income is reduced when corporations cut back payments into defined-benefit pension plans owing to higher equity prices; however, such reductions do not diminish anticipated retirement income and thus should not lower consumption. And reported disposable income is decreased when households pay taxes on capital gains realizations that would not have been so large in less ebullient markets. However, capital gains tax payments also are highly unlikely to be associated with lower spending because the cash realized from the sale of the asset exceeds the tax, and in most cases the typical household presumably does not perceive of this transaction as reducing available income or financial resources. Together these two effects probably account for an appreciable portion of the reduction in the reported saving rate. But beyond these statistical issues, there is little doubt that capital gains have increased consumption relative to income from current production over recent years. Economists have long recognized a "wealth effect"--a tendency for consumption to rise by a fraction of the capital gains on existing assets owned by households--though the magnitude of this effect remains difficult to estimate accurately. We have some evidence from recent years that all or most of the decline in the saving rate is accounted for by the upper income quintile where the capital gains have disproportionately accrued, which suggests that the wealth effect has been real and significant. Thus, all else equal, a flattening of stock prices would likely slow the growth of spending, and a decline in equity values, especially a severe one, could lead to a considerable weakening of consumer demand. Some moderation in economic growth, however, might be required to sustain the expansion. Through the end of 1998, the economy continued to grow more rapidly than can be currently accommodated on an ongoing basis, even with higher, technology-driven productivity growth. Growth has continued to shrink the pool of workers willing to work but without jobs. While higher productivity has helped to keep labor cost increases in check, it cannot be expected to do so indefinitely in ever tighter labor markets. Despite brisk demand and improved productivity growth, corporate profits have sagged over recent quarters. This is attributable in part to some acceleration in labor compensation, but other factors have also been pressing, especially intensified competition and lower prices facing our exporters and those industries competing with imports. In these circumstances, businesses will feel under considerable pressure to preserve profit margins should labor costs accelerate further, or should the falling prices of commodity inputs, like oil, turn around. But, to date, businesses' evident pricing power has been scant. Either that would change and inflation could begin to mount or, if costs could not be recouped, capital outlays might well be cut back. The recent behavior of profits also underlines the unusual nature of the rebound in equity prices and the possibility that the recent performance of the equity markets will have difficulty in being sustained. The level of equity prices would appear to envision substantially greater growth of profits than has been experienced of late. Moreover, the impressive capital gains of recent years would seem also to rest on a perception of relatively low risk in corporate ownership. Risk aversion and uncertainty rose sharply over the late summer and fall of 1998 following the Russian default in mid-August, as evidenced by widening spreads among yields on debt of differing credit qualities and liquidity. The rise in uncertainty increased the discounting of claims on future incomes, and that reduced stock market prices even as the long-term earnings growth expectations of security analysts continued to rise. As risk aversion subsided after mid-October, stock prices returned to record levels. Markets have doubtless stabilized significantly after the turbulence of last fall but they remain fragile, as the repercussions of the recent Brazilian devaluation attest. Moreover, our chronic current account deficit has widened significantly, in part reflecting the strength of domestic demand that has accompanied the further accumulation of capital gains. The continued increase in our net external debt and its growing servicing costs clearly are not sustainable indefinitely. In light of the importance of financial markets in the economy, and of the volatility and vulnerability in financial asset prices more generally, policymakers must continue to pay particular attention to these markets. The Federal Reserve's easing last fall responded to an abrupt stringency in financial markets and the effects that the consequent increased risk aversion was likely to have on economic activity going forward. We were particularly concerned about higher costs and disrupted financing in debt markets, where much of consumption and investment is funded. We were not attempting to prop up equity prices, nor did we plan to continue to ease rates until equity prices recovered, as some have erroneously inferred. This has not been, and is not now, our policy or intent. As I have discussed earlier, movements in equity prices can play an important role in the economy, which the central bank must take into account. And, we may question from time to time whether asset prices may not embody a more optimistic outlook than seems reasonable, or what the consequences might be of a further rise in those prices followed by a steep decline. But many other forces also drive our economy, and it is the performance of the entire economy that forms our objectives and shapes our actions. Nonetheless, in the current state of financial markets, policymakers are going to have to be particularly wary of actions that unnecessarily sow uncertainties, undermine confidence, and interfere with the efficient allocation of capital on which our economic prosperity and asset values rest. It is important not to undermine the highly sensitive ongoing process of reallocation of capital from less to more productive uses. For productivity and standards of living to grow, not only must capital raised in markets be allocated efficiently, but internal cash flow, including the depreciation charges from the existing capital stock, must be continuously directed to their most profitable uses. It is this continuous churning, this so-called creative destruction, that has become so essential to the effective deployment of advanced technologies by this country over recent decades. In this regard, drift toward protectionist trade policies, which are always so difficult to reverse, is a much greater threat than is generally understood. It is well known that erecting barriers to the free flow of goods and services across national borders undermines the division of labor and standards of living by impeding the adjustment of the capital stock to its most productive uses. Not so well understood, in my judgment, is the impact that fear of growing protectionism would have on profit expectations, and hence on the current values of capital assets. Protectionism was a threat to standards of living when capital asset values were low relative to income. It becomes particularly pernicious in a environment, such as today's, when that is no longer the case. In sum, it has been the ability of our flexible and innovative businesses and work force that has enabled the United States to take full advantage of emerging technologies to produce greater growth and higher asset values. Policy has facilitated this process by containing inflation and by promoting competitiveness through deregulation and an open global trading system. Our task going forward--at the Federal Reserve as well as in the Congress and Administration--is to sustain and strengthen these policies, which in turn have sustained and strengthened our now record peacetime economic expansion.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the joint issuance with the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency of a consent Order of Prohibition against Bob L. Sellers, a former officer, director and shareholder of First National Summit Bankshares, Crested Butte, Colorado, a former bank holding company, and a former officer and director of First National Summit Bank, Crested Butte, Colorado, a former national bank. The Board also today announced the issuance of a consent Order of Assessment of Civil Money Penalty against Mr. Sellers. Mr. Sellers, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order in connection with his alleged acquisition of more than 25 percent of the outstanding voting shares of First National Summit Bankshares in 1994 without prior approval from the Board, and his alleged misrepresentations and omissions of fact in connection with regulatory filings to the Board and the OCC. The Order prohibits Mr. Sellers from participating in the conduct of the affairs of any financial institution and requires that he pay a civil money penalty of $100,000. A copy of the combined Order is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice of First Security Corporation, Salt Lake City, Utah, to acquire Van Kasper & Company, San Francisco, California, and thereby engage in underwriting and dealing, to a limited extent, in all types of debt and equity securities, and in certain other nonbanking activities. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. First Security Corporation Salt Lake City, Utah Order Approving Notice to Engage in Underwriting and Dealing in All Types of Debt and Equity Securities on a Limited Basis First Security Corporation ("First Security"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8)) and section 225.24 of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.24) to acquire Van Kasper & Company, San Francisco, California ("Company"), and thereby acquire control of Company's wholly owned subsidiaries and a 24.5-percent voting interest in Redwood Securities Group, Inc. ("Redwood"), also of San Francisco. First Security would thereby engage in the following nonbanking activities: extending credit and servicing loans, in accordance with section 225.28(b)(1) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(1)); engaging in activities related to extending credit, in accordance with section 225.28(b)(2) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(2)); providing financial and investment advisory services, in accordance with section 225.28(b)(6) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(6)); providing securities brokerage, riskless principal, and private placement services, in accordance with section 225.28(b)(7)(i), (ii), and (iii) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(7)(i), (ii), and (iii)); underwriting and dealing in government obligations and money market instruments in which state member banks may underwrite and deal under 12 U.S.C. §§ 335 and 24(7) ("bank-eligible securities"), and engaging in investing and trading activities, in accordance with section 225.28(b)(8)(i) and (ii) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(8)(i) and (ii)); engaging in insurance agency activities, in accordance with section 4(c)(8)(G) of the BHC Act and section 225.28(b)(11)(vii) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(11)(vii)); underwriting and dealing in, to a limited extent, all types of debt and equity securities other than interests in open-end investment companies ("bank-ineligible securities"); and acting as the general partner of private investment limited partnerships that invest in assets in which a bank holding company is permitted to invest. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (63 Federal Register 67,692 (1998)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the notice and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. First Security, with total consolidated assets of approximately $19.4 billion, is the 44th largest banking organization in the United States. First Security operates subsidiary banks with branches in Utah, California, Nevada, New Mexico, Idaho, Oregon, and Wyoming, and engages through other subsidiaries in a broad range of permissible nonbanking activities. Company, with total consolidated assets of $22.1 million, engages directly and indirectly in a broad range of securities underwriting and dealing, securities brokerage, investment advisory, and other activities. Redwood, with total consolidated assets of $946 thousand, underwrites and deals in limited types of securities, including municipal and government agency securities, and provides securities brokerage services. After consummation of the proposal, Company would be renamed First Security Van Kasper. First Security anticipates merging its existing section 20 subsidiary, First Security Capital Markets, Inc., Salt Lake City, Utah ("FSCMI"), with and into Company in May 1999, with Company surviving the merger. Company would continue to own 24.5 percent of the voting shares of and control Redwood after these transactions. Company and Redwood are, and after consummation of the proposal will continue to be, registered as broker-dealers with the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. § 78a et seq. ) and members of the National Association of Securities Dealers, Inc. ("NASD"). Accordingly, Company and Redwood are, and will continue to be, subject to the record-keeping and reporting obligations, fiduciary standards, and other requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the SEC, and the NASD. Underwriting and Dealing in Bank-Ineligible Securities The Board has determined that, subject to the framework of prudential limitations established in previous decisions to address the potential for conflicts of interests, unsound banking practices, or other adverse effects, underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities is so closely related to banking as to be a proper incident thereto within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. The Board also has determined that underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities is consistent with section 20 of the Glass-Steagall Act (12 U.S.C. § 377), provided that the company engaged in the activity derives no more than 25 percent of its gross revenues from underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities. First Security has committed that Company and Redwood each will conduct its underwriting and dealing activities using the methods and procedures and subject to the prudential limitations established by the Board in the Section 20 Orders. First Security also has committed that Company and Redwood each will conduct its bank-ineligible securities underwriting and dealing activities subject to the Board's revenue restriction. As a condition of this order, First Security is required to conduct the bank-ineligible securities activities of Company and Redwood subject to the revenue restrictions and Operating Standards established for section 20 subsidiaries ("Operating Standards"). Other Activities Approved by Regulation or Order The Board previously has determined that credit and credit-related activities; financial and investment advisory activities; securities brokerage, riskless principal, and private placement activities; bank-eligible securities underwriting and dealing; investing and trading activities; and certain insurance agency activities are closely related to banking within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. In addition, the Board previously has determined by order that private investment limited partnership activities are permissible for bank holding companies when conducted within certain limits. First Security has committed that it will conform the activities of Company and Redwood to the requirements of, and will conduct the activities of Company and Redwood in accordance with the limitations set forth in, Regulation Y and the Board's orders and interpretations relating to each of the activities. Other Considerations In order to approve this notice, the Board also must determine that performance of the proposed activities is a proper incident to banking; that is, that the proposed activities "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public, such as greater convenience, increased competition, or gains in efficiency, that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices." As part of its review of these factors, the Board considers the financial and managerial resources of the notificant and its subsidiaries and the effect the transaction would have on such resources. In considering the financial resources of the notificant, the Board has reviewed the capitalization of, and funding arrangements among, First Security, Company, and Redwood in accordance with the standards set forth in the Section 20 Orders and has found the capitalization and the funding arrangements of each to be consistent with approval. This determination is based on all the facts of record, including First Security's projections of the volume of the bank-ineligible underwriting and dealing activities of Company and Redwood. The Board also has reviewed the managerial resources of each of the entities involved in this proposal in light of examination reports and other supervisory information. In connection with the proposal, the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco ("Reserve Bank") has reviewed the policies and procedures of Company and Redwood to ensure compliance with this order and the Section 20 Orders, including Company's and Redwood's operational and managerial infrastructure; computer, audit, and accounting systems; and internal risk management procedures and controls. The Board also has considered the ability of First Security to monitor Redwood's activities and compliance with this order and the Section 20 Orders. First Security has stated that Company has the ability to monitor Redwood's financial condition and securities transactions on a daily basis. A senior officer of Company serves as a director on Redwood's three-member board of directors, and Company's controller also serves as Redwood's controller. In addition, Redwood operates on Company's premises in space leased from Company, and Company provides accounting and administrative support for Redwood's securities activities. On the basis of the Reserve Bank's review and all other facts of record, including the commitments provided in this case, the proposed managerial and risk management systems of Company and Redwood, the relationships between Company and Redwood, and the limited nature of Redwood's activities, the Board has concluded that financial and managerial considerations are consistent with approval of the notice. The Board has carefully considered the competitive effects of the proposal. First Security has stated that FSCMI, Company, and Redwood offer largely complementary services with few significant overlaps. To the extent that Company or Redwood offers different types of products and services than FSCMI, the proposed acquisition would result in no loss of competition. In those markets where the product offerings of First Security's nonbanking subsidiaries overlap with the product offerings of Company or Redwood, such as securities brokerage, investment advisory, and insurance agency activities, there are numerous existing and potential competitors. Consummation of the proposal, therefore, would have a de minimis effect on competition in the markets for these services, and the Board has concluded that the proposal would not have significantly adverse competitive effects in any relevant market. The Board also expects that consummation of the proposal would provide added convenience to the customers of First Security and Company. First Security has indicated that consummation of the proposal would expand the range of products and services available to its customers and those of Company. In addition, there are public benefits to be derived from permitting capital markets to operate so that bank holding companies can make potentially profitable investments in nonbanking companies and from permitting banking organizations to allocate their resources in the manner they consider to be most efficient when such investments and actions are consistent, as in this case, with the relevant considerations under the BHC Act. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that performance of the proposed activities by First Security, under the framework established in this and prior decisions, can reasonably be expected to produce public benefits that outweigh any reasonably expected adverse effects of the proposal. Accordingly, the Board has determined that the performance of the proposed activities by First Security is a proper incident to banking for purposes of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Conclusion On the basis of all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the notice should be, and hereby is, approved, subject to all the terms and conditions described in this order and the Section 20 Orders, as modified by the Modification Orders. The Board's approval of the proposal extends only to activities conducted within the limitations of this order, including the Board's reservation of authority to establish additional limitations to ensure that the activities of Company and Redwood are consistent with safety and soundness, avoidance of conflicts of interests, and other relevant considerations under the BHC Act. Underwriting and dealing in any manner other than as approved in this order is not within the scope of the Board's approval and is not authorized for Company or Redwood. The Board's determination also is subject to all the terms and conditions set forth in Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.25(c) (12 C.F.R. 225.7 and 225.25(c)), and to the Board's authority to require modification or termination of the activities of a bank holding company or any of its subsidiaries as the Board finds necessary to ensure compliance with, or to prevent evasion of, the provisions and purposes of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders issued thereunder. The Board's decision is specifically conditioned on compliance with all the commitments made in connection with this notice, including the commitments discussed in this order and the conditions set forth in this order and the Board regulations and orders noted above. The commitments and conditions are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision, and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. This proposal shall not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or the Reserve Bank, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective January 25, 1999. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Footnotes Company's principal wholly owned subsidiaries are Van Kasper Advisers, Inc., Van Kasper Capital, and Van Kasper Ventures. First Security is authorized to engage in insurance agency activities under section 4(c)(8)(G) of the BHC Act, which authorizes those bank holding companies that engaged with Board approval in insurance agency activities prior to 1971 to engage in insurance agency activities. Asset and ranking data are as of June 30, 1998. Company currently holds certain investments in securities that exceed the levels permissible for bank holding companies. First Security has committed to conform, within two years of consummation of the proposal, all investments held by Company and its subsidiaries to the requirements of section 4 of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and interpretations thereunder. FSCMI currently underwrites and deals in, to a limited extent, certain types of bank-ineligible securities and engages in other permissible nonbanking activities. See Letter dated December 18, 1997, from Jennifer J. Johnson, Deputy Secretary of the Board, to David R. Wilson. First Security has committed, among other things, that Redwood will be treated as an affiliate of First Security's subsidiary banks for purposes of sections 23A and 23B of the Federal Reserve Act and as a subsidiary of First Security within the meaning of the BHC Act. See SR Letter No. 96-39 (APP) (December 26, 1996). See J.P. Morgan & Co. Inc., et al., 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 192 (1989), aff'd sub nom. Securities Industry Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 900 F.2d 360 (D.C. Cir. 1990); Citicorp , 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 473 (1987), aff'd sub nom. Securities Industry Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 839 F.2d 47 (2d Cir.), cert. denied , 486 U.S. 1059 (1988), as modified by Review of Restrictions on Director, Officer and Employee Interlocks, Cross-Marketing Activities, and the Purchase and Sale of Financial Assets Between a Section 20 Subsidiary and an Affiliated Bank or Thrift, 61 Federal Register 57,679 (1996); Amendments to Restrictions in the Board's Section 20 Orders, 62 Federal Register 45,295 (1997); and Clarification to the Board's Section 20 Orders, 63 Federal Register 14,803 (1998) (collectively, "Section 20 Orders"). Compliance with the revenue limitation shall be calculated in accordance with the method stated in the Section 20 Orders, as modified by the Order Approving Modifications to the Section 20 Orders, 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 751 (1989); 10 Percent Revenue Limit on Bank-Ineligible Activities of Subsidiaries of Bank Holding Companies Engaged in Underwriting and Dealing in Securities, 61 Federal Register 48,953 (1996); and Revenue Limit on Bank-Ineligible Activities of Subsidiaries of Bank Holding Companies Engaged in Underwriting and Dealing in Securities, 61 Federal Register 68,750 (1996) (collectively, "Modification Orders"). In light of the fact that First Security proposes to acquire Company and Redwood as going concerns, the Board concludes that allowing Company and Redwood each to calculate compliance with the revenue limitation on an annualized basis during the first year after consummation, and thereafter on a rolling quarterly average basis, would be consistent with the Section 20 Orders. See U.S. Bancorp, 84 Federal Reserve Bulletin 483 (1998); Dauphin Deposit Corporation, 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 672 (1991). As noted above, First Security intends to merge FSCMI with and into Company in May 1999. Until that merger occurs, First Security will operate Company and FSCMI as separate corporate entities and FSCMI and Company will be independently subject to the 25-percent revenue limitation on underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities. In addition, because Redwood will remain at all times a separate corporate entity, Redwood also will be independently subject to the 25-percent revenue limitation. See Citicorp, 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 473, 486 n.45 (1987), aff'd sub nom. Securities Industry Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 839 F.2d 47 (2d Cir.), cert. denied, 486 U.S. 1059 (1988). The Board concludes, based on all the aspects of this proposal, including the fact that Company is significantly larger than FSCMI and will survive the merger with FSCMI, the management structure of the proposed merged company, and the activities of the merging companies and the proposed merged company, that the merger of FSCMI and Company would not disqualify Company from calculating compliance with the revenue test in conformance with the annualized treatment described in this order. See KeyCorp, 84 Federal Reserve Bulletin 1075 (1998). 12 C.F.R. 225.200. Company and Redwood each may provide services that are necessary incidents to the proposed underwriting and dealing activities. Unless Company or Redwood receives specific approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act to conduct the incidental activities independently, any revenues from such activities must be treated as ineligible revenues subject to the Board's revenue limitation. See 12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(1), (2), (6), (7)(i), (ii), and (iii), (8)(i) and (ii), and (11)(vii). See Dresdner Bank AG, 84 Federal Reserve Bulletin 361 (1998); Meridian Bancorp, Inc., 80 Federal Reserve Bulletin 736 (1994). 12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8). See 12 C.F.R. 225.26. Company's controller also is designated as Redwood's financial and operations principal for NASD purposes and, as such, is responsible for preparing and ensuring the accuracy of all financial reports submitted by Redwood to the SEC and NASD; supervising all individuals who assist in the preparation of such reports, individuals who maintain Redwood's books and records, and individuals who are involved in the administration of Redwood's back office operations; and ensuring Redwood's compliance with all financial responsibility rules promulgated pursuant to the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. See NASD Rule 1022(b). Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Meyer, Ferguson, and Gramlich.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of an Order of Removal and Prohibition against John H. Ahn, a former director and institution-affiliated party of the Hanmi Bank, Los Angeles, California. A copy of the Order is attached.
Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan Social security Before the Committee on the Budget, U.S. Senate January 28, 1999 Mr. Chairman and other members of the committee, as you requested in your letter of invitation, today I will be addressing one of our nation's most pressing public policy challenges: social security. The dramatic increase in the ratio of retirees to workers that is projected, as the baby boomers move to retirement and enjoy ever greater longevity, makes our current pay-as-you-go social security system unsustainable. Furthermore, the broad support for social security appears destined to fade as the implications of its current form of financing become increasingly apparent. To date, with the ratio of retirees to workers having been relatively low, workers have not considered it a burden to share the goods and services they produce with retirees. The rising birth rate after World War II, which, in due course, lowered the ratio of retirees to workers, helped make the social security program exceptionally popular, even among those paying the taxes to support it. Indeed, workers perceived it to be a good investment for their own retirement. For those born before World War II, the annuity value of benefits on retirement far exceeded the cumulative sum at the time of retirement of contributions by the worker and his or her employer, plus interest. For example, the implicit real rate of return has been strikingly high for those born in 1920--on average, near 6 percent. The real interest rate on U.S. Treasury bonds, by comparison, has generally been below 3 percent. But, births flattened after the baby boom, and life expectancy beyond age sixty-five continued to rise. Consequently, the ratio of the number of workers contributing to social security to the number of beneficiaries has declined to the point that maintaining the annuity value of benefits on retirement at a level well in excess of accumulated contributions has become increasingly unlikely. Those born in 1960, for example, are currently calculated to receive a real rate of return, on average, of less than 2 percent on their cumulative contributions. Indeed, even these low rates of return for more recent cohorts likely are being overestimated, because they are based on current law taxes and benefits. In all likelihood, these taxes will have to be raised, or benefits cut, given that the system as a whole is still significantly underfunded, at least according to the intermediate projections of the Old-Age and Survivors Insurance (OASI) actuaries. For the present value of current law benefits over the next 75 years to be fully funded through contributions, social security taxes would have to be raised by about 2.2 percent of taxable payroll; to be fully funded in perpetuity, that is, to ensure that taxes and interest income will always be sufficient to pay benefits, social security taxes would have to be raised much more--perhaps something on the order of between 4 and 5 percent of taxable payroll. This issue of funding underscores the critical elements in the forthcoming debate on social security reform, because it focuses on the core of any retirement system, private or public. Simply put, enough resources must be set aside over a lifetime of work to fund retirement consumption. At the most rudimentary level, one could envision households saving by actually storing goods purchased during their working years for consumption during retirement. Even better, the resources that would have otherwise gone into the stored goods could be diverted to the production of new capital assets, which would, cumulatively, over a working lifetime, produce an even greater quantity of goods and services to be consumed in retirement. In this light, increasing our national saving is critical. The President's approach to social security reform supports a large unified budget surplus. This is a major step in the right direction in that it would ensure that the current rise in government's positive contribution to national saving is sustained. The large surpluses projected over the next 15 years, if they actually materialize, can significantly reduce the fiscal pressures created by our changing demographics. To maximize the benefits of this increased saving, it is crucial that the saving is put to its best use. For productivity and standards of living to grow, financial capital raised in markets or generated from internal cash flow from existing plant and equipment must be continuously directed by firms to its most profitable uses--namely new physical capital facilities perceived as the most efficient in serving consumers' multiple preferences. It is this continuous churning, this so-called creative destruction, that has become so essential to the effective deployment of advanced technologies by this country over recent decades. Indeed, improved productivity of capital probably explains much of why the American economy has done so well despite our comparatively low national saving rate. In addition, the profitability of investment in the United States has attracted saving from abroad which has facilitated the expansion and modernization of our capital stock. Clearly, we use both domestic saving and imported financial capital in a highly efficient manner, apparently more efficiently than many, if not most, other major industrial countries. Looking forward, the effective application of our capital to its most highly valued use is going to become, if anything, more important, as we strive to increase the resources available to provide for the retirement of the baby boomers without, in the future, significantly reducing the consumption of workers. Investing a portion of the social security trust fund assets in equities, as the Administration and others have proposed, would arguably put at risk the efficiency of our capital markets and thus, our economy. Even with Herculean efforts, I doubt if it would be feasible to insulate, over the long run, the trust funds from political pressures--direct and indirect--to allocate capital to less than its most productive use. The experience of public pension funds seems to bear this out. Although relevant comparisons to private plans are difficult to construct, there is evidence that the average rate of return on state and local pension funds tends to be lower than the return realized on comparable private pension funds, other pooled investments, and market indexes. Of course, a significant part of this disparity would be eliminated were these returns adjusted for risk, because public pension plans are often invested more conservatively than private plans. But there is evidence that returns are lower even after accounting for differences in the portfolio allocation between stock and bonds. For example, it has been shown that state pensions plans that are required to direct a portion of their investments in-state and those that make "economically targeted investments" experience lower returns as a result. Similarly, there is evidence that suggests that, the greater the proportion of trustees who are political appointees, the lower the rate of return. A lower risk-adjusted rate of return on financial assets is almost invariably an indication of lower rates of return on the real underlying assets on which they are a claim. Some have argued that the Federal government has already shown itself capable of investing in equities without political interference, and I have no doubt that the investments of the $60 billion Federal thrift plan and the $6 billion Federal Reserve retirement plan have been made independently. Moreover, the Federal thrift plan has not been an attraction since it is a defined contribution plan, and therefore effectively self-policed by individual contributors. These plans do not reach the asset size threshold to engage the political establishment--but that would not be the case for a multi-trillion dollar social security trust fund. A trust fund invested in U.S. Treasury securities does not appear to be available for politically supported private projects. A fund that can own equity would. This issue is of particular concern when the pension plan provides a defined benefit. Under these circumstances, the beneficiaries' returns are government guaranteed, and hence they have no incentive to monitor the performance of their invested funds. In sum, because I do not believe that it is politically feasible to insulate such huge funds from governmental influence, investing social security trust fund assets in equities compromises the efficient allocation of our capital--which, as the past few years have demonstrated, is so essential to raising our standards of living. This risk might be worth taking if having the social security trust fund invest in equities provided real benefits to households. But this is not likely to be the case on average. Having the trust fund invest in private securities most likely will increase its rate of return, although perhaps not on a properly risk-adjusted basis. But, as I have argued previously before this committee, unless new savings are created in the process, the corporate securities that displace Treasury securities in the social security trust funds must be exactly offset by the mirror image displacement of corporate securities by government securities in private portfolios, probably largely in private funds held for retirement. This swap is essentially a zero sum game. To a first approximation, aggregate retirement resources--from both social security and private funds--do not change. The crucial retirement funding issues center on how to increase the amount of saving, and how to allocate resources between active workers and retirees. It may turn out that the additional new resource requirements, whether mandated savings or additional taxes, to fully fund current benefit levels will prove too burdensome, particularly once future Medicare benefits are accounted for. If so, the level of retirement benefits, funded through social security or private retirement accounts, that is affordable in our economy will remain an important issue. There have been extensive discussions of potential changes, such as extending the age of full retirement benefit entitlement, altering the benefit calculation bend points, and adjusting annual cost-of-living escalation to a more accurate measure. Considerations such as these should not be taken off the table. While a sharp rise in the number of retirees in about ten years seems almost a certainty, the financial and economic state of the American economy in the early twenty-first century is not. We cannot confidently project large surpluses in our unified budget over the next fifteen years, given the inherent uncertainties of budget forecasting. How can we ignore the fact that virtually all forecasts of the budget balance have been wide of the mark in recent years? For example, as recently as February 1997, OMB projected a deficit for fiscal year 1998 of $121 billion--a $191 billion error. The CBO and others made similar errors. Likewise, in 1983, we confidently projected a solvent social security trust fund through 2057. Our latest estimate with few changes in the program is 2032. It is possible, as some maintain, that the OASI actuaries are too conservative, and that productivity growth could be far greater than is anticipated in their "intermediate" estimate. If that is, in fact, our prospect, the social security system is not in as much jeopardy as it currently appears. But proper fiscal planning requires that consequences of mistakes in all directions be evaluated. If we move now to shore up the social security program, or replace it, in part or in whole, with a private system, and subsequently find that we had been too pessimistic in our projections, the costs to our society would be few. If we assume more optimistic scenarios and they prove wrong, the imbalances could become overwhelming, and finding a solution would be even more divisive than today's problem.