For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between the Foxdale Bank, South Elgin, Illinois and the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the termination of the provision that addressed Year 2000 readiness of the Written Agreement by and among First Utah Bancorp, the First Utah Bank, and Premier Data Corporation, all of Salt Lake City, Utah, and the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application of Exchange Bancshares of Moore, Inc., Moore, Oklahoma, to become a bank holding company by acquiring all the outstanding voting shares of Exchange National Bank of Moore, Moore, Oklahoma. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM Exchange Bancshares of Moore, Inc. Moore, Oklahoma Order Approving the Formation of a Bank Holding Company Exchange Bancshares of Moore, Inc. ("Applicant") has requested the Board's approval under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act") (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1842) to become a bank holding company by acquiring all the outstanding voting shares of Exchange National Bank of Moore, Moore, Oklahoma ("Bank"). Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (64 Federal Register 51,125 (1999)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the proposal and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 3 of the BHC Act. Applicant is a newly organized corporation formed for the purpose of acquiring control of Bank. Bank is the 167th largest depository institution in Oklahoma, controlling $37.4 million in deposits, representing less than 1 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in the state. As noted above, Applicant is a de novo corporation and does not control another depository institution. Accordingly, based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposal would not have a significantly adverse effect on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in any relevant banking market, and that competitive considerations are consistent with approval. The BHC Act also requires the Board to consider the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the companies and banks involved in the proposal, the convenience and needs of the community to be served, and certain other supervisory factors. The Board has carefully considered these factors in light of all the facts of record, including comments from a Bank shareholder and director ("Protestant"), who contends that Applicant has undervalued his shares and, consequently, underestimated the cost of acquiring Bank. The Board has also carefully reviewed all the financial and managerial information provided by Applicant and Protestant about the proposal, assessments of the financial resources of Bank contained in confidential reports of examination by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency ("OCC"), and other supervisory information. Because the resulting organization has total assets of less than $150 million, the Board has reviewed the proposal in light of the its Policy Statement on the Formation of Small Bank Holding Companies. The Board notes that Bank currently is well capitalized. In addition, under the proposal submitted by Applicant, the projected financial condition of Applicant and Bank and the projected debt-service obligation of Applicant are reasonable and consistent with the Board's guidelines. The Board also has reviewed Applicant's ability to service the debt if a court determines that a higher valuation of Protestant's shares is appropriate, and concludes that Applicant appears to have sufficient resources to service any increased debt likely to result from a larger payment to Protestant. The Board has also reviewed relevant reports of examination of Bank and the managerial resources of Applicant's organizers, all of whom currently are officers and directors of Bank. Based on these and all the other facts of record, the Board concludes that financial and managerial considerations and future prospects of Applicant and Bank are consistent with approval. Considerations relating to the convenience and needs of the community, including the performance record of Bank under the Community Reinvestment Act (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 2901 et seq.), and the other supervisory factors the Board must consider under section 3 of the BHC Act, also are consistent with approval. Based on the foregoing, and in light of all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the application should be, and hereby is, approved. The Board's approval is specifically conditioned on compliance by Applicant with all the commitments made in connection with the application. For the purpose of this action, the commitments and conditions relied on by the Board in reaching its decision are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The proposed transaction shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day after the effective date of this order, or later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective December 8, 1999. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Footnotes Deposit data are as of June 30, 1998. In this context, depository institutions include commercial banks, savings associations, and savings banks. Under state law, a shareholder dissenting from a share acquisition is entitled to fair market value for the shareholder's shares, as determined by a state district court. See Okla. Stat. Ann. tit. 18, ï¿½ 1091 (West 1999). Protestant argues that Applicant has not established its ability to finance the proposal without adversely affecting the Bank's financial condition if fair market value of Protestant's shares exceeds the value assigned to the shares by Applicant's appraiser. 12 C.F.R. 225, app. c. Protestant maintains that actions taken by Applicant in connection with the proposal raise adverse managerial considerations. Protestant alleges that Applicant's principals are in violation of the bank's shareholder and voting agreements. These questions involve the interpretation of state law and, as such, are matters appropriately adjudicated by the courts. Protestant also argues that the voting agreement constitutes a voting trust that requires a notice to the OCC under the Change in Bank Control Act, 12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1817(j), and that Applicant has failed to file a notice with the OCC. The Board provided the OCC with Protestant's comments, and the OCC did not file any comments with respect to this proposal. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chairman Ferguson, and Governors Kelley, Meyer, and Gramlich.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the reopening and extension of the comment period on proposals to allow electronic delivery of federally mandated disclosures. On September 14, 1999, the Board published revised proposals for public comment under five consumer protection regulations: B (Equal Credit Opportunity), E (Electronic Fund Transfers), M (Consumer Leasing), Z (Truth in Lending), and DD (Truth in Savings). The Board is reopening and extending the comment period in order to obtain views from individual consumers through focus group interviews. Although the comment period is being extended primarily for the purpose of conducting these focus groups, other members of the public may also submit comments during this period but they are encouraged to submit them as soon as possible. Final action on the proposals is expected in March, shortly after the close of the public comment period. Comment is requested by March 3, 2000.
For immediate release
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Office of the Comptroller of the Currency Office of Thrift Supervision AGENCIES ISSUE GUIDANCE ON ASSET SECURITIZATION ACTIVITIES; CONSIDER REGULATORY RESTRICTIONS The four federal banking agencies today issued the addressing the agencies' supervisory approach to asset securitization activities. The statement reminds financial institution management and examiners of fundamental risk management practices that should be in place at institutions that engage in securitization activities. The statement highlights the risks associated with retained interests in securitization activities. It also details current supervisory concerns about the valuation and reporting of these assets, and concentrations of these assets relative to capital. Given the risks presented by these activities, the bank regulatory agencies are actively considering the establishment of regulatory restrictions that would limit or eliminate the amount of certain retained interests that may be recognized in determining the adequacy of regulatory capital. Reported values for retained interests should be reasonable, conservative and supported by objective and verifiable documentation. Institutions should ensure that sufficient capital is held to support the risks associated with securitization activities and are expected to place concentration limits on retained interests relative to equity capital. The statement reiterates that institutions should establish and implement an adequate and independent audit function to effectively oversee securitization activities. The statement is issued as part of the agencies' ongoing review of securitization activities at insured depository institutions. The agencies continue to review banking institutions' valuation of retained interests and the concentrations of these assets relative to capital. As applicable, the agencies will provide further guidance on the liquidity risk associated with over-reliance on asset securitization as a funding source and on implicit recourse obligations. Media Contacts: FDIC: David Barr (202) 898-6992 Federal Reserve: Dave Skidmore (202) 452-3204 OCC: Robert M. Garsson (202) 874-5770 OTS: Bill Fulwider (202) 906-6913 FDIC: David Barr (202) 898-6992 Federal Reserve: Dave Skidmore (202) 452-3204 OCC: Robert M. Garsson (202) 874-5770 OTS: Bill Fulwider (202) 906-6913
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between the Arab American Bank, New York, New York, and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
For immediate release
For immediate release Depository institutions that use the Federal Reserve Banks’ electronic payment services will benefit from continued price reductions in 2000 under the fee schedules approved today by the Federal Reserve Board. The effective date of all fees have been delayed until April 3, 2000, to minimize change during the period surrounding the rollover to 2000. Prices across all electronic payment services will decline nearly 5 percent in 2000, reflecting lower prices for Fedwire funds, book-entry securities, and automated clearinghouse (ACH) transactions. The savings reflect continued efficiencies gained from consolidating the Federal Reserve’s automated processing facilities. Since 1996, prices for all electronic payment services have declined more than 38 percent. In the aggregate, prices for Reserve Bank priced services are projected to increase 1.3 percent in 2000. The 2000 price increase is attributable to a 3.6 percent increase across paper payment services, reflecting higher fees for check products. For 2000, the Reserve Banks will reduce the basic fee for on-line Fedwire funds, 11.9 percent, and book-entry securities transfers, 17.6 percent. ACH origination fees will be reduced as much as 18.2 percent. Fees for paper check products will increase 3.3 percent, while fees for payor bank services will increase 11 percent. The increase in check service fees reflects, in part, increased investments in check automation and electronic check technologies and national standardization of payor bank product and pricing structures. The 2000 priced services fee schedules are available from the Reserve Banks. The Reserve Banks project that they will recover 99.0 percent of their priced services costs for 2000, including imputed expenses, leaving net income of $88.7 million compared with $98.4 million of targeted return on equity. The Reserve Banks estimate that they will recover 102.8 percent of their costs in 1999. The Monetary Control Act of 1980 requires the Federal Reserve to recover the costs of providing certain payment services over the long term. During the period 1989 to 1998, the Reserve Banks recovered 99.9 percent of the costs of priced services, including targeted return on equity. The Board today also approved the 2000 private sector adjustment factor (PSAF) for Reserve Bank priced services of $192.6 million, an increase of $76.8 million or 66.3 percent from the 1999 PSAF of $115.8 million. The large increase in the PSAF for 2000 is due mainly to including additional pension assets and benefit liabilities in the PSAF balance sheet. The PSAF is an allowance for taxes and other imputed expenses that would have been paid and return on capital that would have been earned had the Federal Reserve’s priced services been provided by a private business firm.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice by Banque Nationale de Paris and Paribas, both of Paris, France, to retain their interests in Paribas Corporation; Paribas Asset Management, Inc.; and Paribas Futures, Inc., all of New York, New York. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
For immediate release The Federal Open Market Committee made no change today in its target for the federal funds rate. Based on the available evidence, however, the Committee remains concerned with the possibility that over time increases in demand will continue to exceed the growth in potential supply, even after taking account of the remarkable rise in productivity growth. Such trends could foster inflationary imbalances that would undermine the economy's exemplary performance. Nonetheless, in light of market uncertainties associated with the century date change, the Committee decided to adopt a symmetric directive in order to indicate that the focus of policy in the intermeeting period must be ensuring a smooth transition into the Year 2000. At its next meeting the Committee will assess available information on the likely balance of supply and demand, conditions in financial markets, and the possible need for adjustment in the stance of policy to contain inflationary pressures.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Consumer Confidence in Banking Y2K Preparation Remains High, Gallup Poll Reports U.S. bank customers remain confident that their banks are ready for the Year 2000 according to a new report issued by the Gallup Organization. Nine out of ten bank customers continue to express confidence in their bank's readiness. The report is based on about 1,800 interviews completed between November 13, 1999, and December 12, 1999, as part of an ongoing survey of adult Americans who have bank accounts. The ongoing survey is being sponsored by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). "The survey shows that as we move closer to January 1, 2000, consumers are extremely confident that banks are prepared for Y2K," said FDIC Chairman Donna Tanoue. The survey results also indicate that the public remains confident that basic payment systems will work properly during the century date change. Most American adult depositors believe that they will have access to their money; that checks will continue to be processed accurately; and that automatic teller machines, credit card systems, and electronic direct deposits will function normally. "No one is predicting perfect performance for the rollover period, but this data demonstrates that the public is heading confidently into the weekend, making sensible and appropriate preparations," said Edward W. Kelley, Jr., a member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Over the past several years, FDIC-insured financial institutions have been identifying and overhauling computer systems to make them Year 2000-ready. At the same time, regulatory agencies have been closely monitoring their efforts. Based on their findings, the regulators said that the banking industry is prepared for the Year 2000 and that it will be business as usual for bank customers on January 1, 2000, and thereafter. Attachment (30 KB PDF) U.S. bank customers remain confident that their banks are ready for the Year 2000 according to a new report issued by the Gallup Organization. Nine out of ten bank customers continue to express confidence in their bank's readiness. The report is based on about 1,800 interviews completed between November 13, 1999, and December 12, 1999, as part of an ongoing survey of adult Americans who have bank accounts. The ongoing survey is being sponsored by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). "The survey shows that as we move closer to January 1, 2000, consumers are extremely confident that banks are prepared for Y2K," said FDIC Chairman Donna Tanoue. The survey results also indicate that the public remains confident that basic payment systems will work properly during the century date change. Most American adult depositors believe that they will have access to their money; that checks will continue to be processed accurately; and that automatic teller machines, credit card systems, and electronic direct deposits will function normally. "No one is predicting perfect performance for the rollover period, but this data demonstrates that the public is heading confidently into the weekend, making sensible and appropriate preparations," said Edward W. Kelley, Jr., a member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Over the past several years, FDIC-insured financial institutions have been identifying and overhauling computer systems to make them Year 2000-ready. At the same time, regulatory agencies have been closely monitoring their efforts. Based on their findings, the regulators said that the banking industry is prepared for the Year 2000 and that it will be business as usual for bank customers on January 1, 2000, and thereafter. Attachment (30 KB PDF)