For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice of The Banc Corporation, Birmingham Alabama, to merge with Emerald Coast Bancshares, Inc., and thereby acquire Emerald Coast Bank ("Emerald"), both of Panama City Beach, Florida, after Emerald's conversion to a savings association. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. The Banc Corporation Birmingham, Alabama Order Approving the Acquisition of a Savings Association The Banc Corporation ("TBC"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8)) and section 225.24 of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.24)) to merge with Emerald Coast Bancshares, Inc., and thereby acquire its wholly owned savings association, Emerald Coast Bank, both of Panama City Beach, Florida ("Emerald") after that institution's conversion from a state-chartered savings bank to a federally chartered savings association. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (63 Federal Register 68,768 (1998)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the proposal and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 4 of the BHC Act. TBC currently operates one subsidiary bank in Alabama, with total consolidated assets of $104 million. TBC is the 73rd largest commercial banking organization in Alabama, controlling approximately $93 million in deposits, representing less than 1 percent of total deposits in commercial banking organizations in the state ("state deposits"). Emerald is the 173rd largest depository institution in Florida, controlling $31 million in deposits, representing less than 1 percent of state deposits. TCB and Emerald do not compete in any relevant banking markets. The Board previously has determined by regulation that the operation of a savings association by a bank holding company is closely related to banking for purposes of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. In making this determination, the Board requires that savings associations acquired by bank holding companies conform their direct and indirect activities to those permissible for bank holding companies under section 4 of the BHC Act. TBC has committed to conform all of Emerald's activities to those permissible under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act and Regulation Y. In order to approve the proposal, the Board must determine that the proposed activities are a proper incident to banking, that is, that the proposal "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public, such as greater convenience, increased competition, or gains in efficiency, that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices." In assessing the balance of public benefits and adverse effects of this proposal, the Board has considered comments submitted by the Director of Banking of the Florida Department of Banking and Finance ("Director"). The Director expressed concern that TBC's proposal to convert Emerald to a savings association and acquire it pursuant to section 4 of the BHC Act was designed to evade Florida's interstate banking statute, which requires a Florida bank to be in existence and continuously operating for more than three years before it can be acquired by an out-of-state holding company. The Board has reviewed the Director's comments in light of the factors that the Board must consider under section 4 of the BHC Act. The Board concludes that a violation of law is a factor it must consider in determining whether a proposal under section 4(c)(8) would produce net public benefits. In this case, however, the Board does not believe that the acquisition of Emerald as a savings association would result in a violation of law. Unlike section 3 of the BHC Act, section 4 does not apply a minimum age limitation on the ability of out-of-state bank holding companies to acquire savings associations. In addition, once Emerald has converted to a savings association, the minimum operating requirement that applies to the acquisition of banks under Florida state law does not apply. Moreover, TBC has stated that it plans to acquire and operate Emerald as a savings association, and that it has no plans to convert Emerald back to a bank. TBC may not operate Emerald as a bank without prior Board approval under section 3 of the BHC Act and without meeting the requirements of section 3(d) of the Act. TBC has committed that it will maintain Emerald as a savings association until August 31, 1999. The Board also has considered the financial and managerial resources of TBC, its subsidiaries, and Emerald and the effect the transaction would have on such resources in light of all the facts of record. The Board has reviewed, among other things, confidential reports of examination and other supervisory information received from the appropriate supervisory authorities for the organizations. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that the financial and managerial resources of the organizations involved in this proposal are consistent with approval. The record indicates that consummation of the proposal would produce benefits for consumers. TBC states that the proposed acquisition of Emerald would allow TBC to offer a wider range of deposit accounts and loan products and would result in improved automated services available to Emerald customers. In addition, the Board has recognized that there are public benefits to be derived from permitting capital markets to operate so that banking organizations may make potentially profitable investments in nonbanking companies and allocate their resources in the manner they believe to be most efficient when such investments are consistent, as in this case, with the relevant considerations under the BHC Act. The Board believes that the conduct of the proposed activities within the framework established in Regulation Y is not likely to result in significantly adverse effects, such as an undue concentration or resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices that would outweigh the public benefits of the proposal, such as increased consumer convenience. Accordingly, the Board has determined that the balance of factors considered under the proper incident to banking standards of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act is consistent with approval. Conclusion Based on the foregoing and all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the notice should be, and hereby is, approved. The Board's approval of the proposal is specifically conditioned on compliance by TBC with the commitments made in connection with the notice. The Board's determination also is subject to all the conditions in Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.25(c) (12 C.F.R. 225.7 and 225.25(c)), and to the Board's authority to require such modification or termination of the activities of a holding company or any of its subsidiaries as the Board finds necessary to ensure compliance with, or to prevent evasion of, the provisions and purposes of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders issued thereunder. The commitments and conditions relied on by the Board in reaching this decision are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision, and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The transaction shall not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective February 1, 1999. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Footnotes The conversion of Emerald from a bank to a savings association would occur before the merger. The Office of Thrift Supervision ("OTS") approved the conversion of Emerald from a bank to a savings association on December 16, 1998. Asset and deposit data, including rankings, are as of September 30, 1998. Deposit data and rankings are as of June 30, 1997. In this context, depository institutions include commercial banks, savings banks, and savings associations. 12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(4). 12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8). Fla. Stat. Ann. § 658.295(8)(a). Emerald began operations on August 30, 1996. Section 3(d) of the BHC Act specifically authorizes a state to enact laws that limit the ability of an out-of-state bank holding company to acquire a bank in that state by requiring that the bank to be acquired be in existence for a minimum period of time, as long as that period does not exceed five years. 12 U.S.C. § 1842(d). See 12 C.F.R. 225.26. See Banc One Corporation, 84 Federal Reserve Bulletin 553 (1998). Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Meyer, Ferguson, and Gramlich.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice filed by BankAmerica Corporation, Charlotte, North Carolina; BancWest Corporation, Honolulu, Hawaii; BB&T Corporation, Winston-Salem, North Carolina; First Union Corporation, Charlotte, North Carolina; SunTrust Banks, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia; Wachovia Corporation, Winston-Salem, North Carolina; and Zions Bancorporation, Salt Lake City, Utah, to acquire H&S Holding Company, Maitland, Florida, and thereby merge Honor Technologies, Inc., Maitland, Florida, and Star Systems, Inc., San Diego, California, and engage in providing data processing, check verification, and management consulting services. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. BankAmerica Corporation Charlotte, North Carolina BancWest Corporation Honolulu, Hawaii BB&T Corporation Winston-Salem, North Carolina First Union Corporation Charlotte, North Carolina SunTrust Banks, Inc. Atlanta, Georgia Wachovia Corporation Winston-Salem, North Carolina Zions Bancorporation Salt Lake City, Utah Order Approving Notices to Conduct Certain Data Processing Activities and Other Nonbanking Activities BankAmerica Corporation, BancWest Corporation, BB&T Corporation, First Union Corporation, SunTrust Banks, Inc., Wachovia Corporation, and Zions Bancorporation (collectively, "Notificants"), bank holding companies within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), have requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. 1843(c)(8)) and section 225.24 of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.24) to acquire and merge Honor Technologies, Inc., Maitland, Florida, and Star Systems, Inc., San Diego, California, and to engage in providing data processing services, pursuant to section 225.28(b)(14) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(14)). In addition, Notificants, through H&S, would engage in providing check verification services, in accordance with section 225.28(b)(2) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(2)), and management consulting services related to the activities of H&S, in accordance with section 225.28(b)(9) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(9)). Currently, Honor Technologies, Inc. operates two electronic funds transfer ("EFT") networks under the service names HONOR and HONOR West (collectively, "HONOR"), and Star Systems, Inc. operates the Star EFT network ("Star"). These EFT networks provide data processing and transmission services to financial institutions and merchants that are members of their respective branded automated teller machine ("ATM") and point of sale ("POS") networks. H&S would engage through HONOR and Star in certain nonbanking activities related to the operation of ATM and POS networks, including various data processing and transmission services, in accordance with section 225.28(b)(14) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(14)). Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (63 Federal Register 67,693 and 70,131 (1998)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the notice and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. As in similar cases, the Board also sought comments from the Department of Justice on the competitive effects of the proposal. The Department of Justice indicated that it had no objection to consummation of the proposed transaction. Notificants are large commercial banking organizations with headquarters in Georgia, Hawaii, North Carolina, and Utah. Notificants each engage directly and through subsidiaries in a broad range of banking and permissible nonbanking activities in the United States. Section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act provides that a bank holding company may, with Board approval, engage in any activity that the Board determines to be "so closely related to banking or managing and controlling banks as to be a proper incident thereto." The Board previously has determined that all the activities proposed in the notice are closely related to banking within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Notificants would conduct the proposed activities in accordance with Regulation Y and previous Board decisions. The Board also must consider whether the performance of the proposed activities by Notificants through H&S "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public . . . that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices." As part of this review under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act, the Board considers the financial and managerial resources of Notificants, their subsidiaries, and any company to be acquired and the effect of the proposal on those resources. Based on all the facts of record, including reports of examination and other supervisory information, the Board concludes that financial and managerial considerations are consistent with approval of the proposal. In addition, there is no evidence in the record that the proposal would result in conflicts of interests or unsound banking practices. Competitive Considerations The proposal would result in the combination of two EFT networks, one operating primarily in the mid-Atlantic and southeastern states and the other operating primarily in the western states. A number of other large regional networks and national networks that link financial institutions and local and regional networks nationwide would continue to operate in these areas. To determine whether a particular transaction is likely to decrease competition, the Board traditionally has considered the area of effective competition between parties. The area of effective competition has been defined by reference to the line of commerce or product market involved and a geographic market. In this case, the Board has carefully considered the relevant product and geographic markets in which to analyze the competitive effects of the proposal in light of all the facts of record, including information provided by Notificants and the geographic scope of and services provided by existing EFT networks and other providers of EFT services. The Board previously has identified three distinct products that are typically offered by EFT networks: Network access (access to an EFT network identified by a common trademark or logo displayed on ATMs, POS terminals, and access cards); Network services (operation of a "network switch" to receive and route electronic messages between ATMs, POS terminals, and data processing facilities used by depository institutions to authorize EFT transactions and the provision of "gateway" access to other networks); and ATM/POS processing (data processing and transmission used to drive ATMs and POS terminals, monitor their activity, authorize ATM and POS transactions, and reconcile accounts). HONOR provides all three services to its network members. Star directly provides only network access; a third party provides network services and ATM/POS processing. Under the proposal, H&S would not acquire the facilities to provide network services or ATM/POS processing services to the Star network or any other network or the right to provide these services. Accordingly, the relevant product market in which to examine the competitive effects of the proposal is the market for network access. The Board previously has determined that the geographic market for network access is an area significantly larger than local banking markets and has considered the market area of an EFT network to consist of regions comprising several states. Based on all the facts of record, the Board believes that HONOR has a significant competitive presence in the mid-Atlantic and southeastern states (Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Maryland, North Carolina, South Carolina, Tennessee, Virginia, and the District of Columbia) and, to a lesser extent, in Kansas and Missouri. Star's primary service area is located in the western United States (Arizona, California, Colorado, Hawaii, Idaho, Nevada, Oregon, Utah, and Washington). Thus, the primary service areas for HONOR and Star do not overlap. There are a number of areas outside these primary service areas in which HONOR and Star somewhat overlap in providing network access. Changes in market concentration in these other areas would not be significant, however, and in each area a number of other networks, including other large regional networks, and third party processors will continue to operate and to provide both direct and potential competition for HONOR and Star. National networks also offer an alternative to regional networks for some financial institutions, particularly in the southeast region served by HONOR, where relatively fewer financial institutions are members of any regional EFT network and national networks appear to be increasing their competitive presence. The Board also has considered the proposed operating rules for HONOR and Star. The rules appear to facilitate competition and to ensure access to the network for all depository institutions. For example, all depository institutions would be able to participate in HONOR and Star on a nondiscriminatory basis, to join other regional networks, and to co-brand their cards and ATM terminals. Each member of the network wouldl be able to set for itself the fees it charges its retail customers for ATM or POS transactions. The operating rules also would permit the use of third-party processors and unbranded subswitching of transactions. The Board notes that transactions initiated at an ATM in the HONOR or Star network and routed through a national network to another network would not be required to pass through the HONOR or Star gateway. In addition, H&S's proposed corporate structure ensures that its board of directors would represent a wide range of interests and that H&S's policymaking would not be dominated by the organizations with the largest shareholdings. The proposal, therefore, would provide services to Notificants' subsidiary banks, other shareholders of H&S, and other financial institutions that participate in HONOR or Star under operating rules that would promote open access to the network. Smaller financial institutions would have the opportunity to provide their customers with greater access to their deposit accounts and thereby could compete with larger, multistate organizations for retail deposit funds without substantial investments in their own proprietary ATM networks. In addition, the operating rules of HONOR and Star would promote competition between the HONOR and Star networks and alternative providers of EFT-related services, including national ATM and POS networks, other regional networks, and third-party providers of EFT switching and processing services, and thereby encourage price and other competition for the services provided by HONOR and Star. In this light, and based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that the proposal would not result in adverse effects such as undue concentration of resources or unfair competition. For these reasons, and based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposal is not likely to have a significantly adverse effect on competition in any relevant market. Public Benefits Section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act requires that, in order to approve a proposal, the Board must determine that the public benefits that could reasonably be expected from the proposal would outweigh potential adverse effects. This is a balancing process that takes into account the extent of the potential for adverse effects, which, for the reasons indicated above, the Board does not believe to be significant in this case. Consumers would benefit from the added account availability and convenience resulting from consummation of the proposal. In particular, an ATM network with a large number of financial institution members and that provides network access at more locations over a broad geographical area would have greater value to network cardholders because they would have broader and more convenient access to their deposit accounts. In this case, the geographic markets served by H&S would include all the southern United States and the Pacific northwest states and, accordingly, the proposal would enhance benefits to consumers in these areas, particularly as consumer travel increases and business activity continues to grow. In addition, H&S would offer services to all financial institutions, and smaller financial institutions would have the opportunity to provide their customers with greater access to their deposit accounts. As noted, membership in the H&S networks would enable smaller financial institutions to compete with larger, multistate organizations to retain deposit funds without having to make substantial investments in branch systems or their own proprietary ATM networks. Consummation of the proposal also would result in other public benefits. The proposal is expected to produce economies of scale, for example, and to reduce average costs for the combined networks. Members of each network also would benefit from the technical expertise and the expanded research and development programs of the other network. Star network members would have access to a broader array of products and services, including card production and website design and maintenance. HONOR network members would benefit from the introduction of a service provided by Star that permits bill payments by telephone without the use of a personal identification number. For the foregoing reasons, and after careful consideration of all the facts of record, the Board has determined that consummation of the proposal can reasonably be expected to produce public benefits that would outweigh any possible adverse effects under the proper incident to banking standard of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Conclusion Based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the notices should be, and hereby are, approved. The Board's approval is specifically conditioned on Notificants' compliance with the commitments made in connection with these notices and the conditions referred to in this order. The Board's determination also is subject to all the terms and conditions set forth in Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.25(c) (12 C.F.R. 225.7 and 225.25(c)), and to the Board's authority to require modification or termination of the activities of a bank holding company or any of its subsidiaries that the Board finds necessary to ensure compliance with, or to prevent evasion of, the provisions and purposes of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders issued thereunder. For purposes of this action, the commitments and conditions shall be deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. This proposal shall not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board, or the Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Richmond or San Francisco, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective February 1, 1999. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Appendix Asset and Deposit Data for Notificants BankAmerica Corporation, with approximately $594.7 billion in total consolidated assets, is the second largest commercial banking organization in the United States, controlling $287.6 billion in deposits. BankAmerica Corporation operates subsidiary banks in 23 states and the District of Columbia. BancWest Corporation, with approximately $8.2 billion in total consolidated assets, is the 63rd largest commercial banking organization in the United States, controlling $5.9 billion in deposits. BancWest Corporation operates subsidiary banks in five states. BB&T Corporation, with approximately $33.9 billion in total consolidated assets, is the 27th largest commercial banking organization in the United States, controlling $20.6 billion in deposits. BB&T Corporation operates subsidiary banks in four states and the District of Columbia. First Union Corporation, with approximately $234.6 billion in total consolidated assets, is the sixth largest commercial banking organization in the United States, controlling $134 billion in deposits. First Union Corporation operates subsidiary banks in 12 states and the District of Columbia. SunTrust Banks, Inc., with approximately $86.6 billion in total consolidated assets, is the eleventh largest commercial banking organization in the United States, controlling $53.3 billion in deposits. SunTrust Banks, Inc., operates subsidiary banks in six states and the District of Columbia. Wachovia Corporation, with approximately $65.6 billion in total consolidated assets, is the 17th largest commercial banking organization in the United States, controlling $37 billion in deposits. Wachovia Corporation operates subsidiary banks in six states. Zions Bancorporation, with approximately $12.4 billion in total consolidated assets, is the 53rd largest commercial banking organization in the United States, controlling $8.1 billion in deposits. Zions Bancorporation operates subsidiary banks in eight states. Footnotes Notificants would form a de novo company, H&S Holding Company, Maitland, Florida ("H&S"), that would indirectly acquire all the voting shares of the two companies to be acquired. Notificants are shareholders or members of the companies to be acquired and, under the proposal, each would receive, directly or indirectly, more than 5 percent of the voting shares of H&S. In general, an ATM network is an arrangement whereby more than one ATM and more than one depository institution (or the depository records of such institutions) are connected by electronic or telecommunications means to one or more computers, processors or switches for the purpose of providing ATM services to retail customers of the depository institutions. POS terminals are generally located in merchant establishments. POS terminals accept ATM or similar cards from retail customers and, using an ATM network or a parallel POS-only network, provide access to a retail customer's account to transfer funds to a merchant's account. Asset and deposit data for each Notificant are set forth in the Appendix. See 12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(2), (9), and (14); 12 C.F.R. 225.131 (permissible consulting services); Barnett Banks of Florida, Inc., 65 Federal Reserve Bulletin 263 (1979) (check verification services); Compagnie Financiï¿½re de Paribas, 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 348 (1996) (fraud detection services); Bank of New York Company, Inc., 80 Federal Reserve Bulletin 1107 (1994) (" InfiNet Order ") (ATM network services); Banc One Corporation , 81 Federal Reserve Bulletin 492 (1995) (" EPS Order ") (ATM network services). The Board notes that ATM activities must be conducted in accordance with applicable federal and state laws, including applicable branching laws. See 12 U.S.C. 1843(c)(8). See 12 C.F.R. 225.26. HONOR and Star are among the largest EFT regional networks in the United States. Star has the largest number of ATMs, POS terminals, and EFT transactions per month, and HONOR has the second largest number of ATMs and EFT transactions per month and the third largest number of POS terminals. HONOR has the largest number and Star has the seventh largest number of financial institutions participating in a network. Sources: EFT Network Data Book (1999); Bank Network News (September 25, 1998). See EPS Order at 493-94. See EPS Order at 494. The Board also notes the rapid growth in recent years in the volume of POS transactions, which serve as an alternative for certain ATM transactions, and the presence of a number of competitors that provide POS network services across regional boundaries. See Barnett Banks, Inc., 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin 131, 133 n.20 (1997) (" HONOR/Most Order "). In October 1998, Visa began operations of its Visa Check II card, a debit card offering issuers higher fees for POS transactions but prohibiting co-branding with other networks. The Board previously has determined that ATM network operating rules are an important consideration in assessing the competitive impact of a proposal under the section 4(c)(8) factors. See InfiNet Order ; EPS Order . See HONOR/Most Order at 132. "Subswitching" refers to the routing of transactions between members of the same regional network without accessing that network, and, therefore, without paying the network's switch fee. Typically, this is accomplished by routing the transaction through a third-party processor that provides ATM processing services for both network members. The proposed bylaws of H&S provide that the board of directors would consist of 30 members, and this number may not be changed except by the affirmative vote of two-thirds of the directors or shareholders. No more than one director may be an affiliate of or have any material business relationship with any one shareholder, and voting for directors is cumulative. No shareholder may hold more than 19 percent of H&S voting shares. See also HONOR/Most Order at 133 n.21. See HONOR/Most Order at 132-33. See HONOR/Most Order at 134. Notificants expect that any network services and ATM processing that are consolidated in the future would result in economies of scale for computer facilities, operations personnel, programming staff, and other support services and would likely reduce the cost of operation of the HONOR and Star networks. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Meyer, Ferguson, and Gramlich. Asset data are as of September 30, 1998, and deposit data are as of June 30, 1998, and are adjusted to reflect acquisitions consummated after that date.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the proposal of Istituto Bancario San Paolo di Torino-Istituto Mobiliare Italiano S.p.A., Turin, Italy, to retain its ownership of Mabon Securities Corp. and Cedar Street Securities Corp., both of New York, New York, and thereby engage in certain nonbanking activities. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Istituto Bancario San Paolo di Torino-Istituto Mobiliare Italiano S.p.A. Turin, Italy Order Approving Notice to Engage in Nonbanking Activities Istituto Bancario San Paolo di Torino-Istituto Mobiliare Italiano S.p.A. ("San Paolo-IMI"), a foreign banking organization subject to the provisions of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval to engage through Mabon Securities Corp. ("Mabon") and, in certain cases, through Mabon's wholly owned subsidiary, Cedar Street Securities Corp. ("Cedar Street"), both of New York, New York, in the following nonbanking activities: Extending credit and servicing loans, in accordance with section 225.28(b)(1) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(1)); Engaging in activities related to extending credit, in accordance with section 225.28(b)(2) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(2)); Providing financial and investment advisory services, in accordance with section 225.28(b)(6) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(6)); Providing securities brokerage, riskless principal, private placement, futures commission merchant, and other agency transactional services, in accordance with section 225.28(b)(7) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R 225.28(b)(7)); Underwriting and dealing in government obligations and money market instruments in which state member banks may underwrite and deal under 12 U.S.C. §§ 335 and 24(7) ("bank-eligible securities"), engaging in investing and trading activities, and buying and selling bullion and related activities, in accordance with section 225.28(b)(8) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(8)); and Underwriting and dealing in, to a limited extent, all types of debt and equity securities, except ownership interests in open-end investment companies ("bank-ineligible securities") through Mabon. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (63 Federal Register 67,693 (1998)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the notice and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. San Paolo-IMI, with total consolidated assets of approximately $200 billion, is the largest banking organization in Italy. In the United States, San Paolo-IMI operates a federally licensed branch in New York, New York, and a representative office in Los Angeles, California. Mabon engages in securities transactions in the United States on behalf of San Paolo-IMI's European affiliates and provides research and investment management services to both U.S. and foreign investors. Mabon and Cedar Street are and will continue to be broker-dealers registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. § 78a et seq. ) and members of the National Association of Securities Dealers, Inc. ("NASD"). Accordingly, Mabon and Cedar Street are and will continue to be subject to the record-keeping and reporting obligations, fiduciary standards, and other requirements of the Securities Exchange Act, the SEC, and the NASD. Underwriting and Dealing in Bank-Ineligible Securities The Board previously has determined - subject to the framework of prudential limitations established in previous decisions to address the potential for conflicts of interests, unsound banking practices, or other adverse effects - that underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities is so closely related to banking as to be a proper incident thereto within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. The Board also has determined that underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities is consistent with section 20 of the Glass-Steagall Act (12 U.S.C. § 377), provided that the company engaged in the activity derives no more than 25 percent of its gross revenues from underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities. San Paolo-IMI has committed that Mabon will conduct its underwriting and dealing activities using the methods and procedures and subject to the prudential limitations established by the Board in the Section 20 Orders. San Paolo-IMI also has committed that Mabon will conduct its bank-ineligible securities underwriting and dealing subject to the Board's revenue restriction. As a condition of this order, San Paolo-IMI is required to conduct its bank-ineligible securities activities subject to the revenue restrictions and Operating Standards established for section 20 subsidiaries ("Operating Standards"). Other Activities Approved by Regulation The Board previously has determined that credit and credit-related activities; financial and investment advisory activities; securities brokerage, riskless principal, private placement, and other agency transactional activities; underwriting and dealing in bank-eligible securities; investing and trading activities; and buying and selling bullion and related activities are all closely related to banking within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. San Paolo-IMI has committed that it will conduct these activities in accordance with the limitations set forth in Regulation Y and the Board's orders and interpretations relating to each of these activities. Other Considerations In order to approve the notice, the Board also must determine that performance of the proposed activities is a proper incident to banking, that is, that the proposed activities "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public, such as greater convenience, increased competition, or gains in efficiency, that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices." As part of its evaluation of these factors, the Board considers the financial condition and managerial resources of the notificant and its subsidiaries and the effect of the proposed transaction on those resources. San Paolo-IMI's capital ratios satisfy applicable risk-based standards under the Basle Accord and are considered equivalent to the capital levels that would be required of a United States banking organization. The Board also has reviewed the capitalization of San Paolo-IMI and Mabon in accordance with the standards set forth in the Section 20 Orders and finds the capitalization of each to be consistent with approval. This determination is based on all the facts of record, including San Paolo-IMI's projections of the volume of Mabon's bank-ineligible underwriting and dealing activities. The Board also has reviewed the managerial resources of San Paolo-IMI and Mabon in light of relevant reports of examination and all the facts of record. Based on the foregoing, the Board has concluded that financial and managerial considerations are consistent with approval of the notice. The Board also has carefully considered the competitive effects of the proposal. Prior to its merger with IMI, San Paolo did not engage in the United States in the nonbanking activities conducted by Mabon. Furthermore, the Board notes that the markets for the proposed activities are unconcentrated and there are numerous existing and potential competitors. As a result, consummation of the proposal would have a de minimis effect on competition, and the Board has concluded that the proposal would not result in a significantly adverse effect on competition in any relevant market. The Board expects that continuation of the proposed activities would provide added convenience to the expanded customer base of San Paolo-IMI. San Paolo-IMI also has indicated that it intends to expand the product and service offerings of Mabon, thereby increasing competition in the relevant product markets. The Board also has recognized the public benefits of permitting capital markets to operate so that banking organizations may make potentially profitable investments in nonbanking companies and allocate their resources in the manner they believe is most efficient when such investments are consistent, as in this case, with the relevant consideration under the BHC Act. Under the framework and conditions established in this order and the Section 20 Orders, and based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that the performance of the proposed activities by San Paolo-IMI can reasonably be expected to produce public benefits that outweigh any adverse effects of the proposal. Accordingly, the Board has determined that the performance of the proposed activities by San Paolo-IMI is a proper incident to banking for purposes of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Conclusion On the basis of the foregoing and all other facts of record, the Board has determined that the notice should be, and hereby is, approved, subject to all the terms and conditions discussed in this order and in the Section 20 Orders, as modified by the Modification Orders. The Board's approval of the proposed underwriting and dealing activities extends only to activities conducted within the limitations of those orders and this order, including the Board's reservation of authority to establish additional limitations to ensure that Mabon's activities are consistent with safety and soundness, avoidance of conflict of interests, and other relevant considerations under the BHC Act. Underwriting and dealing in any manner other than as approved in this order and the Section 20 Orders (as modified by the Modification Orders), is not within the scope of the Board's approval and is not authorized for Mabon. The Board's approval of the proposal to underwrite and deal in all types of bank-ineligible securities is conditioned on a determination by the Board that San Paolo-IMI and Mabon have established policies and procedures to ensure compliance with the Operating Standards and the other requirements of this order, the Section 20 Orders, and the Modification Orders, including computer, audit, and accounting systems, internal risk management controls, and the necessary operation and managerial infrastructure for underwriting and dealing in all types of debt and equity securities. San Paolo-IMI proposes to expand the existing bank-ineligible securities activities of Mabon, and has requested a delay in conducting the infrastructure review to allow San Paolo-IMI to develop enhanced policies and procedures for the proposed expanded bank-ineligible securities activities of Mabon. As part of the request, San Paolo-IMI has committed not to expand the scope of Mabon's current bank-ineligible securities activities until the Board determines that a satisfactory infrastructure is in place. The Board's determination also is subject to all terms and conditions set forth in Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.25(c) (12 C.F.R. 225.7 and 225.25(c)), and to the Board's authority to require modification or termination of the activities of a bank holding company or any of its subsidiaries as the Board finds necessary to ensure compliance with, and prevent evasion of, the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders issued thereunder. The Board's decision is specifically conditioned on compliance with all the commitments made in connection with the notice, including the commitments discussed in this order and the conditions set forth in this order and the Board's regulations and orders noted above. The commitments and conditions are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The proposal shall not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective February 1, 1999. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Footnotes As a foreign banking organization operating a branch in the United States, San Paolo-IMI is subject to certain provisions of the BHC Act pursuant to section 8(a) of the International Banking Act of 1978. 12 U.S.C. § 3106(a). San Paolo-IMI was formed in November 1998 through the merger of Istituto San Paolo di Torino S.p.A., Turin, Italy ("San Paolo"), and Istituto Mobiliare Italiano S.p.A., Rome, Italy ("IMI"). In connection with this merger, San Paolo-IMI received approval under section 4(c)(9) of the BHC Act to retain temporarily the United States subsidiaries of IMI. See Letter dated July 27,1998, from Robert deV. Frierson, Associate Secretary of the Board, to Randal K. Quarles, Esq. Cedar Street currently is an inactive subsidiary of Mabon. San Paolo-IMI has indicated that in the future Cedar Street may commence the activities listed above, except underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities. San Paolo-IMI has agreed to consult with the Federal Reserve System before Cedar Street commences any bank-ineligible underwriting and dealing activities so that it can be determined whether an additional notice pursuant to section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act would be required. Asset and ranking data are as of June 30, 1998. Compagnia di San Paolo (the "Foundation"), an Italian public law foundation, previously controlled a majority of the voting shares of San Paolo. See Istituto Bancario San Paolo di Torino, S.p.A., 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 1147 (1996). The Foundation has significantly reduced its ownership interest in San Paolo over time and currently owns approximately 16 percent of the voting shares of San Paolo-IMI. One director and two other representatives of the Foundation also serve on San Paolo-IMI's current 17-member board of directors. Italian law requires that the Foundation terminate its director interlock with San Paolo-IMI by April 15, 1999, and prohibits the Foundation from being involved in the management of San Paolo-IMI after November 18, 1999. The Foundation also has entered into a shareholders' agreement that permits the Foundation to vote only 5 percent of San Paolo-IMI's shares at the next election of San Paolo-IMI's board of directors. San Paolo-IMI has represented that the Foundation will not have the right or ability to independently elect any director to the future boards of directors of San Paolo-IMI. Based on these and all other facts of record, including the limited nature of the continuing business relationships between the Foundation and San Paolo-IMI, the Board has determined that the Foundation is not required to join this notice. See J.P. Morgan & Co., Incorporated, et al., 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 192 (1989), aff'd sub nom. Securities Industry Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 900 F.2d 360 (D.C. Cir. 1990); Citicorp, et al., 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 473 (1987), aff'd sub nom. Securities Industry Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 839 F.2d 47 (2d Cir.), cert. denied, 486 U.S. 1059 (1988); as modified by Review of Restrictions on Director, Officer and Employee Interlocks, Cross-Marketing Activities, and the Purchase and Sale of Financial Assets Between a Section 20 Subsidiary and an Affiliated Bank or Thrift, 61 Federal Register 57,679 (1996); Amendments to Restrictions in the Board's Section 20 Orders, 62 Federal Register 45,295 (1997); and Clarification to the Board's Section 20 Orders, 63 Federal Register 14,803 (1998) (collectively, "Section 20 Orders"). Compliance with the revenue limitation shall be calculated in accordance with the methods stated in the Section 20 Orders, as modified by the Order Approving Modifications to the Section 20 Orders, 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 751 (1989); 10 Percent Revenue Limit on Bank-Ineligible Activities of Subsidiaries of Bank Holding Companies Engaged in Underwriting and Dealing in Securities, 61 Federal Register 48,953 (1996); and Revenue Limit on Bank-Ineligible Activities of Subsidiaries of Bank Holding Companies Engaged in Underwriting and Dealing in Securities, 61 Federal Register 68,750 (1996) (collectively, "Modification Orders"). In light of the fact that Mabon was a going concern on the date of the merger of San Paolo and IMI, the Board believes that allowing Mabon to calculate compliance with the revenue limitation on an annualized basis during the first year after the date that the merger of San Paolo and IMI was consummated and thereafter on a rolling quarterly basis is consistent with the Section 20 Orders. See, e.g., Dresdner Bank AG, 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 850 (1996); Dauphin Deposit Corporation, 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 672 (1991). 12 C.F.R. 225.200. Mabon may provide services that are necessary incidents to the proposed underwriting and dealing activities. Unless Mabon receives specific approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act to conduct the activities independently, any revenues from the incidental activities must be treated as ineligible revenues subject to the Board's revenue limitation. See 12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(1), (2), (6), (7), and (8). 12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8). See 12 C.F.R. 225.26(b); see also The Fuji Bank, Limited, 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 94 (1989); Bayerische Vereinsbank AG, 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 155 (1987). See Banc One Corporation, 84 Federal Reserve Bulletin 553 (1998). Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Meyer, Ferguson, and Gramlich.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among First Utah Bancorporation, the First Utah Bank, Premier Data Corporation, all of Salt Lake City, Utah, and the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. The Written Agreement includes provisions addressing Year 2000 readiness. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
Testimony of Governor Edward M. Gramlich The budget surplus and social security Before the Committee on Finance, U.S. Senate February 9, 1999 Governor Gramlich presented identical testimony before the Committee on Ways and Means, U.S. House of Representatives, February 23, 1999 Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee, I appreciate the opportunity to appear before you today to discuss Social Security reform. I speak for myself, as past chair of the 1994-1996 Quadrennial Advisory Council on Social Security, and not in my current status as a member of the Federal Reserve Board. As you are all well aware, the U.S. population is aging. Today there are 3.4 workers per retiree; by 2030 it is projected that there will only be two. This fundamental change in the demographics of our population poses a large challenge: how can we provide adequate health and retirement benefits to our retired population, without imposing undue burdens on tomorrow's workers? Clearly, the answer to this question is that we must act now to increase the total amount of resources to be available in the future. By increasing the size of our economy, we can devote a greater share of output to the retired population, without reducing the consumption of the working population. The only way to achieve this critical objective is for us to build up the stock of productive capital by increasing our rate of national saving. Indeed, in the current expansion, investment has expanded at a rapid clip, without inducing a rise in interest rates. This investment boom, and the accompanying step-up in the growth of the capital stock, is partly attributable to an increased rate of national saving. Between 1992 and 1998, national saving increased from 3.7 percent to 7.5 percent of net national product. While private and state and local government saving actually dipped during this period, this decline was more than offset by increased saving by the federal government through deficit reduction. The stellar performance of the economy over recent years provides the nation a unique opportunity to begin to tackle its long-run problems. In particular, the large budget surpluses that are projected over the next 15 years or so, if they are permitted to materialize, will significantly improve our fiscal and economic position as the baby boom starts to retire. From the government's perspective, using those surpluses to pay down the federal debt will reduce future interest payments and free up future tax revenue; from the macroeconomic perspective, the increase in national saving represented by the increase in government saving will lead to a larger capital stock, higher productivity, and an improved standard of living. From this standpoint, the broad objective of the Clinton Administration's budget--that is, to preserve most of the projected surpluses--seems to me both responsible and appropriate. The Administration would devote about $1.4 trillion of the projected $4.9 trillion of current law surpluses over the next 15 years to new spending, and use the remainder to pay down our national debt. According to the Administration's calculations, the ratio of debt held by the public to GDP would fall from its current 44 percent to 7 percent by 2014. If such an outcome were to materialize, it would represent a dramatic improvement in the fiscal position of the nation. Under current law, the Social Security revenues exceed outlays, creating surpluses that are credited to the Social Security trust fund. Without any legislative changes, the Social Security trust fund will continue to accumulate funds, reaching a peak in 2020 of $3.8 trillion, or almost 16 percent of GDP. These surpluses both reduce the national debt and improve the long run fiscal condition of Social Security. This claim does not stem from any accounting gimmickry: By reducing future interest payments, these surpluses do indeed free up future revenues. In addition to this accumulation already scheduled under current law, the Administration is also proposing to transfer an additional $2.8 trillion of general revenues to the Social Security trust fund. While the Administration's rationale for these transfers is to ensure that the surpluses actually materialize, the transfer of general revenues represents a major shift from past practice, under which Social Security has been financed almost entirely from dedicated payroll taxes. During the deliberations of the 1994-1996 Quadrennial Advisory Council on Social Security, we considered whether general revenues should be used to help shore up the Social Security program. This idea was unanimously rejected, for a number of reasons. First, using general revenues to fund Social Security puts the Social Security system in competition with other spending programs during the budget cycle. But Social Security is a long-range program--people pay dedicated taxes today toward benefits that may not be received for 30 or 40 years--and many feel that it should not be part of an annual budgetary allocation process. Perhaps more importantly, using general revenues to fund Social Security undermines the fiscal discipline imposed by the need to ensure that income earmarked for Social Security is sufficient to meet the entire cost of the program, both in the short run and long run. Without a long-range budget constraint on Social Security, it will be much more difficult to limit future benefit growth. And, notwithstanding the large surpluses being projected, some reductions in benefits are almost certain to be necessary as the U.S. population ages. It is important to remember that the aging of the population will bring pressures to programs other than Social Security. The trustees of the Medicare trust fund project that Medicare expenditures as a share of GDP will more than double--from 2.7 percent today, to over 5.8 percent in 2030, and Medicaid spending on long-term care likely will face similar increases. Because under the current budget system, Medicare Part B and Medicaid are financed with general revenues, there is much less pressure to take measures now to improve their long-run financing. But these programs too will put significant demands on government resources in the future. If we use the projected surpluses as a rationale for not making hard choices in Social Security, finding the resources to provide Medicare and Medicaid to our aging population will prove that much harder. Thus, there are serious drawbacks to relaxing Social Security's long run budget constraint through general revenue transfers. I would prefer Social Security reforms that maintain the link between dedicated taxes and benefits, and maintain the value of long-range actuarial analysis. This discipline is essential if we are to limit the impending explosion of entitlement spending. The President's budget proposal, by preserving future surpluses and paying down our national debt, makes an important contribution to raising national saving. But to me the proposal looks even better without the general revenue transfer.
Release Date: February 10, 1999 Interagency Task Force Publishes Consumer Brochure About Shopping and Negotiating for the Best Mortgage The federal Interagency Task Force on Fair Lending has published a brochure for consumers, . The brochure notes that shopping around for a home loan or mortgage is similar to shopping for a car--consumers should obtain information on all costs of the loan and negotiate for the best deal. The brochure describes how comparing and negotiating interest rates, fees and other payment terms may help consumers get the best financing and possibly save thousands of dollars, whether it's a home purchase, a refinancing, or a home equity loan. It advises consumers to: Obtain information from several lenders. Make sure to obtain all important cost information. Negotiate for the best deal. For example, the brochure notes that on any given day, lenders and brokers may offer different prices for the same loan to different consumers, even if consumers have the same loan qualifications. These different prices may result because loan officers and brokers often are allowed to keep some or all of the difference between the lowest available price and any higher price that the consumer agrees to pay. This compensation arrangement helps explain why it is important for consumers to ask questions about costs and negotiate for the best deal. The brochure contains a worksheet consumers can use to compare costs while shopping. The worksheet lists commonly charged fees and closing costs and includes a useful list of questions consumers may wish to ask lenders when they shop for a loan. The free publication outlines common sources for home loans and explains the difference between rates, points, and fees. The brochure highlights some of the laws that protect consumers from unfair lending practices. It also emphasizes that even consumers with past credit problems should shop around and negotiate for the best deal. Finally, the brochure includes a mortgage loan shopping form that consumers can use to record loan data quoted by two or more lenders or brokers and then compare that data to help identify or negotiate the best deal. The members of the Interagency Task Force include the Department of Housing and Urban Development, Department of Justice, Department of the Treasury, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Federal Housing Finance Board, Federal Reserve Board, Federal Trade Commission, National Credit Union Administration, Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and Office of Thrift Supervision. The brochure is available at 50 cents per copy from Consumer Information Center Pueblo, CO 81009 or from the center's web site at . Single copies of the brochure are available free of charge from the following agencies: Department of Housing and Urban Development: The Department's web site at . Media contact -- Peggy Johannsen, Public Affairs Specialist, Office of Public Affairs, U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, 451 Seventh Street, SW, Washington, D.C. 20410; 202-708-0685. Department of Justice: The Department's web site at or contact Jane Dyer, U.S. Department of Justice, Civil Rights Division, Housing and Civil Enforcement Section, P.O. Box 65998, Washington, D.C. 20035; 202-514-4744. Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation: The FDIC's web site at or the FDIC's Public Information Center, 801 17th Street, NW, Room 100, Washington, D.C. 20434; 800-276-6003 or 202-416-6940. Media contact: Jay Rosenstein, 202-898-7303. Federal Reserve Board: The Board's web site at and from Publications, Stop 127, Federal Reserve Board, 20th & C Streets, NW, Washington, D.C. 20551; 202-452-3245. Federal Trade Commission: The FTC's web site: and from the FTC=s Consumer Response Center, Room 130, 600 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW, Washington, D.C. 20580; 202-FTC-HELP (202-382-4357); TDD for the hearing impaired 202-326-2502. Media contact: Howard Shapiro, Office of Public Affairs, 202-326-2176. National Credit Union Administration: NCUA's web site at or contact Bob Loftus, Director of Public Affairs, National Credit Union Administration, 1775 Duke Street, Washington, D.C. 22134. Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight: The Office's web site at or contact Jill Weide, 202-414-3813. Office of the Comptroller of the Currency: The OCC's web site at and from Communications, Mail Stop 3-2, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, 250 E Street, SW, Washington, D.C. 20219; 202-874-4700. Office of Thrift Supervision: The OTS's web site at and from Publications, Office of Thrift Supervision, 1700 G Street, NW, Washington, D.C. 20552; 202-906-6410 (OTS Publications Hotline).
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of a Prompt Corrective Action Directive against the Zia New Mexico Bank, Tucumcari, New Mexico. A copy of the Directive is attached.
Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan H.R. 10 and the need for financial reform Before the Committee on Banking and Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives February 11, 1999 It is a pleasure to appear before the Committee to present the views of the Federal Reserve on the need to enact legislation to modernize the U.S. financial system. The Federal Reserve continues to support strongly the enactment of such legislation and believes that H.R. 10 contains the fundamental principles that should be included in such legislation. I commend the Committee for taking up this vital matter so promptly. The Need for Financial Reform U.S. financial institutions are today among the most innovative and efficient providers of financial services in the world. They compete, however, in a marketplace that is undergoing major and fundamental change driven by a revolution in technology, by dramatic innovations in the capital markets, and by the globalization of the financial markets and the financial services industry. For these reasons, we support, as we have for many years, major revisions, such as those included in H.R. 10, to the Glass-Steagall Act and the Bank Holding Company Act to remove the legislative barriers against the integration of banking, insurance and securities activities. There is virtual unanimity among all concerned--private and public alike--that these barriers should be removed. The technologically driven proliferation of new financial products that enable risk unbundling have been increasingly combining the characteristics of banking, insurance, and securities products into single financial instruments. These changes, which are occurring all over the world, have also dramatically altered the way financial services providers operate and the way they deliver their products. In the United States, our financial institutions have been required to take elaborate steps to develop and deliver new financial products and services in a manner that is consistent with our outdated laws. The costs of these efforts are becoming increasingly burdensome and serve no useful public purpose. Unless soon repealed, the archaic statutory barriers to efficiency could undermine the global dominance of American finance, as well as the continued competitiveness of our financial institutions and their ability to innovate and to provide the best and broadest possible services to U.S. consumers. We believe that it is important that the rules for our financial services industry be set by the Congress rather than, as too often has been the case, by banking regulators dealing with our outdated laws. Only Congress has the ability to fashion rules that are comprehensive and equitable to all participants and that guard the public interest. The market will continue to force change whether or not Congress acts. Without Congressional action, changes will occur through exploitation of loopholes and marginal interpretations of the law that courts feel obliged to sanction. This type of response to market forces leads to inefficiencies and inconsistencies, expansion of the federal safety net, potentially increased risk exposure to the federal deposit insurance funds, and a system that will undermine the competitiveness and innovative edge of major segments of our financial services industry. Delay in acting on financial modernization legislation limits Congress's options as these developments proliferate and complicate, increases the difficulty of enacting the safeguards included in H.R. 10 to protect safety and soundness and the public interest, and denies to consumers the benefits that immediate changes in our outdated banking laws will surely bring. H.R. 10 also recognizes another dimension of the changing nature of banking and financial markets: that financial modernization means more than authorizing new powers and affiliations. Not only are we experiencing a revolution in financial products and their delivery, the U.S. is also at a historic crossroads in financial services regulation . It is becoming increasingly evident that the dramatic advances in computer and telecommunications technologies of the past decade have so significantly altered the structure of domestic, indeed, global finance as to render our existing modes of supervision and regulation of financial institutions increasingly obsolescent. The volume, sophistication, and rapidity of financial dealings will inevitably lead to supervisory emphasis on oversight of risk management of financial institutions and a marked scaling back of outmoded loan file and balance sheet surveillance. As we move into the twenty-first century, the remnants of nineteenth century bank examination philosophies will fall by the wayside. Banks, of course, will still need to be supervised and regulated, in no small part because they are subject to the safety net. My point is, however, that the nature and extent of that effort needs to become more consistent with market realities. Moreover, affiliation with banks need not--indeed, should not--create bank-like regulation of affiliates of banks. This shift in supervisory mode, which is already underway, is market driven. It is not the result of some potentially reversible ideology. Such an approach is captured in H.R. 10 in many of the so-called "Fed-light" provisions, and we at the Fed strongly support this approach. H.R. 10 also, in our judgment, has chosen the appropriate structure to combine banking, securities and insurance firms using financial service holding companies. While we enthusiastically support the new powers granted to financial service holding companies, we just as strongly believe that they should be financed by the marketplace, not by instruments backed by the sovereign credit of the United States. The requirement that the new powers be conducted through holding company affiliates minimizes the expansion of the use of the subsidies arising from a safety net backed by the U.S. taxpayer and serves to promote the safety and soundness and stability of our banking and financial system. The rejection of expanded powers for subsidiaries of commercial banks, at least those conducted as principal, is a decision that will inhibit the widespread employment of federal subsidies over a wide range of activities. These activities, if conducted in bank subsidiaries, would accord banking organizations an unfair competitive advantage over comparable insurance and securities firms operating independently or as bank holding company subsidiaries. Even more important, to inject the substantial new subsidies that would accrue to operating subsidiaries of banks into the currently mushrooming domestic and international financial system could distort capital markets and the efficient allocation of both financial and real resources that has been so central to America's current prosperity. The choice of requiring the new powers to be harbored in affiliates of holding companies, not in the so-called op-subs of their banks, will significantly fashion the underlying structure of twenty-first century finance. Another twenty-first century issue is whether we should move beyond affiliations among financial service providers and allow the full integration of banking and commerce. As technology increasingly blurs the distinction among various financial products, it is already beginning to blur the distinctions between predominately commercial and banking firms. We cannot rule out whether sometime in our future full integration may occur, potentially with increased efficiencies. But how the underlying subsidies of deposit insurance, discount window access, and guaranteed final settlement through Fedwire, are folded into a commercial firm, should the latter purchase a bank, is crucially important to the systemic stability of our financial system. It seems to us wise to move first toward the integration of banking, insurance, and securities as envisioned in H.R. 10 and employ the lessons we learn from that important step before we consider whether and under what conditions it would be desirable to move to the second stage of the full integration of commerce and banking. Nothing is lost, in my judgment, by making this a two stage process. Indeed, there is much to be gained. The Asian crisis last year highlighted some of the risks that can arise if relationships between banks and commercial firms are too close, and make caution at this stage prudent in our judgment. In line with these considerations, the Board continues to support elimination of the unitary thrift loophole, which currently allows any type of commercial firm to control a federally insured depository institution. These principles, which we see as fundamental to financial modernization, are embodied in H.R. 10. As in all such major legislation, there are, and will be, numerous provisions only indirectly associated with the legislation's core principles that often foster disagreements. These surrounding details are doubtless important, but not so important that they should be allowed to defeat the consensus that has developed around the key principles embodied in H.R. 10. It would be a disservice to the public and the nation if, in the fruitless search for a bill that pleases everyone in every detail, the benefits of this vital consensus are lost or further delayed. The decision to use the holding company structure, and not the universal bank, as the appropriate structure to allow new securities and insurance affiliations is strongly driven by several key principles embodied in H.R. 10. These principles include that new powers and affiliations should be financed by the market and not by the sovereign credit of the United States, and that supervision of nonbank affiliates must not use the exhaustive bank examination method. Importantly, that decision also prevents the spread of the safety net that would inevitably lead to a weakening of the competitive strength of large segments of our financial services industry because those securities, insurance and other financial services providers that do not operate as subsidiaries of banks would be at a serious disadvantage to similar firms owned by banks. By fostering a level playing field within the financial services industry, we contribute to full, open and fair competition as we enter the next century. This choice of the holding company structure is also critical to the way in which the financial services industry will develop because it provides better protection for and promotes the safety and soundness of our banking and financial system without damaging the national or state bank charters or limiting in any way the benefits of financial modernization. The other route toward full powered commercial bank operating subsidiaries and universal banking would, in our judgment, lead to greater risk for the deposit insurance funds and the taxpayer. It is for these reasons that the Federal Reserve, Securities and Exchange Commission, many state functional regulators, and many in the affected industries have supported the holding company framework and have opposed the universal bank approach. In virtually every other industry, Congress would not be asked to address issues such as these, which are associated with technological and market developments; the market would force the necessary institutional adjustments. Arguably, this difference reflects the painful experience that has taught us that developments in our banking system can have profound effects on the stability of our whole economy, rather than the limited impact we perceive from difficulties in most other industries. Moreover, as a society we have made the choice to create a safety net for depository institutions, not only to protect the public's deposits, but also to minimize the impact of adverse banking developments on our economy. Although we have clearly been successful in doing so, the safety net has predictably shielded bank shareholders from the full consequences of the risks their banks take. Moreover, since the sovereign credit of the United States fosters the stability of the banking system and guarantees the claims of insured depositors, bank creditors do not apply the same self-interest monitoring of banks to protect their own position as they would without discount window access and deposit insurance. As a consequence, to redress the balance of risk-taking, entities with access to the safety net are required to be supervised and regulated. In this way, the U.S. government protects its own--that is the taxpayers'--interest, which is the cost of making good on the guarantee. Put another way, the safety net requires that the government replace with law, regulation, and supervision much of the disciplinary role that the market plays for other businesses. Our experience in the 1980s with insured thrift institutions illustrates the necessity of avoiding expanding risks to the deposit insurance funds and lax supervisory policies and rules. But this necessity has an obvious downside: these same rules limit innovative responses and the ability to take the risks so necessary for economic growth. The last thing we should want, therefore, is to widen or spread this unintended, but nevertheless corrosive, dimension of the safety net to other financial and business entities and markets. It is clear that to do so would not only spread a subsidy to new forms of risk-taking, but would ultimately require the expansion of bank-like supervision as well. In our judgment, the holding company approach upon which H.R. 10 is premised avoids this pitfall; the universal bank approach cannot. While financial modernization represents much needed reform, we should not forget that this modernization will, by itself, introduce dramatic changes in our financial services industry. We feel confident that the risks of this type of reform are manageable within the holding company framework set out in H.R. 10. There is a final point I want to make since it appears to have driven Treasury's opposition to last year's version of H.R. 10. H.R. 10 would not diminish the ability of the Executive Branch to continue to play its meaningful role in the development of banking or economic policy. Currently, the Executive Branch influences such policy primarily through its supervision of national banks and federal savings associations. H.R. 10 would not alter the Executive Branch's supervisory authority for national banks or federal savings associations, nor would it result in any reduction in the predominant and growing share of this nation's banking assets controlled by national banks and federal savings associations. Indeed, as of September 1998, nearly 58 percent of all banking assets were under the supervision of the Comptroller of the Currency, up from 55.2 percent at the end of 1996. Moreover, after controlling for mergers of like-chartered banks, the number of national banks has increased over the period 1996-98 and the number of state banks has declined. Furthermore, Congress for sound public policy reasons has purposefully apportioned responsibility for this nation's financial institutions among the elected Executive Branch and independent regulatory agencies. H.R. 10 retains this balance, and the Federal Reserve does not believe it would serve any useful purpose to alter it. Such action would be contrary to the deliberate steps that Congress has taken to ensure a proper balance in the regulation of this nation's dual banking system. Conclusion The markets are demanding that we change outdated statutory limitations that stand in the way of more efficiently and effectively delivering financial services to the public. Many of these changes will occur even if Congress does not act, but only Congress can establish the ground rules designed to assure the maximum net public benefits, protect the safety and soundness of our financial system, create a fair and level playing field for all participants, and assure the continued primacy of U.S. financial markets. For these reasons, the Federal Reserve supports and urges prompt enactment of the financial modernization contained in H.R. 10.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the applications of First Banks, Inc., Creve Coeur, Missouri, and First Banks America, Inc., Clayton, Missouri, to acquire Redwood Bancorp ("Redwood"), and thereby indirectly acquire Redwood's subsidiary bank, Redwood Bank, both in San Francisco, California. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. First Banks, Inc. Creve Coeur, Missouri First Banks America, Inc. Clayton, Missouri Order Approving Acquisition of a Bank Holding Company First Banks, Inc., and First Banks America, Inc. (collectively, "First Banks"), bank holding companies within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), have requested the Board's approval under section 3 of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1842) to acquire Redwood Bancorp ("Redwood"), and thereby indirectly acquire Redwood's subsidiary bank, Redwood Bank ("Bank"), both in San Francisco, California. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (63 Federal Register 55,389 (1998)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the proposal and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 3 of the BHC Act. First Banks, with total consolidated assets of approximately $4.3 billion, operates subsidiary banks in Missouri, California and Texas. First Banks is the 37th largest commercial banking organization in California, controlling deposits of $974.4 million, representing less than 1 percent of total deposits in commercial banking organizations in the state. Redwood is the 74th largest commercial banking organization in California, controlling deposits of $384 million, representing less than 1 percent of total deposits in commercial .banking organizations in the state. On consummation of the proposal, First Banks would become the 28th largest commercial banking organization in California, controlling deposits of $1.36 billion, representing less than 1 percent of total deposits in the state. Interstate Analysis Section 3(d) of the BHC Act allows the Board to approve an application by a bank holding company to acquire control of a bank located in a state other than the home state of such bank holding company if certain conditions are met. For purposes of the BHC Act, the home state of First Banks is Missouri, and First Banks proposes to acquire a bank in California. All conditions for an interstate acquisition enumerated in section 3(d) are met in this case. In light of all the facts of record, the Board is permitted to approve this proposal under section 3(d) of the BHC Act. Competitive Factor Section 3 of the BHC Act prohibits the Board from approving a proposal that would result in a monopoly, or would be in furtherance of any attempt to monopolize the business of banking. The BHC Act also prohibits the Board from approving a proposal that would substantially lessen competition in any relevant banking market, unless the Board finds that the anticompetitive effects of the proposal in that banking market are clearly outweighed in the public interest by the probable effect of the proposal in meeting the convenience and needs of the community to be served. First Banks and Redwood compete directly in the San Francisco-Oakland-San Jose banking market. The Board has carefully reviewed the competitive effects of the proposal in this banking market in light of all the facts of record, including the characteristics of the market and the projected increase in the concentration of total deposits in depository institutions in the market ("market deposits") as measured by the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index ("HHI") under the Department of Justice Merger Guidelines ("DOJ Guidelines"). Consummation of the proposal would be consistent with the DOJ Guidelines and prior Board precedent in the San Francisco-Oakland-San Jose banking market. The DOJ has reviewed the proposal and advised the Board that consummation of the proposal would not likely have a significantly adverse competitive effect in the San Francisco-Oakland-San Jose banking market or any other relevant market. Based on these and all the facts of record, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposal would not result in any significantly adverse effects on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in the San Francisco-Oakland-San Jose banking market, or in any other relevant banking market, and that competitive factors are consistent with approval of the proposal. Financial, Managerial and Other Considerations The BHC Act also requires the Board to consider the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the companies and banks involved in the proposal, the convenience and needs of the communities to be served, and certain supervisory factors. The Board has reviewed carefully these factors in light of all the factors of record, including supervisory reports of examination assessing the financial and managerial resources of the organizations and confidential financial information provided by First Banks. Based on these and all the other facts of record, the Board concludes that the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of First Banks, Redwood and their subsidiary banks are consistent with approval, as are the other supervisory factors that the Board must consider under section 3 of the BHC Act. In considering the convenience and needs factor, the Board has reviewed the records of First Banks's subsidiary banks and Bank under the Community Reinvestment Act ("CRA"). The Board notes that First Banks does not intend to make any material changes in the products and services provided by Bank. The Board has evaluated the convenience and needs factor in light of examinations of the CRA performance records of First Banks's subsidiary banks and Bank. Each of First Banks's subsidiary banks received a rating of "satisfactory" at its most recent examination for CRA performance in 1998 from its federal supervisory agency. Bank received a rating of "satisfactory" at its most recent examination of CRA performance as of March 4, 1997, by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that convenience and needs considerations, including the CRA performance records of the relevant institutions, are consistent with approval of the proposal. Conclusion Based on the foregoing, and in light of all the facts of record the Board has determined that the applications should be, and hereby, are approved. Approval of the applications is specifically conditioned on compliance by First Banks with all the commitments made in connection with the proposal. For purposes of this order, the commitments and conditions referred to above shall be deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The acquisition of Redwood shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day after the effective date of the order, or later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board, or by the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective February 12, 1999. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Footnotes All banking data are as of June 30, 1997. 12 U.S.C. § 1842(d). A bank holding company's home state is that state in which the operations of the bank holding company's banking subsidiaries were principally conducted on July 1, 1966, or the date on which the company became a bank holding company, whichever is later. 12 U.S.C. §§ 1842(d)(1)(A) and (B) and 1842(d)(2)(A) and (B). First Banks meets the capital and managerial requirements established by applicable law. On consummation of the proposal, First Banks and its affiliates would control less than 10 percent of the total amount of deposits of insured depository institutions in the United States, and less than 30 percent of the total amount of deposits in California. See Cal. Financial Code § 3753 (West 1999). All other requirements of section 3(d) of the BHC Act also would be met on consummation of the proposal. 12 U.S.C. § 1842(c)(1)(A). 12 U.S.C. § 1842(c)(1)(B). The San Francisco-Oakland-San Jose banking market is approximated by the San Francisco-Oakland-San Jose Ranally Metropolitan Area, including the city of Pescardero. For this purpose, depository institution includes all insured banks, savings banks, and saving associations. Market share data are based on calculations that include the deposits of thrift institutions at 50 percent. The Board previously has indicated that thrift institutions have become, or have the potential to become, significant competitors of commercial banks. See, e.g. Midwest Financial Group, 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 386 (1989); National City Corporation, 70 Federal Reserve Bulletin 743 (1984). Thus, the Board has regularly included thrift deposits in the calculation of market share on a 50-percent weighted basis. See, e.g. First Hawaiian, Inc., 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 52 (1991). Under the DOJ Guidelines, 49 Federal Register 26,823 (1984), a market in which the post-merger HHI is between 1000 and 1800 is considered to be moderately concentrated. The Department of Justice ("DOJ") has informed the Board that a bank merger or acquisition generally will not be challenged (in the absence of other factors indicating anticompetitive effects) unless the post-merger HHI is at least 1800 and the merger or acquisition increases the HHI by at least 200 points. The DOJ has stated that the higher than normal HHI thresholds for screening bank mergers or acquisitions for anticompetitive effects implicitly recognize the competitive effects of limited-purpose lenders and other nondepository financial institutions. On consummation of the proposal, First Banks would become the 31st largest depository institution in the San Francisco-Oakland-San Jose banking market, controlling deposits of $205 million, representing less than 1 percent of market deposits. The HHI would remain unchanged at 1579. The Board has received a letter from a director of Bank requesting an indefinite suspension of the acquisition. The director states that he was placed on the board of directors of Bank as a representative of the Republic of the Philippines (the "Philippines") in accordance with a consent order issued by a United States District Court. The director requested that the processing of the application be suspended until the appropriate authorities in the Philippines have reviewed the transaction. The Board has contacted the appropriate authorities in the Philippines and has considered the director's comments in light of information provided by the Philippines government. 12 U.S.C. § 2901 et seq. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Meyer, Ferguson, and Gramlich.
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan The interaction of education and economic change At the 81st Annual Meeting of the American Council on Education, Washington, D.C. February 16, 1999 When Neil Rudenstine first invited me to join you today, he suggested that it might be valuable to discuss the roots of the changes that our economy has been experiencing in recent years. As leaders in higher education, you have all been dealing with the practical effects of these shifts. But, in more theoretical terms, what do these historic changes teach us about the way we learn and innovate? What is their impact on the workforce and on your graduates? How has technology transformed our ability to understand the natural and social world? Our faculty for rational thought has carried the human race one arduous step at a time into a deeper understanding of how the world works. Decade by decade, scholars have recorded their insights, building knowledge from one generation to the next. We have learned to use that knowledge to alter our physical environment for the betterment of mankind. That process has become increasingly conceptual in nature and ever less reliant on physical materials. Indeed, the endeavor to economize on physical resources has led to widespread downsizing of the elements of the nation's output. We have dramatically reduced the size of our radios, for example, by substituting transistors for vacuum tubes. Thin fiber-optic cable has replaced huge tonnages of copper wire. New architectural, engineering, and materials technologies have enabled the construction of buildings enclosing the same space, but with far less physical material than was required, say, 50 or 100 years ago. Most recently, mobile phones have been markedly downsized as they have been improved. Over the last century, for example, the rate of increase of the gross domestic product in the United States, adjusted for price change--our measure of gains in the real value of output--has averaged around three percent per year. Only a small fraction of that represents growth in the tonnage of physical materials--oil, coal, ores, wood, raw chemicals, for example. The remainder represents new insights into how to rearrange those physical materials to better serve human needs. This process has enabled valued goods to be transported more easily and to be produced with ever fewer workers, allowing the more efficient division of labor to propel overall output and standards of living progressively higher. The share of the nation's output that is conceptual appears to have accelerated following World War II with the insights that led to the development of the transistor and microprocessor. They have spawned remarkable alterations in how we, and other developed societies, live. Computers, telecommunications, and satellite technologies have enabled data and ideas, the ever more important elements of output, to be speedily transferred geographically to where they can be put to best use. Thus, these advanced means of communication have added much the same type of value that the railroads added in transporting the more physical goods of an earlier century. Here in the United States, we have developed an exceptionally sophisticated stock of capital assets--plant and equipment--fostered most recently by what has to be the most conceptual and impalpable of all new major products--software. The breakthroughs in information technology have facilitated an elevated rate of "creative destruction," as noted Harvard economist Joseph Schumpeter put it earlier this century. Our capital stock is undergoing an increasing pace of renewal through investment of cash flow from older-technology capital facilities into new, more efficient vintages. Some Silicon Valley firms claim that they completely reconstitute themselves every year or two. This renewal process is driven by an increasing ability to more finely calibrate the value preferences of consumers. In turn, those preferences are converted, through market transactions, into prices of products and assets. They, in turn, signal entrepreneurs which capital facilities to build to meet those shifting consumer needs. But as human intelligence appears without limit to engage our physical environment, human psychology remains, in some more primordial sense, invariant to time. The rapidity of change in our capital assets, the infrastructure with which all workers must interface day-by-day, has clearly raised the level of anxiety and insecurity in the workforce. As recently as 1981, in the depths of a recession, International Survey Research found twelve percent of workers fearful of losing their jobs. In today's tightest labor market in two generations, the same organization has recently found thirty-seven percent concerned about job loss. The fear of job obsolescence when confronted with a rapidly changing work environment is arguably one reason for a massive increase in the demand for educational services--the rise in on-the-job training, the proliferation of community colleges enhancing work skills, so-called corporate universities that combine jobs-oriented curricula with some broader excursions into the liberal arts, and, of course, the traditional university curricula. The heyday when a high school or college education would serve a graduate for a lifetime is gone. Today's recipients of diplomas expect to have many jobs and to use a wide range of skills over their working lives. Their parents and grandparents looked to a more stable future--even if in reality it often turned out otherwise. However one views the uncertainty that so many in our workforce are experiencing in their endeavor to advance, an economist can scarcely fail to notice a marketplace working efficiently to guide our educational system, defined in its widest sense, toward the broader needs of our economy. But this is not new. The history of education in the United States traces a path heavily influenced by the need for a workforce with the skills required to interact productively with the evolving economic infrastructure. Historically, technological advance has brought with it improvements not only in the capital inputs used in production, but also new demands on workers who must interact with that increasingly more complex stock of capital. Early this century, these advances required workers with a higher level of cognitive skills, for instance the ability to read manuals, to interpret blueprints, or to understand formulae. Our educational system responded: In the 1920s and 1930s, high school enrollment in this country expanded rapidly, pulling youth from rural areas, where opportunities were limited, into more productive occupations in business and broadening the skills of students to meet the needs of an advancing manufacturing sector. It became the job of these institutions to prepare students for work life, not just for a transition to college. In the context of the demands of the economy at that time, a high school diploma represented the training needed to be successful in most aspects of American enterprise. The economic returns for having a high school diploma rose and, as a result, high school enrollment rates climbed. At the same time, our system of higher education was also responding to the advances in economic processes. Although many states had established land grant schools earlier, their support accelerated in the late nineteenth century as those whose economies specialized in agriculture and mining sought to take advantage of new scientific methods of production. Early in the twentieth century, the content of education at an American college--as you all are aware--had evolved from a classically based curriculum to one combining the sciences, empirical studies, and modern liberal arts. Universities responded to the need for the application of science--particularly chemistry and physics--to the manufacture of steel, rubber, chemicals, petroleum, and other goods requiring the newer production technologies. Communities looked to their institutions of higher learning for leadership in scientific knowledge and for training of professionals such as teachers and engineers. The scale and scope of higher education in America was being shaped by the recognition that research--the creation of knowledge--complemented teaching and training--the diffusion of knowledge. In broad terms, the basic structure of higher education remains much the same today. That structure has proven sufficiently flexible to respond to the needs of a changing economy. Market economies have succeeded over the centuries by granting rewards to those who could anticipate changes in the value preferences of society. America's system of higher education has evolved into a highly diverse and complex range of institutions--large research universities that combine undergraduate and graduate offerings, small liberal arts colleges, and vocation-oriented community colleges--all seeking their competitive advantage. What makes that system work effectively is that it has been influenced importantly by the values of a strong market economy--competition, risk-taking, and innovation. America's reputation as the world's leader in higher education is grounded in the ability of these versatile institutions, taken together, to serve the practical needs of the economy and, more significantly, to unleash the creative thinking that moves our society forward. In a global environment in which prospects for economic growth now depend importantly on a country's capacity to develop and apply new technologies, the research facilities of our universities are envied throughout the world. The payoffs--in terms of the flow of expertise, new products, and startup companies, for example--have been impressive. Here, perhaps the most frequently cited measures of our success have been the emergence of significant centers of commercial innovation and entrepreneurship--Silicon Valley, the Research Triangle, and the clustering of biotech enterprises in the Northeast corridor--where creative ideas flow freely between local academic scholars and those in industry. Beyond these highly visible achievements, what has made our research universities so extraordinarily productive is their promotion of peer-reviewed scholarship and the value they place on creativity and risk-taking. Although some innovations move quickly from the development stage to applications, more often, we cannot accurately predict which particular scientific advance, or synergy of advances, will ultimately prove valuable. One has only to recall our experience with the laser, which had to wait for improvements in fiber optics to yield important applications. Indeed, according to Nobel Laureate Charles Townes, in the late 1960s the attorneys for Bell Labs initially refused to patent the laser because they believed it had no applications in the field of telecommunications. Our universities have shown the patience and the flexibility to accept that uncertainty, confident that the rigorous effort to explore ideas would eventually lead to discovery. If we are to remain preeminent in transforming knowledge into economic value, America's system of higher education must remain the world's leader in generating scientific and technological breakthroughs and in meeting the challenge to educate workers. With two-thirds of our high school graduates now enrolling in college and a growing proportion of adult workers seeking opportunities for retooling, our institutions of higher learning now bear the overwhelming responsibility for ensuring that our society is prepared for the demands of rapid economic change. What our colleges and universities produce is highly valued in today's economy. The rise in that value over the past several decades has been reflected in a widening spread between compensation paid to college-educated workers relative to those with less schooling. Accordingly, college enrollment rates among new U.S. high school graduates have been rising. And despite competitive pressures to improve university education abroad, almost one-third of all students who leave their home countries to study elsewhere choose to study in the United States. In recent years, the most popular fields of study for both groups have been business and management, but, as you are all aware, interest in life sciences, math, and computer sciences has been growing rapidly. Another measure of the value placed on university education is the rising propensity of older workers to return to school. Today, more than one-fourth of all undergraduates are over thirty years old; one-fifth of these older students are enrolled in full-time programs. These individuals are already responding to the need to seek retooling during their careers. As a result, education is increasingly becoming a lifelong activity. Businesses are now looking for employees who are prepared to continue learning and who recognize that maintaining their human capital will require persistent hard work and flexibility. The press for lifelong learning and the availability of technology have spawned a variety of education initiatives outside the traditional classroom. Courses now can be taken "at a distance" over the Internet. These are just the newest in a series of attempts to move learning closer to workers on the job and to make it more relevant to changing business needs. Although many of these new programs focus on specific, applied skill training, some degree-granting programs already exist, and companies that have successfully developed interactive educational software for the classroom are looking to move it online. Competition is the necessary driving force toward delivering a superior product or service. We should not shy away from it. Colleges and universities are being challenged to evaluate how new information technologies can best be employed in their curricula and their delivery systems. Beyond these more practical issues, the most significant challenge facing our universities is to ensure that teaching and research continue to unleash the creative intellectual energy that drives our system forward. As the conceptual share of the value added in our economic processes continues to grow, the ability to think abstractly will be increasingly important across a broad range of professions. Critical awareness and the abilities to hypothesize, to interpret, and to communicate are essential elements of successful innovation in a conceptual-based economy. The roots and nature of how the human mind innovates have always been subject to controversy. Yet, even without hard indisputable evidence, there is a remarkable and broad presumption that the ability to think abstractly is fostered through exposure to philosophy, literature, music, art, and languages. Liberal education is presumed to spawn a greater understanding of all aspects of living--an essential ingredient to broaden one's world view by "vaulting over disciplinary walls," as my good friend Judith Rodin put it, and exploring other fields of study. Most great conceptual advances are interdisciplinary and involve synergies of different specialities. Yet there is more to the liberal arts than increasing technical intellectual efficiency. They encourage the appreciation of life experiences that reach beyond material well-being and, indeed, are comparable and mutually reinforcing. The intense pleasure many experience from listening to Mozart's great D Minor Piano Concerto has much in common with the deep satisfaction of solving a complex mathematical problem. The challenge for our institutions of higher education is to successfully blend the exposure to all aspects of human intellectual activity, especially our artistic propensities and our technical skills. What makes the challenge particularly daunting is that scientific knowledge expands and broadens the measurable rewards of its curriculum at a pace that liberal arts, by their nature, arguably have difficulty matching. The depth of knowledge in nuclear physics is today far greater than it was a century ago, creating an enormous expansion in economically useful teaching hours. But do the same economic opportunities exist for courses in English literature? A related difference between science and the arts arises in the non-academic world: Engineering and metallurgical advances have reduced the number of hours required to produce a ton of steel, but the same number of musicians will be needed to perform a Beethoven quartet this evening as were needed a century ago. Many of you will recognize this application of Baumol's Law. To make the point even more graphically, Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan has noted that the Minute Waltz could be played in 50 seconds, but he wondered if it would sound as good. Overwhelmed with the increasing scientific knowledge base, our universities are going to have to struggle to prevent the liberal arts curricula from being swamped by technology and science. It is crucial that that not happen. The advent of the twenty-first century will certainly bring new challenges for our society and for our education system. We cannot know the precise directions in which advances in technology and the transmission of knowledge will take us. However, we can be certain that our institutions of higher education will remain at the center of the endeavor to comprehend those profound changes and to seize the opportunities to direct them toward ever-rising standards of living and quality of life.
For immediate release The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System today announced that it will include in future issues of the Flow of Funds Accounts of the United States ( ) supplementary tables that combine the assets and liabilities of all government entities in the United States. The title of the new tables is Consolidated Statement for Federal, State, and Local Governments and they will be numbered F.106.c for financial flows and L.106.c for outstanding amounts of financial assets and liabilities at the end of the periods shown. Copies of the new tables as they would have appeared in the most recent release of the Flow of Funds Accounts, dated December 11, 1998, are attached. The release will continue to show separately the assets and liabilities of the federal government and state and local governments. The inclusion of table F.106.c and table L.106.c is motivated by the IMF's Special Data Dissemination Standards (SDDS), which were established in 1996 to provide guidance on the dissemination of economic and financial data for countries that have, or might seek, access to international capital markets. The United States is a subscriber to the IMF's SDDS. The Flow of Funds Accounts of the United States is updated after about ten weeks following the end of a quarter. The publication is available from the Board's Publications Services as well as on the Board's web site.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today requested comment on proposed changes to its Regulation CC, Availability of Funds and Collection of Checks, that would provide more flexibility to depository institutions to experiment with methods to return unpaid checks electronically. Comment is requested by April 30, 1999 . The Board seeks to support development of new payment services and to take steps to remove any federal regulatory impediments to innovation in the payments area where appropriate. Therefore, comment is requested on options for amending Regulation CC and/or its Commentary to clarify the permissibility of notices in a check truncation environment instead of the return of the actual check. The Board's notice is attached. |
Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan Need for financial modernization Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate February 23, 1999 The Committee has asked that, in addition to my report on the economy, I present today the views of the Federal Reserve on the need for legislation to modernize the U.S. financial system. The Federal Reserve continues to support strongly the enactment of such legislation and I commend the Committee for taking up this vital matter so promptly. Need for Financial Modernization U.S. financial institutions are today among the most innovative and efficient providers of financial services in the world. They compete, however, in a marketplace that is undergoing major and fundamental change driven by a revolution in technology, by dramatic innovations in the capital markets, and by the globalization of the financial markets and the financial services industry. The technologically driven proliferation of new financial products that enable risk unbundling has created new financial instruments that increasingly combine the characteristics of banking, insurance, and securities products. These changes, which are occurring all over the world, have also dramatically altered the way financial services providers operate and the way they market and deliver their products. In the United States, our financial institutions have been required to take elaborate steps to develop and deliver new financial products and services in a manner that is consistent with our outdated laws. The costs of these efforts are becoming increasingly burdensome and serve no useful public purpose. Unless soon repealed, the archaic statutory barriers to efficiency could undermine the competitiveness of our financial institutions, their ability to innovate and to provide the best and broadest possible services to U.S. consumers, and ultimately, the global dominance of American finance. Without congressional action to update our laws, the market will force ad hoc administrative responses that lead to inefficiencies and inconsistencies, expansion of the federal safety net, and potentially increased risk exposure to the federal deposit insurance funds. Such developments will undermine the competitiveness and innovative edge of major segments of our financial services industry. We believe that it is important that the rules for our financial services industry be set by the Congress rather than, as too often has been the case, by banking regulators dealing with our outdated laws. Only Congress has the ability to fashion rules that are comprehensive and equitable to all participants and that guard the public interest. For these reasons, we support removal of the legislative barriers that prohibit the straightforward integration of banking, insurance and securities activities. There is virtual unanimity among all concerned--private and public alike--that these barriers should be removed. In designing financial modernization legislation, we firmly believe that the Congress should focus on achieving two essential and indivisible objectives: removing outdated, competitively stifling restrictions on financial affiliations, and, most importantly, adopting a framework for this modernization that promotes the safety and soundness of our banking and financial system and prevents the extension of the federal subsidy. Framework for Financial Modernization The first objective is achieved by amending the Glass-Steagall Act and the Bank Holding Company Act to permit financial affiliations and broader financial activities. In our judgment, the other objective of preserving safety and soundness and preventing the spread of the federal subsidy is best achieved by allowing banks, securities firms and insurance companies to combine in the financial service holding company structure. While we enthusiastically support the new powers granted to financial service holding companies, we just as strongly believe that they should be financed by the marketplace, not by instruments backed by the sovereign credit of the United States. The requirement that the new powers, at least those conducted as principal, be conducted through holding company affiliates minimizes the expansion of the use of the subsidies arising from a safety net backed by the U.S. taxpayer. The choice of requiring the new powers to be harbored in affiliates of holding companies, not in operating subsidiaries of their banks, will significantly fashion the underlying structure of twenty-first century finance. To inject the substantial new subsidies that would accrue to operating subsidiaries of banks into the currently mushrooming domestic and international financial system could distort capital markets and the efficient allocation of both financial and real resources that has been so central to America's current prosperity. New affiliations, if allowed through bank subsidiaries, would accord banking organizations an unfair competitive advantage over comparable insurance and securities firms--both those operating independently and those that are bank holding company subsidiaries. By fostering a level playing field within the financial services industry, we contribute to full, open and fair competition. This choice of the holding company structure is also critical to the way in which the financial services industry will develop because it provides better protection for and promotes the safety, soundness and stability of our banking and financial system. At the same time, it accomplishes much needed financial modernization without damaging the national or state bank charters or limiting in any way the benefits of financial modernization. The other route toward full powered commercial bank operating subsidiaries and universal banking would, in our judgment, lead to greater risk for the deposit insurance funds and the taxpayer. In addition, the holding company structure promotes effective supervision and the functional regulation of different activities. The U.S. is at a historic crossroads in financial services regulation. It is becoming increasingly evident that the dramatic advances in computer and telecommunications technologies of the past decade have so significantly altered the structure of domestic, indeed, global finance as to render our existing modes of supervision and regulation of financial institutions increasingly obsolescent. The volume, sophistication, and rapidity of financial dealings should continue to lead to supervisory emphasis on oversight of risk management of financial institutions and a marked scaling back of outmoded loan file and balance sheet surveillance. For the same reasons, affiliation with banks need not--indeed, should not--create bank-like regulation of affiliates of banks. A constructive approach to supervision for the twenty-first century is captured in the so-called "Fed-light" provisions of various bills, which focus on and enhance the functional regulation of securities firms, insurance companies, insured depository institutions and their affiliates. We at the Fed strongly support this approach. Banking and Commerce A twenty-first century issue that has become a part of the financial modernization debate is whether we should move beyond affiliations among financial service providers and allow the full integration of banking and commerce. As technology increasingly blurs the distinction among various financial products, it is already beginning to blur the distinctions between predominately commercial and banking firms. But how the underlying subsidies of deposit insurance, discount window access, and guaranteed final settlement through Fedwire, are folded into a commercial firm, should the latter affiliate with a bank, is crucially important to the systemic stability of our financial system. It seems to us wise to move first toward the integration of banking, insurance, and securities, and employ the lessons we learn from that important step before we consider whether and under what conditions it would be desirable to move to the second stage of the full integration of commerce and banking. Nothing is lost, in my judgment, by making this a two stage process. Indeed, there is much to be gained. The Asian crisis highlighted some of the risks that can arise if relationships between banks and commercial firms are too close, and makes caution at this stage prudent in our judgment. In line with these considerations, the Board continues to support elimination of the unitary thrift loophole, which currently allows any type of commercial firm to control a federally insured depository institution. Preservation of Executive Branch Influence There is a final point I want to make since it appears to have driven Treasury's opposition to financial modernization legislation considered last year. That legislation would not have altered the executive branch's supervisory authority for national banks or federal savings associations; nor would it have resulted in any reduction in the predominant and growing share of this nation's banking assets controlled by national banks and federal savings associations. Indeed, as of September 1998, nearly 58 percent of all banking assets were under the supervision of the Comptroller of the Currency, up from 55.2 percent at the end of 1996. Moreover, after controlling for mergers of like-chartered banks, the number of national banks has increased over the period 1996-98 and the number of state banks has declined. Furthermore, Congress for sound public policy reasons has purposefully apportioned responsibility for this nation's financial institutions among the elected executive branch and independent regulatory agencies. Action to alter this balance would be contrary to the deliberate steps that Congress has taken to ensure a proper balance in the regulation of this nation's dual banking system. Conclusion In virtually every other industry, Congress would not be asked to address issues such as these, which are associated with technological and market developments; the market would force the necessary institutional adjustments. Arguably, this difference reflects the painful experience that has taught us that developments in our banking system can have profound effects on the stability of our whole economy, rather than the limited impact we perceive from difficulties in most other industries. Moreover, as in all major legislation, there are, and will be, numerous provisions only indirectly associated with the legislation's core objectives that often foster disagreements. These surrounding issues are doubtless important, but not so important that they should be allowed to defeat the consensus that has developed around these key goals. It would be a disservice to the public and the nation if, in the fruitless search for a bill that pleases everyone in every detail, the benefits of this vital consensus are lost or further delayed. The markets are demanding that we change outdated statutory limitations that stand in the way of more efficiently and effectively delivering financial services to the public. The Federal Reserve agrees and urges prompt enactment of financial modernization legislation that achieves the two central and indivisible objectives that I have outlined today.
Remarks by Vice Chair Alice M. Rivlin At the Financial Services Dinner of the Foreign Policy Association, New York, New York February 24, 1999 Dilemmas of an Economic Superpower I am deeply honored to be the recipient of a medal from the Foreign Policy Association, which does so much to increase America's understanding of foreign policy issues and the problems and opportunities that face us on the world scene. I am especially honored to share the evening with Michael Camdessus, who is giving the International Monetary Fund such strong leadership at perhaps the most challenging moment in its history. I want to take this opportunity to share a few thoughts on a subject that I suspect most of us have been forced to think about quite a bit in our various roles recently: the dilemmas of being an economic superpower. The United States at century's end finds itself with the best functioning, most productive economy in the world, bar none. That is our great good fortune -- lucky us! It's an enormous opportunity, but it is also a heavy responsibility. Much is expected of the world's foremost economic superpower -- leadership, vision, generosity, and good sense. How should we act? Are we up to the task? It would certainly be easier to be Sweden or Singapore and be able to enjoy a high standard of living without being expected to carry the weight of the world's troubles and hopes. Of course, economic preeminence is not a new experience for the United States. We've been here before. In some ways the current situation most resembles the one we found ourselves in at mid-century, in the aftermath of World War II. We were the only economic superpower of that moment, and there was no mystery about why this was so. We had carried the winning side to victory in the War, and unlike our allies and our erstwhile enemies, we had not suffered economic devastation in the conflict. On the contrary, the end of the war left us on the technological forefront, with a backlog of innovations crying out for embodiment in new products, plenty of savings, a better trained, more disciplined workforce than at the end of the Depression and plenty of pent-up demand for American goods at home and abroad. We had energy, know-how, confidence, ready markets, and weak competitors. Fortunately, both for us and the rest of the world, we had strong political leadership with a sense of responsibility for creating a new world economic structure that would avoid the mistakes of the past. This leadership shared two premises: The first was that America's future prosperity depended on the recovery, growth and stability of the rest of the world. We had to find a way of getting war-torn Europe and Asia producing again, to encourage development in the new nations emerging from crumbling colonial empires. We had to find a way to avoid destructive trade wars, counterproductive protectionism, and the spreading contagion of financial instability. The second premise was that the only hope for avoiding future conflict -- economic and political -- was to keep talking to each other, to set up multi-national organizations to establish the economic ground rules, formulate consensus, resolve conflicts, and mobilize collective action to solve problems before they erupted into warfare or economic catastrophe. It was this faith in peaceful multinational interaction that motivated U.S. leadership in creating the UN, the IMF and World Bank and the long list of other international organizations and fora that have mostly survived for fifty years and are striving to cope with the changing problems confronting us today. Most people -- certainly most in this audience -- are proud of the American post-World War II leadership. We were responsible and farsighted. We did the right thing, and it worked. Even in the immediate post-war period, broad based public support for multi-national approaches and fostering prosperity abroad was not a foregone conclusion. There were isolationists. There were nay-sayers. There were advocates of punishing the enemy. But the memories of the War and the Depression were fresh and no one wanted to go back to either. Confidence in our leaders was high. International responsibility and cooperation sounded right enough to generate, if not deep or enthusiastic public support, at least broad public acquiescence. How long this would have lasted without the emergence of a new enemy, no one can tell, but the advent of the Cold War and the perceived threat of Soviet aggression soon provided a new rationale for cooperation and mutual aid among the nations of the so-called "free world" that ensured public support of the basic stance for another four decades. Half a century later, the U.S. again finds itself with the most productive, best functioning economy in the world and a new set of dilemmas -- harder ones this time -- about how an economic superpower ought to act. The world, of course, is very different. Thanks in part to the policies and institutions of the post war era, there are plenty of other rich industrial countries with standards of living on a par with ours. Emerging market countries, that used to be impoverished agricultural backwaters, have spurted ahead and are now able to produce sophisticated manufactures and services and support a rising middle class. Trade has burgeoned; financial flows and cross-border investments have skyrocketed; the entire globe is linked by instant electronic and satellite communications. Yet the financial stability that the Bretton Woods architects hoped for has eluded us. Exchange rates gyrate; capital surges across borders in disruptive explosions. Institutions and policies designed to stabilize are under enormous pressure. The current formidable performance of the U.S. economy is more mysterious than that of the post-World War II period when there were pretty obvious reasons for our preeminence. Moreover, the strong performance has not been continuous. Indeed, U.S. economic confidence is newly returned. A decade ago we thought we were being beaten out by the Japanese and emerging Asia and perhaps by Europe as well. We were discouraged by the struggles of our uncompetitive industrial behemoths and disheartened by our endless budget deficits. We were concerned about our capacity to lead or even to keep up in the growing leadership pack. But now some combination of good luck and good policy has brought us an eight year run of strong growth, declining unemployment, and falling inflation and made the American economy a vital positive force in a turbulent world. The best guess about why the U.S. economy is performing so well is that we are benefitting from an unusual coming together of multiple favorable forces--all at the same time. Good policy helps. The steps taken by the Bush and Clinton Administrations, together with the Congress, to bring the federal budget deficit under control have paid off handsomely -- better than any of us who worked on the problem dared hope -- and are now yielding surpluses as far as the eye can see. This increase in national saving lowers interest rates, raises confidence, and encourages investment. At the Fed, we like to think that vigilant monetary policy has kept the economy from overheating, lowered inflationary expectations, and prolonged the current growth period. Strong productivity performance has been aided by the rapid evolution and increasing utilization of computer and telecommunications technology, by the painful downsizing and restructuring undertaken by American industry under the impact of global competition, and by the new skills and dedication to continuous improvement of American business managers. Productivity growth has allowed wages to rise with minimal upward pressure on prices. The strong dollar, low world-wide commodity prices, restraint on medical costs, flexible labor markets and competitive product markets have combined to keep inflation low even in the face of considerable scarcity of skilled workers. Some of these factors could easily reverse; others could have lasting effects. The uncertainty makes prediction especially difficult at this moment. The custodians of monetary policy at the Fed have no option but to continuously evaluate the situation, weighing the balance of risks between an economy that might be growing unsustainably fast and begin to show signs of future inflation and one that might slow down too much under the impact of weak growth and financial turbulence around the world. We do the best we can, conscious that the best contribution we can make to the economic health of the world, as well as our own, is to keep the U.S. economy growing at its highest sustainable rate. At century's end, the two premises of America's post war political leadership still seem right, but the challenges are most complicated. That continued U.S. prosperity depends on the prosperity of the rest of the world is even more obvious than it was at mid-century when global interlinking was far less intense. We have to learn how to prevent surging inflows and outflows of capital from derailing solid growth in emerging market countries, and how to restore equilibrium in world currency and capital markets quickly before minor perturbations become escalating crises. Multilateral cooperation and consensus building on the rules of the game still appear to be the only viable approaches to ensure world prosperity and stability. The current efforts to modernize the rules and reform the international economic framework are generating endless meetings, conference calls, position papers, and communiques that so far have produced some forward movement but no definitive solutions. In this context, it is not easy for the world's most formidable economic super power to figure out how to be an effective leader. Unlike fifty years ago, there are other rich countries with whom to share the burden, which is comforting but also stressful. Being the leader at century's end involves pulling together multi-national leadership teams that can work together to solve particular problems and to design new rules of the game. The task is demanding since an unmanageably large number of countries want to be on the leadership team, which leads to endless discussions of who gets to sit at the table. Moreover, although other countries frequently criticize the U.S. for failing to provide leadership, none wants to be pushed around by us just because we happen to have a high performance economy at the moment. So keeping the leadership team moving forward takes a finesse and subtlety not always easy for Americans to achieve. The greatest need at the moment is to find a forum for continuous and constructive communication and consensus building among the major industrial and emerging market countries to hammer out new ways of strengthening world financial systems and both preventing and mitigating future financial crises and dealing with them more effectively when they occur. Existing international groupings have not evolved as fast as the economy and do not always have the relevant players at the table. The G-7, for example, have grown comfortable talking with each other, but have not yet found an effective way of reaching out to the major emerging market countries and bringing them into the dialogue. The biggest challenge to America's effective leadership in this new era comes not from our international colleagues, but from the American public itself and its elected representatives in Congress. Fifty years ago the basic premises of America's leadership were widely accepted. Now, it is crucial that the public recognizes that our continued prosperity depends on the sustained and stable growth in the rest of the world and that working with other countries in the painstaking effort of building consensus on economic rules and structures is essential to that end. Americans no longer trust their political leaders as unquestioningly as they did 50 years ago -- in many ways, a healthy sign -- and confidence in all institutions, national and international has eroded. The isolationist, xenophobic theme in the American symphony, never entirely silent, but sometimes less audible, appears to be playing at full volume. Politicians listen well, and this listening has brought us the embarrassment of UN arrears, the extended cliff-hanger of the IMF quota increase, the defeat of fast-track, and a lot of protectionist rhetoric, albeit, so far, little action. We are not just an economic superpower; we are a democratic economic super power. Hence, if we are going to act responsibly and effectively on the world scene, we in this room -- we the dedicated internationalists of the country -- had better figure out how to build the support of the public solidly behind that international leadership role for America. That's where the Foreign Policy Association comes in. Internationalists can't just come together and talk to each other. We have to use all the modern communication techniques at our disposal. We have to get out into the communities, neighborhoods, and campuses of America. We have to teach and dialogue and listen and explain. We have to build a convincing case for all to hear that the future prosperity of average Americans depends on growth and stability across the globe and that we need to work with other nations to achieve it. Thank you all for this honor and this opportunity to talk about a subject close to my heart.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of a Consent Order against Daniel K. Walker, senior vice-president, a director, and an institution-affiliated party of the Farmers and Merchants Bank of Long Beach, Long Beach, California, a state member bank. Mr. Walker, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order in connection with the bank's extensions of credit in 1996 to a bank affiliate that resulted in alleged violations by the bank of the prior approval, collateral, documentation and certain other requirements of Sections 23A and 23B of the Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. 371c and 371c-1), Regulation O of the Board of Governors (12 C.F.R. Part 215), and a Written Agreement between the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco and the bank, dated November 10, 1993. Mr. Walker paid a fine of $12,500. A copy of the Order is attached.
Testimony of Governor Edward W. Kelley, Jr. Service credit under the federal employees retirement system Before the Subcommittee on Civil Service, U.S. House of Representatives February 25, 1999 Mr. Chairman, Representative Cummings, members of the Subcommittee, I am pleased to testify on behalf of the Board of Governors on the Federal Reserve Board Retirement Portability Act, and to provide the Subcommittee with information on the Federal Reserve retirement system. The Board strongly supports this legislation. The bill would allow certain employees who leave the Board to work for other agencies and who then retire under the Federal Employees Retirement System (FERS), to receive pensions reflecting all of their federal service, including post-1988 service at the Federal Reserve Board. On behalf of the Board and its employees, let me particularly thank you, Chairman Scarborough, and Representatives Cummings, Morella, Mica, Waxman, Norton, Davis, Hoyer, and Moran for introducing this important legislation. By way of background, the Federal Reserve System has its own defined benefit retirement plan which has two benefit structures: the Board Plan covering Board employees hired pre-1984 which is modeled on the Civil Service Retirement System (CSRS); and the Bank Plan, covering Board employees hired after 1983 and all employees of the Federal Reserve Banks. The Board Plan and CSRS have historically had reciprocity with regard to service credit portability. However, as a result of an oversight that occurred when the FERS statute was first passed, post-1988 service at the Federal Reserve Board by employees enrolled in the Bank Plan and, in some limited situations, those enrolled in the Board Plan, is not creditable service under FERS. Service Credit Problem The Board gains and loses employees in transfers between the Board and other government agencies each year. In particular, transfers between the Board and the other bank regulatory agencies -- the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Office of Thrift Supervision -- are common. The Board grants credit under its retirement plan to newly-hired employees with prior CSRS and FERS service if the employee renounces benefits under the prior retirement plan (to prevent dual credit). Thus, there is service portability when employees come to the Board. And, generally, there has been portability between the Board and other government agencies in crediting Board Plan service under CSRS. However, due to the oversight mentioned above, post-1988 Bank Plan service at the Federal Reserve Board is not creditable under FERS. As a result, if a Board employee hired after 1983 (and participating in the Bank Plan) leaves the Board to work for another federal agency and then retires from that agency under FERS, that employee would receive a reduced pension that would not reflect all of that employee's federal government service. This problem also affects any employee who participated in the Board Plan, did not complete five years of service prior to 1987, and left the Board and reentered federal employment after a break in service of more than one year. In this situation, under current law, the employee would be placed under FERS with no credit for post-1988 Board service. My testimony will refer to these situations as the "service credit" problem. Under current law, an employee affected by the service credit problem could receive two pensions: the reduced pension from FERS and, if he or she had worked long enough to be vested, a pension from the Board. In this case, because of the way the pensions are calculated, the sum of those pensions would usually be less than a single FERS pension that gave credit for all of the individual's federal government service. Alternatively, if the employee was not vested at the Board, he or she would receive only the reduced FERS pension. Thus, current law creates a dollars-and-cents problem in retirement security. Depending on the individual's final average salary and years of other federal service, the lack of portability of post-1988 Board service can mean the loss of hundreds or thousands of dollars a year in retirement income. We have identified about fifty former employees of the Board who have gone to work for other federal agencies and who will have this service credit problem when they retire under FERS. In addition, those of the Board's current workforce covered by the Bank Plan (about two-thirds of staff) would have the same problem if they should go to another federal agency and retire under FERS. Over time, a growing percentage of Board staff could encounter similar problems since virtually all new hires will have service that is not creditable under FERS. The service credit problem has festered without resolution since the FERS statute was enacted in 1986. Employees at the Board are very aware of it. The problem is damaging to employee morale and, just as important, some Board employees are deterred from making sound career moves because their pensions will suffer. And, government agencies' efforts to recruit these employees are hampered. The bill before the Subcommittee would correct the unidirectional service credit problem. It would amend the FERS statute to make post-1988 Board service creditable service under FERS. As a result, when affected former Board employees retire under FERS, their pensions will reflect all their federal government service. To receive credit for post-1988 Board service under FERS, the bill appropriately requires the employee to do two things. First, the employee would have to renounce the entitlement (if any) to receive a pension from the Board. This would prevent receipt of credit for post-1988 Board service under both FERS and the Bank Plan. Second, the bill requires the employee to make a contribution to FERS that, in effect, would "buy" FERS credit for his or her Board service. This contribution would equal the amount the employee would have contributed to FERS if he or she had been covered by FERS during the service in question, plus interest to the date of payment. This contribution is appropriate, since all FERS participants are required to contribute toward their pension benefit. These two requirements mirror provisions in current law that provide service credit for employees with prior service under the Foreign Service pension program. We believe that virtually all affected employees would be better off with this legislation than under current law. This includes the Bank Plan employee who transfers to another agency and is placed under FERS, as well as the Board Plan employee who has completed five years service (but not prior to 1987) and who was placed under FERS following a break in service of more than one year. As FERS employees, they will receive service credit for their post-1988 Board service. Future government hires in the second situation (prior Board Plan) would be placed in CSRS Offset as a result of the legislation, where their post-1988 Board service would be creditable. To ensure that no one is inadvertently hurt, the bill would, in effect, allow affected employees to choose whether or not to get FERS credit for their post-1988 Board service. With that option, the employee could make whichever choice would be more advantageous. In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, the Board and its employees strongly support this legislation, and we hope that the Congress can approve it quickly. I would now like to respond to the Subcommittee's request for an overview of the Federal Reserve Retirement Plan and information on the management of pension plan assets. Overview of the Federal Reserve Retirement Plan The Federal Reserve System Retirement Plan is a governmental defined benefit plan that is qualified under Section 401(a) of the tax code. The Plan provides retirement benefits for virtually all employees of the Federal Reserve Board and Reserve Banks. (Exceptions are approximately 30 employees at the Board who are in FERS or CSRS.) Plan benefits are determined under two separate benefit structures: the Board Benefit Structure (Board Plan), which covers approximately 600 Board employees; or the Bank Plan, which covers all eligible Reserve Bank staff (about 23,000 employees) and approximately 1,000 Board employees. There are approximately 500 annuitants receiving payments from the Board Plan and approximately 12,000 annuitants receiving payments from the Bank Plan, with another 5,000 who have earned a benefit but have not yet begun drawing payments. The Federal Reserve Banks and the Board, as employers, are responsible to ensure the funding required to pay the benefits promised to participants and have contributed to the Plan at varying levels throughout the years as determined necessary by the Plan actuary. Since 1986, the actuary has determined that no employer contributions are required. Currently, the Retirement Plan's assets exceed both the Plan's accrued liability as well as total liability as calculated by the Plan actuary. Plan assets based on a 5-year moving average as of January 1, 1998, were $4.0 billion. The total benefit obligation--which includes both future service and future salary increases--was $3.5 billion. Accrued benefits--based on service and salary up to the date of the valuation--were valued at $2.8 billion. The value of Plan assets at the end of 1998 was $5.8 billion. The Board Plan covers Board employees hired prior to 1984; its plan design is nearly identical to that of the Civil Service Retirement System. Participants do not pay Social Security tax, but have contributed to the Board Plan at the same rate as CSRS participants over the years (except that the Board did not increase the employee contribution rate from 7.0 percent to 7.25 percent in 1999 as CSRS did). The benefit features of the Board Plan mirror those of CSRS in most important respects. The most significant differences are: the Board Plan credits Federal Reserve Bank service while CSRS does not; the Board Plan has adopted a benefit formula for employees with part-time service after April 6, 1986, that is different from the CSRS; and the Board Plan does not allow incorporation of retired military pay into the Board Plan annuity as allowed by CSRS. A detailed listing of the differences between the two plans is found in . The Bank Plan covers all eligible employees of the Federal Reserve Banks. When Congress passed legislation requiring that federal employees hired after 1983 be subject to Social Security tax, the Board decided to place all newly hired Board employees in the Bank Plan as well. Unlike the Board Plan, the Bank Plan does not require employee contributions, but all Bank Plan participants are covered under Social Security and thus are subject to the FICA withholding requirement. The basic annuity formula for the Bank Plan is integrated with Social Security. The annuity formula is based on years of creditable service and the average of the five highest earning years of the employee's career. The benefit formula provides 1.3 percent of High-5 salary up to the Social Security integration level times the number of years of creditable service plus 1.8 percent of High-5 salary above the integration level times years of creditable service. While the Bank Plan is similar to FERS in that it is designed to work together with Social Security, the plan design features differ. For example, the Bank Plan requires no employee contributions as FERS does; it uses the highest five years of earnings to compute the pension benefit rather than the highest three years under FERS; and it provides for annuity reductions for retirements prior to age 60 while FERS allows unreduced retirement below age 60 if the participant has 30 years of service. A detailed comparison of the plan features of FERS and the Bank Plan are provided in . The Federal Reserve Thrift Plan is the System's defined contribution plan comparable to the government's Thrift Savings Plan (TSP). Both Board Plan and Bank Plan employees are eligible to participate and receive employer matching funds. The Federal Reserve Thrift Plan differs from TSP in that it offers both pre-tax and after-tax savings components, and a wider variety of investment options. It also allows higher contribution rates from participants (up to 20 percent of salary), subject to IRS limitations. Management of Pension Plan Assets The Federal Reserve System, composed of the Board of Governors and 12 Reserve Banks, vests fiduciary responsibility for the investments of its defined benefit (pension) and defined contribution (savings) plans in a committee of five senior System officers. The System's investment oversight committee is currently comprised of three Reserve Bank presidents, one Member of the Board, and the First Vice President of the New York Reserve Bank. The pension and savings Plans had investments valued at $8.1 billion as of year-end 1998, with $5.8 billion representing pension plan assets. I represent the Board on this committee and have done so since 1994. The committee is chaired by one of the Reserve Bank presidents (currently Mr. Gary Stern of the Minneapolis Reserve Bank). Day-to-day oversight of the investments is the responsibility of a small staff (3) in New York directed by our Chief Investment Officer, Mr. Paul Lipson, CFA. Our oversight committee has long sought to distance itself from asset allocation decisions because such activity might bring with it the appearance of a conflict of interest for the System. Instead, the committee functions as a manager-of-managers -- selecting independent investment firms and giving them a common balanced investment mandate. That mandate is set forth in our Investment Objectives and Guidelines document, which has been provided to the Subcommittee. This document is part of the investment advisory agreement with each firm, and delegates to them asset allocation decisions (within broad parameters set by the committee), securities selection decisions, and the voting of proxies. Currently, eight firms are retained to manage our $5.8 billion in pension assets (of which about two-thirds were invested in equities as of year end 1998). Those balanced accounts range in size from $350 million to $1 billion. Managers are selected by criteria that include past performance, desired equity and fixed income investment "styles", trading and research capabilities, expense levels, etc. Management expenses for the entire Plan are less than one-quarter of one percent of invested assets. No pension assets are managed in-house. The staff in New York monitors portfolio activity and performance, reporting on both to the committee on a monthly basis. The committee meets with its portfolio managers at least once a year; staff meets with most of them quarterly. No consultants are retained for any aspect of the investment process; although the staff in New York makes extensive use of generally-available analytical software to assess returns and various measures of risk. Performance of invested assets is measured against three benchmarks: versus the expected long term rate of return for Plan investments used in actuarial valuation (currently 9%), versus a trailing 36 month composite return (60% S&P 500/40% Lehman Bros. Aggregate), and in comparison to the Plan's peer group in the Wilshire Trust Universe Comparison Service, the largest tax-exempt institutional performance database in the US. I am pleased to report that the Plan has met or exceeded each of those benchmarks over many years. Attachment A Differences between CSRS and Board Plan The Board Plan and CSRS are identical in major benefit provisions. The few differences that exist include the following. Board Plan provides credit for service performed at Federal Reserve Banks, subject to deposit rules for non-contributory service. CSRS does not permit credit for Federal Reserve Bank service unless the CSRS participant is a presidential appointee. The Board Plan does not permit military retirement pay to be waived and credit received for such time under the Board Plan. CSRS permits such credit upon waiver of military retired pay. The Board Plan does not include the requirement under CSRS that a participant must have at least one year of civilian service under CSRS within the two years immediately prior to the retirement date. The Board Plan has amended the provisions for determining the retirement benefit for employees who had part-time service after 4/6/86. The change corrects some inequities that exist under the CSRS treatment of part-time employees. The change is consistent with a provision to amend CSRS that was introduced in legislation proposed by Senator Robb in the 105th Congress. Entitlement to Discontinued Service Retirement under the Board Plan is determined by the Board pursuant to a resolution. CSRS has specific requirements promulgated by OPM for discontinued service retirements. The employee contribution rate under the Board Plan varies from the employee contribution rate under CSRS for the first time, effective January 1999. The Board Plan rate continues to be 7 percent; the CSRS rate rose to 7.25 percent. The Board benefit structure does not include certain special provisions provided for under CSRS such as: special provisions for firefighters, law enforcement officers, air traffic controllers, employees on LWOP to serve in an employee organization, employees temporarily assigned to a state or local government, and similar situations. Board Plan annuitants are treated differently upon reemployment. Under CSRS, the reemployed annuitant continues to receive an annuity but is paid a salary that is reduced by the amount of that annuity. Board Plan annuitants have the annuity suspended until the period of reemployment has ended. Attachment B Retirement system comparison BANK PLAN FERS Retirement Eligibility ï¿½ Unreduced Benefit Age 65 with 5 yrs service Age 60 & meets rule of 90 (age + service = 90) Age 62 with 5 yrs service Age 60 with 20 yrs service MRA(age 55 to age 57 depending on birthdate) + 30 yrs service Retirement Eligibility ï¿½ Reduced Benefit Minimum: Age 50 w/ 5 yrs (37.5 percent of full benefit) Reductions based on actuarial tables MRA + 10 years service (5 percent reduction for each year under age 62) Retirement Computation Formula 1.3 percent x High-5 average salary up to SS Integration level, plus 1.8 percent x High-5 average salary over SS integration level, multiplied by total years of service Reduction for retirement before eligibility date (based on actuarial table) Maximum annuity ï¿½ 80 percent of High-5 average salary 1 percent (or 1.1 percent at age 62) x High-3 salary x total years of service plus annuity supplement, where applicable Reduction of 5 percent for each year under age 62 No maximum annuity Cost of Living Adjustments Upon approval of Board of Governors ï¿½ On average, 40 ï¿½ 60 percent of CPI-W change after CPI-W increases at least 8 percent No COLAs until age 62; CPI-1 thereafter Employee Contributions None required Social Security contributions Currently 1.05 percent + Social Security Contributions Employer Contributions None since 1986 Social Security Contributions Currently 10.7 percent + Social Security Contributions Vesting 5 years 5 years BANK PLAN FERS Retirement Eligibility ï¿½ Unreduced Benefit Age 65 with 5 yrs service Age 60 & meets rule of 90 (age + service = 90) Age 62 with 5 yrs service Age 60 with 20 yrs service MRA(age 55 to age 57 depending on birthdate) + 30 yrs service Retirement Eligibility ï¿½ Reduced Benefit Minimum: Age 50 w/ 5 yrs (37.5 percent of full benefit) Reductions based on actuarial tables MRA + 10 years service (5 percent reduction for each year under age 62) Retirement Computation Formula 1.3 percent x High-5 average salary up to SS Integration level, plus 1.8 percent x High-5 average salary over SS integration level, multiplied by total years of service Reduction for retirement before eligibility date (based on actuarial table) Maximum annuity ï¿½ 80 percent of High-5 average salary 1 percent (or 1.1 percent at age 62) x High-3 salary x total years of service plus annuity supplement, where applicable Reduction of 5 percent for each year under age 62 No maximum annuity Cost of Living Adjustments Upon approval of Board of Governors ï¿½ On average, 40 ï¿½ 60 percent of CPI-W change after CPI-W increases at least 8 percent No COLAs until age 62; CPI-1 thereafter Employee Contributions None required Social Security contributions Currently 1.05 percent + Social Security Contributions Employer Contributions None since 1986 Social Security Contributions Currently 10.7 percent + Social Security Contributions Vesting 5 years 5 years
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of a Consent Order against Kenneth G. Walker, president, chairman of the board of directors, chief executive officer, and institution-affiliated party of the Farmers and Merchants Bank of Long Beach, Long Beach, California, a state member bank. Mr. Walker, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order in connection with the bank's extensions of credit in 1996 to a bank affiliate that resulted in alleged violations by the bank of the prior approval, collateral, documentation and certain other requirements of Sections 23A and 23B of the Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. 371c and 371c-1), Regulation O of the Board of Governors (12 C.F.R. Part 215), and a Written Agreement between the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco and the bank, dated November 10, 1993. Mr. Walker paid a fine of $12,500. A copy of the Order is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of a combined Order to Cease and Desist and of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty against Hogi Patrick Hyun, a former employee of BT Singapore, a wholly owned non-bank subsidiary of Bankers Trust New York Corporation, New York, New York. Mr. Hyun, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order in connection with his involvement in the marketing and sale of leveraged derivative transactions to customers of BTNYC and its subsidiaries. Mr. Hyun paid a fine of $120,000. A copy of the Order is attached.