For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today its approval of the application of Paribas, Paris, France, to establish a representative office in Atlanta, Georgia. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Paribas Paris, France Order Approving Establishment of a Representative Office Paribas, Paris, France, a foreign bank within the meaning of the International Banking Act ("IBA"), has applied under section 10(a) of the IBA (12 U.S.C. § 3107(a)) to establish a representative office in Atlanta, Georgia. The Foreign Bank Supervision Enhancement Act of 1991, which amended the IBA, provides that a foreign bank must obtain the approval of the Board to establish a representative office in the United States. Notice of the application, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published in a newspaper of general circulation in Atlanta, Georgia ( Atlanta Journal and Constitution, October 23, 1998). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the application and all comments received. Paribas, with total consolidated assets of approximately $309 billion, is the surviving entity resulting from the merger into Banque Paribas of its parent company, Compagnie Financiï¿½re de Paribas, and certain other subsidiaries and affiliated companies in May 1998. Paribas, which primarily engages in investment banking, asset management, and retail financial services, is the fifth largest banking group in France and has offices in more than 60 countries. In the United States, Paribas operates branches in New York, New York, and Chicago, Illinois; agencies in Houston, Texas, and Los Angeles, California; and representative offices in Dallas, Texas, and San Francisco, California. Paribas also owns several U.S. subsidiaries that engage in nonbanking activities. The proposed representative office would market Paribas's products and services. In acting on an application to establish a representative office, the IBA and Regulation K provide that the Board shall take into account whether the foreign bank engages directly in the business of banking outside the United States, and has furnished to the Board the information it needs to assess the application adequately. The Board also shall take into account whether the foreign bank and any foreign bank parent is subject to comprehensive supervision or regulation on a consolidated basis by its home country supervisor (12 U.S.C. § 3107(a)(2); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(d)(2)). In addition, the Board may take into account additional standards set forth in the IBA and Regulation K (12 U.S.C. § 3105(d)(3)-(4); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)(2)). As noted above, Paribas engages directly in the business of banking outside the United States. Paribas also has provided the Board with information necessary to assess the application through submissions that address the relevant issues. With respect to supervision by home country authorities, the Board previously has determined, in connection with applications involving other banks in France, that those banks were subject to home country supervision on a consolidated basis. Paribas is supervised by the French regulators on substantially the same terms and conditions as those other banks. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that Paribas is subject to comprehensive supervision and regulation on a consolidated basis by its home country supervisors. The Board also has taken into account the additional standards set forth in section 7 of the IBA and Regulation K (see 12 U.S.C. § 3105(d)(3)-(4); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)(2)). The Commission Bancaire has no objection to the establishment of the proposed representative office. With respect to the financial and managerial resources of Paribas, taking into consideration Paribas's record of operations in its home country, its overall financial resources, and its standing with its home country supervisors, the Board has also determined that financial and managerial factors are consistent with approval of the proposed representative office. Paribas appears to have the experience and capacity to support the proposed representative office and has established controls and procedures for the proposed representative office to ensure compliance with U.S. law. With respect to access to information about Paribas's operations, the Board has reviewed the restrictions on disclosure in relevant jurisdictions in which Paribas operates and has communicated with relevant government authorities regarding access to information. Paribas has committed to make available to the Board such information on the operations of Paribas and any of its affiliates that the Board deems necessary to determine and enforce compliance with the IBA, the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956, as amended, and other applicable federal law. To the extent that the provision of such information to the Board may be prohibited by law, Paribas has committed to cooperate with the Board to obtain any necessary consents or waivers that might be required from third parties for disclosure of such information. In addition, subject to certain conditions, the Commission Bancaire may share information on Paribas's operations with other supervisors, including the Board. In light of these commitments and other facts of record, and subject to the conditions described below, the Board concludes that Paribas has provided adequate assurances of access to any necessary information that the Board may request. On the basis of all the facts of record, and subject to the commitments made by Paribas, as well as the terms and conditions set forth in this order, the Board has determined that Paribas's application to establish a representative office should be, and hereby is, approved. Should any restrictions on access to information on the operations or activities of Paribas and its affiliates subsequently interfere with the Board's ability to obtain information to determine and enforce compliance by Paribas or its affiliates with applicable federal statutes, the Board may require termination of any of Paribas's direct or indirect activities in the United States. Approval of this application is also specifically conditioned on Paribas's compliance with the commitments made in connection with this application and with the conditions in this order. The commitments and conditions referred to above are conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its decision and may be enforced in .proceedings under 12 U.S.C. § 1818 against Paribas and its affiliates. By order of the Board of Governors, effective April 1, 1999. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Secretary of the Board Footnotes Data are as of December 31, 1998. In assessing this standard, the Board considers, among other factors, the extent to which the home country supervisors: (i) ensure that the bank has adequate procedures for monitoring and controlling its activities worldwide; (ii) obtain information on the condition of the bank and its subsidiaries and offices through regular examination reports, audit reports, or otherwise; (iii) obtain information on the dealings with and relationship between the bank and its affiliates, both foreign and domestic; (iv) receive from the bank financial reports that are consolidated on a worldwide basis or comparable information that permits analysis of the bank's financial condition on a worldwide consolidated basis; (v) evaluate prudential standards, such as capital adequacy and risk asset exposure, on a worldwide basis. These are indicia of comprehensive, consolidated supervision. No single factor is essential, and other elements may inform the Board's determination. See Banque Nationale de Paris, 81 Federal Reserve Bulletin 515 (1995); Caisse Nationale de Crï¿½dit Agricole, 81 Federal Reserve Bulletin 1055 (1995); Crï¿½dit Agricole Indosuez, 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin 1025 (1997). On February 1, 1999, Sociï¿½tï¿½ Gï¿½nï¿½rale ("SoGen") announced its intention to make a stock-for-stock exchange offer for all of the shares of Paribas. The Board previously determined that the home country supervision of SoGen was consistent with the approval of a representative office. See Sociï¿½tï¿½ Gï¿½nï¿½rale, 80 Federal Reserve Bulletin 665 (1994). The Board's authority to approve the establishment of the proposed office parallels the continuing authority of the State of Georgia to license offices of a foreign bank. The Board's approval of this application does not supplant the authority of the State of Georgia and the State of Georgia Department of Banking and Finance ("Department") to license the proposed office of Paribas in accordance with any terms or conditions that the Department may impose. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Meyer, Ferguson, and Gramlich.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application of ANB Corporation, Muncie, Indiana, to acquire Farmers State Bancorp, and thereby acquire The Farmers State Bank of Union City, both of Union City, Ohio. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. ANB Corporation Muncie, Indiana Order Approving the Acquisition of a Bank Holding Company ANB Corporation ("ANB"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 3 of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1842) to acquire Farmers State Bancorp ("Bancorp") and thereby to acquire The Farmers State Bank of Union City ("Bank"), both in Union City, Ohio. Notice of proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (64 Federal Register 6361 (1999)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the proposal and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 3 of the BHC Act. ANB is the 33rd largest depository institution in Indiana, controlling deposits of approximately $417.5 million, representing less than 1 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in Indiana ("state deposits"). Bank is the 179th largest depository institution in Ohio, controlling deposits of $63.3 million, representing less than 1 percent of state deposits. Bank also is the 112th largest depository institution in Indiana, controlling approximately $18.2 million in deposits, representing less than 1 percent of state deposits. On consummation of the proposal, ANB would become the 32nd largest depository institution in Indiana, controlling $435.7 million, representing less than 1 percent of state deposits. Interstate Analysis Section 3(d) of the BHC Act allows the Board to approve an application by a bank holding company to acquire control of a bank located in a state other than the home state of such bank holding company, provided that certain conditions are met. For purposes of the BHC Act, the home state of ANB is Indiana, and ANB proposes to acquire a bank in Ohio. The proposed transaction meets all of the conditions for an interstate acquisition that are enumerated in section 3(d). In view of all the facts of record, the Board is permitted to approve the proposal under section 3(d) of the BHC Act. Competitive Considerations The BHC Act prohibits the Board from approving an application under section 3 of the BHC Act if the proposal would result in a monopoly or would be in furtherance of any attempt to monopolize the business of banking. The BHC Act also prohibits the Board from approving a proposed combination that would substantially lessen competition or tend to create a monopoly in any relevant banking market, unless the Board finds that the anticompetitive effects of the proposal are clearly outweighed in the public interest by the probable effect of the proposal in meeting the convenience and needs of the community to be served. ANB and Bank compete in the Muncie, Indiana, banking market ("Muncie banking market"). The Board has carefully reviewed the competitive effects of the proposal in the Muncie banking market in light of all of the facts of record, including the characteristics of the market and the projected increase in the concentration of total deposits in insured depository institutions in this market ("market deposits") as measured by the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index ("HHI") under the Department of Justice Merger Guidelines ("DOJ Guidelines"). The Board also has carefully considered the number of competitors that would remain in the market after consummation of the proposal. ANB is the second largest depository institution in the Muncie banking market, controlling $355.5 million in deposits, representing 23 percent of market deposits. Bank is the seventh largest depository institution in the market, controlling $81.5 million in deposits, representing 5.3 percent of market deposits. On consummation of the proposal, ANB would remain the second largest depository institution in the market, controlling deposits of $417.5 million, representing 28.3 percent of market deposits. The HHI would increase by 243 points to 2450. The Board believes that several characteristics of the Muncie banking market mitigate the proposal's potential anticompetitive effects. First, a significant number of other depository institutions would have the market share and resources to compete effectively in the banking market. Eight bank and thrift institutions, including ANB, would remain in the market after consummation of the proposal, including several multistate banking organizations. Four of these institutions, including ANB, would each control market shares of 9 percent or more of market deposits and several large regional bank holding companies would continue to operate in the market. The Muncie banking market also is attractive for entry. Data for the year ending June 30, 1998 show that the Muncie Metropolitan Statistical Area ("MSA"), which encompasses most of the population of the Muncie banking market, has had a larger increase in total deposits and per capita income than the increase on average in these statistics for other MSAs in Indiana. The market also has recently experienced de novo entry and entry by acquisition, including two entries by acquisition in 1998. Indiana, moreover, permits unrestricted intrastate branching. The Department of Justice reviewed the proposal and advised the Board that consummation of the proposal would not likely have any significantly adverse competitive effects in the Muncie banking market or any other relevant banking market. The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation has been consulted and has not objected to the proposal. Based on all the facts of record, and for the reasons discussed above, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposal is not likely to result in any significantly adverse effects on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in the Muncie banking market or any other relevant banking market, and that competitive factors are consistent with approval of the proposal. Other Considerations The BHC Act also requires the Board, in acting on an application, to consider the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the companies and banks involved, the convenience and needs of the communities to be served, and certain supervisory factors. The Board has reviewed these factors in light of all the facts of record, including supervisory reports of examination assessing the financial and managerial resources of the organizations. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of ANB, its subsidiary banks, and Bank are consistent with approval, as are the other supervisory factors the Board must consider under section 3 of the BHC Act. Considerations related to the convenience and needs of communities to be served, including the records of performance of the institutions involved under the Community Reinvestment Act (12 U.S.C. § 2901 et seq. ), also are consistent with approval of the proposal. Conclusion Based on the foregoing, and in light of all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the application should be, and hereby is, approved. Approval of the application is specifically conditioned on compliance by ANB with all the commitments made in connection with the application. For the purposes of this order, the commitments and conditions relied on by the Board in reaching its decision are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The transaction shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day after the effective date of this order, or later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective April 1, 1999. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Secretary of the Board Footnotes Deposit data are as of June 30, 1998. In this context, depository institutions include commercial banks, savings banks, and savings associations. Bank controls total deposits of $81.5 million, $18.2 million of which are booked in its branch office in Indiana. The balance of the bank's deposits are booked in its main office in Ohio. 12 U.S.C. § 1842(d). A bank holding company's home state is that state in which the total deposits of all banking subsidiaries of such company were the largest on July 1, 1966, or on the date on which the company became a bank holding company, whichever is later. 12 U.S.C. 1841(o)(4)(C). See 12 U.S.C. §§ 1842(d)(1)(A) & (B) and 1842(d)(2)(A) & (B). ANB is adequately capitalized and adequately managed, as defined by applicable law. Bank has been in existence and operated continuously during the five-year minimum statutory period. On consummation of the proposal, ANB would control less than 10 percent of the total amount of deposits of insured depository institutions in the United States. All other requirements of section 3(d) of the BHC Act would be met on consummation of the proposal. The Muncie banking market is defined as Delaware County excluding Salem township; Randolph County excluding Washington and Greensfork townships; Licking and Johnson townships in Blackford County, all in Indiana; and Jackson township in Darke County, Ohio. Market share data are reported as of June 30, 1998. Market share data are based on calculations that include the deposits of thrift institutions at 50 percent. The Board previously has indicated that thrift institutions have become, or have the potential to become, significant competitors of commercial banks. See, e.g., Midwest Financial Group, 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 386 (1989); National City Corporation, 70 Federal Reserve Bulletin 743 (1984). Thus, the Board has regularly included thrift deposits in the calculation of market share on a 50-percent weighted basis. See, e.g., First Hawaiian, Inc., 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 52 (1991). Under the revised DOJ Guidelines, 49 Federal Register 26,823 (June 29, 1984), a market in which the post-merger HHI exceeds 1800 is considered highly concentrated. The Department of Justice has informed the Board that a bank merger or acquisition generally will not be challenged (in the absence of other factors indicating anticompetitive effects) unless the post-merger HHI is at least 1800 and the merger increases the HHI by more than 200 points. The Department of Justice has stated that the higher than normal HHI thresholds for screening bank mergers for anticompetitive effects implicitly recognize the competitive effect of limited-purpose lenders and other non-depository financial entities. Ind. Code Ann. §§ 28-2-13-19 & 28-2-16-15 (West 1998). Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Meyer, Ferguson, and Gramlich.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application of Banco Santander, S.A., Madrid, Spain, to acquire BCH-USA, New York, New York. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Banco Santander, S.A. Madrid, Spain Order Approving Acquisition of a Bank Holding Company Banco Santander, S.A. ("Santander"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 3 of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1842) to acquire BCH-USA, New York, New York ("Bank"), a wholly owned subsidiary bank of Banco Central Hispanoamericano, S.A., Madrid, Spain ("BCH"). Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (64 Federal Register 9995 (1999)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the application and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 3 of the BHC Act. Santander, with total consolidated assets of approximately $181 billion, is the largest banking organization in Spain. In the United States, Santander operates a branch in New York, New York; and an agency and an Edge corporation in Miami, Florida. Santander also controls Banco Santander Puerto Rico, San Juan, Puerto Rico ("Santander-PR"), a subsidiary bank that also maintains a branch in New York, New York. Santander also has an indirect interest in Citizens Financial Group, Inc., Providence, Rhode Island, a registered bank holding company. In addition, Santander engages directly and through subsidiaries in a number of permissible nonbanking activities in the United States. BCH, with total consolidated assets of approximately $95 billion, is the third largest banking organization in Spain. In addition to Bank, BCH's U.S. banking operations consist of branches in New York, New York, and Miami, Florida. Interstate Analysis Section 3(d) of the BHC Act allows the Board to approve an application by a bank holding company to acquire control of a bank located in a state other than the home state of such bank holding company if certain conditions are met. For purposes of the BHC Act, the home state of Santander is Rhode Island and Santander proposes to acquire control of a bank in New York. All the conditions for an interstate acquisition under section 3(d) are met in this case. In light of all the facts of record, the Board is permitted to approve the proposal under section 3(d) of the BHC Act. Competitive Considerations As noted above, Santander and BCH operate various banking entities that compete in the Metropolitan New York-New Jersey banking market. Each of these banking entities is relatively small and consummation of the proposal would result in an increase of less than one point in the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index ("HHI") for the Metropolitan New York-New Jersey banking market. The banking market would remain unconcentrated with numerous competitors operating in the market. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposal would not have a significantly adverse effect on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in the Metropolitan New York-New Jersey banking market or any other relevant banking market. Financial and Managerial Considerations The BHC Act also requires the Board to consider the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the companies and banks involved in the proposal. Santander's capital ratios exceed the minimum levels that would be required under the Basle Capital Accord, and are considered equivalent to the capital that would be required of a U.S. banking organization. Bank's capital ratios exceed the "well capitalized" thresholds and would be unchanged by this transaction. Based on these and all the other facts of record, including confidential examination and other supervisory information concerning the foreign banks involved in the proposal and their existing U.S. operations and the commitments provided in this case, the Board concludes that financial and managerial factors are consistent with approval. Convenience and Needs Considerations The Board also has carefully considered the effect of the proposal on the convenience and needs of the communities to be served in light of all the facts of record. The Board has long held that consideration of the convenience and needs factor includes a review of the records of the relevant depository institutions under the Community Reinvestment Act (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 2901 et seq .) ("CRA"). An institution's most recent CRA performance evaluation is a particularly important consideration in the applications process because it represents a detailed on-site evaluation of the institution's overall record of performance under the CRA by the appropriate federal financial supervisory agency. CRA Performance Examinations Santander-PR, the only Santander banking operation that is subject to the CRA, received an "outstanding" rating at its most recent CRA performance evaluation from its primary federal financial supervisory agency, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ("FDIC"), as of October 14, 1997. Bank received a "satisfactory" rating from the FDIC at its most recent CRA performance evaluation, as of December 31, 1998. Santander's CRA Performance Record According to examiners, Santander-PR's lending activities reflected responsiveness to credit needs in the bank's assessment area. From January 1 through September 30, 1997, Santander-PR originated more than 3,200 small business loans, totaling more than $247 million, and more than 100 small farm loans, totaling more than $9 million. Of these loans, Santander originated more than 400 of the small business loans, totaling more than $36 million, and 16 of the small farm loans, totaling more than $700,000 in low- and moderate-income ("LMI") census tracts. Examiners stated that from October 1, 1996, through September 30, 1997, Santander-PR originated 180 Small Business Administration ("SBA") loans totaling more than $26 million. Examiners noted that Santander-PR had been designated a "Preferred Lender" and "Certified Lender" by the SBA. Examiners also commended the bank on the distribution of its loans to businesses of different sizes. Of the small business loans made by Santander-PR since its last CRA evaluation, 22 percent were to businesses with gross annual revenues of less than $50,000, and 74 percent were to businesses with gross annual revenues of less than $250,000. Examiners also noted that Santander-PR had made $81 million in qualified community development loans since its October 1995 CRA evaluation, including a loan to a consortium of small poultry processors under the Rural Housing and Community Development Service guarantee program to construct a poultry processing facility in a low-income census tract in Salinas, Puerto Rico; a loan to a builder under the affordable housing guidelines set by the Government Development Bank of Puerto Rico to construct 49 single-family homes in a moderate-income census tract in Barceloneta, Puerto Rico; and a loan to construct a condominium project in a moderate-income census tract in Rio Piedras, Puerto Rico, with one-third of the units designated for affordable housing. Bank's CRA Performance Record On May 21, 1998, the FDIC granted Bank's request for designation as a "wholesale institution" for purposes of evaluation under the CRA, and Bank's CRA activities have been focused on lending to community development intermediaries operating in its assessment area. At Bank's December 31, 1998 examination, examiners noted that Bank's CRA performance had improved since its previous CRA performance evaluation because the bank had improved its ascertainment and financial support of local community development initiatives consistent with its resources and capabilities. Examiners noted that Bank's community development lending (including new originations from January 1997 through December 1998 and prior loans funded with outstanding balances) totaled more than $1 million. Examiners stated that, since its last CRA examination, Bank has increased its community development lending by providing six commitments totaling $900,000, representing a 600 percent increase in funding. Examiners also stated that Bank's levels of qualified investments and community development service since its prior CRA evaluation were adequate. Conclusion on Convenience and Needs Considerations The Board has carefully considered all the facts of record, including the comments received and the public CRA performance records of the institutions involved. In particular, the Board has considered the efforts by Bank to improve its CRA performance, as verified by the FDIC in a recently concluded CRA performance examination, and the fact that this proposal represents an acquisition by an applicant that has maintained a consistently outstanding CRA performance record. Based on a review of the entire record, including the relevant reports of examination, the Board concludes that considerations relating to the convenience and needs of the communities to be served are consistent with approval. Other Supervisory Considerations Under section 3 of the BHC Act, the Board may not approve an application involving a foreign bank unless the bank is "subject to comprehensive supervision or regulation on a consolidated basis by the appropriate authorities in the bank's home country." The Board previously determined that Santander was subject to such supervision and regulation, and based on all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that Santander continues to be subject to comprehensive supervision and regulation on a consolidated basis by its home country supervisor. The BHC Act also requires the Board to determine that the foreign bank has provided adequate assurances that it will make available to the Board such information on its operations and activities and those of its affiliates that the Board deems appropriate to determine and enforce compliance with the BHC Act and the International Banking Act ("IBA") (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 3101 et seq .). The Board has reviewed restrictions on disclosure in jurisdictions where Santander has material operations and has communicated with relevant banking authorities concerning access to information. Santander has committed that, to the extent not prohibited by applicable law, it will make available to the Board such information on the operations of Santander and any of its affiliates that the Board deems necessary to determine and enforce compliance with the BHC Act, the IBA, and other applicable federal law. Santander also has committed to cooperate with the Board to obtain any waivers or exemptions that may be necessary to enable Santander to make any such information available to the Board. In light of these commitments and other facts of record, the Board has concluded that Santander has provided adequate assurances of access to any appropriate information that the Board may request. For these reasons, and based on all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that the supervisory factors it is required to consider under section 3(c) of the BHC Act are consistent with approval. Conclusion Based on the foregoing and all other facts of record, the Board has determined that the application should be, and hereby is, approved. The Board's approval of the proposal is expressly conditioned on Santander's compliance with all the commitments made in connection with the application. The commitments and conditions relied on by the Board in reaching this decision are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The proposal shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day after the effective date of this order, or later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective April 1, 1999. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Jennifer J. Johnson Secretary of the Board Footnotes Santander and BCH are two large foreign banks headquartered in Spain, each with modest operations in the United States. This application involves a review of the proposed combination of the U.S. operations of these banks as part of a merger of BCH with and into Santander, in which Santander would be the surviving corporation. On consummation, Santander would change its corporate name to "Banco Santander Central Hispano, S.A." Santander also has applied under the International Banking Act, 12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 3101 et seq ., to retain BCH's direct U.S. branches and other offices. That application will be considered separately. Asset data are as of December 31, 1998, using exchange rates then in effect. Ranking data are as of December 31, 1997. Santander owns its indirect minority interest in Citizens Financial Group, Inc. ("Citizens") through The Royal Bank of Scotland Group plc and its subsidiary, The Royal Bank of Scotland plc, both of Edinburgh, Scotland. See Banco de Santander, S.A. de Credito , 78 Federal Reserve Bulletin 60 (1992). 12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1842(d). A bank holding company's home state is that state in which the total deposits of all banking subsidiaries of such company were the largest on July 1, 1966, or the date on which the company became a bank holding company, whichever is later. 12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1841(o)(4)(C). For purposes of section 3(d) of the BHC Act, the home state of Santander is Rhode Island by virtue of Santander's indirect ownership interest in Citizens, a bank holding company in Providence, Rhode Island. See The Royal Bank of Scotland Group plc , 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 428 (1996). 12 U.S.C. ï¿½ï¿½ 1842(d)(1)(A) and (B) and 1842(d)(2)(A) and (B). Santander meets the capital and managerial requirements established by applicable law. On consummation of the proposal, Santander and its affiliates would control less than 10 percent of the total amount of deposits of insured depository institutions in the United States, and less than 30 percent of the total amount of deposits in New York. See N.Y. Banking Law ï¿½ 142-a (McKinney 1999). All other requirements of section 3(d) of the BHC Act also would be met on consummation of the proposal. The Metropolitan New York-New Jersey banking market includes New York City; Nassau, Orange, Putnam, Rockland, Suffolk, Sullivan, and Westchester Counties in New York; Bergen, Essex, Hudson, Hunterdon, Middlesex, Monmouth, Morris, Ocean, Passaic, Somerset, Sussex, Union, Warren Counties, and a portion of Mercer County in New Jersey; Pike County in Pennsylvania; and portions of Fairfield and Litchfield Counties in Connecticut. Market share data used to analyze the competitive effects of the proposal are as of June 30, 1997, and are based on calculations in which the deposits of thrift institutions are included at 50 percent. The HHI for the Metropolitan New York-New Jersey banking market would remain at 761 after consummation of the proposal. Under the revised Department of Justice Merger Guidelines, 49 Federal Register 26,823 (1984), a market in which the post-merger HHI is less than 1000 is considered to be unconcentrated. The Department of Justice has informed the Board that a bank merger or acquisition generally will not be challenged (in the absence of other factors indicating anticompetitive effects) unless the post-merger HHI is at least 1800 and the merger increases the HHI by more than 200 points. The Department of Justice has stated that the higher than normal HHI thresholds for screening bank mergers and acquisitions for anticompetitive effects implicitly recognize the competitive effects of limited-purpose lenders and other nondepository financial entities. On May 18, 1998, the Board issued a temporary cease and desist order (the "Order") pursuant to section 8(c) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1818(c)) against Santander to address deficiencies in its anti-money laundering programs. See Issuance of Enforcement Actions , 84 Federal Reserve Bulletin 539 (1998). The Order arose out of an investigation into the improper activities of two employees of Santander's subsidiary bank in Mexico, Banco Santander Mexicano, S.A. In response to the Order, Santander completed an internal investigation of the subject accounts and transactions and reported its findings to the appropriate U.S. and Mexican authorities. In addition, Santander, with the assistance of outside counsel and independent auditors, conducted a review of its anti-money laundering policies and on June 30, 1998, submitted a confidential report to the Board on the adequacy of its procedures and a plan designed to ensure that the conduct described in the Order would not occur in the future. The Board received a comment from Inner City Press/Community on the Move ("Protestant") stating that the issues raised by the Order were grounds on which the application should be denied. In light of Santander's compliance with the Order to date, and its other efforts, the Board concludes that these matters do not warrant denial of the proposal. Santander-PR also received an "outstanding" rating at its CRA performance evaluation by the FDIC, as of September 18, 1995. Examiners noted in the October 14, 1997, CRA performance evaluation that Santander-PR's branch in New York, New York, does not generally engage in domestic retail deposit or lending activities. The examiners found that the branch had performed in a satisfactory manner under the CRA when the branch was compared to similar institutions in the assessment area. Bank received "needs to improve" ratings from the FDIC in two prior CRA performance evaluations, as of July 15, 1996, and May 31, 1995. Protestant argues that these earlier CRA ratings support a denial of the proposal. Bank's current CRA performance evaluation was recently completed by the FDIC, and its rating of "satisfactory" was announced by the bank after the date of Protestant's comment letter. Examiners noted that Santander-PR did not engage in residential mortgage lending, but that Bank's affiliate, Santander Mortgage Corporation ("SMC"), offered affordable and first-time buyer programs sponsored by the Government National Mortgage Association. In addition, examiners stated that SMC offered Federal Housing Administration and Veterans Administration mortgage products. See 12 C.F.R. 345.25 (community development test for wholesale institutions). These commitments included a $150,000 three-year term loan to a nonprofit community development financial institution to assist with the construction of affordable housing; a three-year, low-interest $200,000 loan to a nonprofit community development support organization that acts as an intermediary by channeling grants, loans, and equity investments to underserved communities; and a two-year, low-interest $150,000 loan to the capitalization program of a nonprofit association that assists community development credit unions serving low-income communities and community groups seeking to form credit unions. 12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1842(c)(3)(B). As provided in Regulation Y, the Board determines whether a foreign bank is subject to consolidated home country supervision under the standards set forth in Regulation K. See 12 C.F.R. 225.13(a)(4). Regulation K provides that a foreign bank may be considered subject to consolidated supervision if the Board determines that the bank is supervised or regulated in such a manner that its home country supervisor receives sufficient information on the worldwide operations of the foreign bank, including the relationship of the bank and its affiliates, to assess the foreign bank's overall financial condition and compliance with law and regulation. See 12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)(1)(ii). See, e.g., Banco Santander, S.A. , 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 833 (1996). Protestant argues that the Board should deny Santander's application because the matters described by the Order referred to in footnote 9 raise questions about whether Santander is subject to comprehensive consolidated supervision by its home country supervisor under section 3 of the BHC Act. As noted above, in light of Santander's compliance with the Order to date, and its other efforts, the Board does not believe that these matters warrant denial of the subject proposal. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Meyer, Ferguson, and Gramlich.
Remarks by Vice Chair Alice M. Rivlin Social Security Before the Business Roundtable, Social Security Symposium, Washington, D.C. April 6, 1999 This conference focuses on the question: "What should we do about funding Social Security?" That sounds like a well-defined issue for a conference. There are serious Social Security reform proposals on the table and choices to be made. Experts can be brought in to analyze the options and evaluate the pros and cons. Business leaders can pick the best ideas and try to influence politicians to support them. I believe, however, that focussing too narrowly on the Social Security funding question -- in isolation from the more fundamental economic challenge of an aging population -- risks muddling the problem and perhaps picking a wrong answer. The fundamental challenge is that in about a decade the ratio of older people to those of working age will begin to rise rapidly as the baby boom generation retires from the work force. Moreover, because people are living longer, that ratio is almost certain to go on rising indefinitely, albeit at a much slower rate after the whole baby boom generation has retired. In any given future year, say 2050, a larger proportion of older people will be competing with the workforce and the rest of the population for shares of the GDP in that year. Whatever is produced in 2050 will have to suffice for all the claimants. Societies cannot consume more than they produce for long, nor can consumer goods feasibly be stockpiled. This challenge raises two policy questions of immediate importance: What can we do now to increase future GDP so that there are more goods and services to be distributed among the claimants in future years? What, if anything, should be done now to lock in the claims of particular groups, such as retirees, on that future GDP? The first question -- how to move to a higher economic growth path -- is obviously the most important, as well as the most urgent. If we can find ways to make the future workforce more productive, both they and future retirees will benefit. Moreover, since growth is cumulative and even small increases in growth rates have large effects over time, the sooner we get started, the greater the impact on any given future year. What to do about funding Social Security is an aspect of the second question -- whether to try to lock in the claims of older people on future GDP. Its main urgency is that some solutions contribute to higher growth and some do not. It's important to choose a pro-growth solution and choose it soon. Locking in claims may also have some intrinsic merit, since it reduces uncertainty and future tension among claimants, but any deal struck now could come unstuck under future political pressures. The Important Objective: Higher Sustained Economic Growth It we want to have a bigger GDP to divide among the elderly and the non-elderly in the future, the obvious thing to do is to save more now and invest it wisely. Higher saving can come in the form of public sector surpluses used to reduce debt held by the public. Public debt reduction makes more funds available for investment and puts downward pressure on the cost of capital. Alternatively, higher saving can come from the private sector deciding to consume less and save more, which also channels more funds into investment and puts downward pressure on capital costs. From a macroeconomic point of view, it doesn't much matter whether the saving is public or private. The choice is pragmatic. We know how to increase public saving by running surpluses in the public budget; we are not at all sure how to raise private saving in the United States. We have tried a lot of different incentives in the last decade or two without any visible effect. Private saving remains low. Hence, paying down public debt has the obvious merit of being something we know how to do. Increasing national saving isn't a guarantee of higher growth in the future, nor is it the only prerequisite for a more productive economy. The increased saving has to be used well. It should be combined with a steady stream of innovations ready to be turned into products and processes, successful investment in human capital that results in upgrading workforce skills, and a widespread managerial focus on continuous productivity improvement. That all sounds like what is happening in the U.S. economy right now, so one way to contribute to a higher GDP over coming decades may be to figure out what we are all doing so right in the current U.S. economy and keep doing it. Tight labor markets have long been seen as harbingers of inflation (as higher wages led to higher prices) and lower productivity (as less skilled and experienced workers were drawn into the labor market). But recent experience suggests that, at least in the context of intense global and domestic competitiveness, as well as a continuing revolution in computers and telecommunications, tight labor markets can provide incentives for managerial innovation, skills acquisition and higher productivity, thereby leading to higher growth with little inflation. Locking in Claims on Future Output The challenge of an aging society is sometimes equated with locking in claims on future output, especially those of Social Security beneficiaries. Current estimates are that the Social Security system will continue to take in more than it is paying out (including interest) until about 2022, thus building up balances in the fund. Then, as the baby boom generation swells the retirement rolls, it will begin paying out more than it is taking in, drawing down its resources (selling the Treasury securities in the fund). By current calculations, the fund will be used up in 2034; the Social Security system will be unable to pay all the claims out of current inflow. If nothing is done to fix the imbalance before then, either benefits would have to be cut drastically or payroll taxes increased precipitously (or some combination of the two) to keep the fund solvent and the checks flowing. Proposals to "fully fund" Social Security are designed to avoid the pain of abrupt changes in either taxes or benefits by ensuring the fund is large enough to go on paying benefits for the foreseeable future (or at least for 75 years). There would be advantages to knowing that the system was fully funded. The scare talk about "Social Security going bankrupt" would diminish. Younger people might become more confident that they would get their Social Security benefits when they retire (many, if not most, currently doubt that Social Security will still be there when they retire), and people of all ages would likely do more accurate planning for their retirement. Full funding, however, does not necessarily contribute to making future GDP larger, although it could do so if it was done in a way that added to national saving. Full funding achieved by increasing tax inflows into the fund and/or reducing benefit outflows would build up larger balances in the fund and would add to national saving, provided these larger surpluses in the Social Security trust fund were not offset by larger deficits in the rest of the federal budget. Full funding achieved by transferring general revenues to the Social Security fund would add to national saving only if other expenditures were cut commensurately so that no offsetting deficit was created in the rest of the budget. Raising the rate of return on Social Security assets by investing in them in private sector securities would help achieve full funding with a smaller tax increase or benefit cut, but would do nothing by itself to increase national saving. The merits of any particular full funding proposal, therefore, depend on: how much it contributes, on balance, to national saving (the more it does, the more it helps to ease the burden of paying all future claimants, elderly and non-elderly alike); how the evaluator weighs the future consumption of the elderly against that of other groups (the young, the middle aged, the sick, the poor) or against other activities (national defense, scientific research). Of course, priorities chosen now won't necessarily be those of future populations and their elected representatives. Current law Social Security benefits, even if fully funded by enactment of future tax increases, might begin to seem too costly as the future difficulty of paying other claims became apparent. The opposite scenario, seems more likely, however. Near-term decisions to fully fund the system by reducing future benefits could easily come unstuck as the political clout of seniors inevitably increases with their rising proportion of the voting-age population. A third criterion that appeals to me is preserving the structure of the Social Security system as much as possible. Social Security has served us well. It has been enormously successful in enhancing the well-being, independence and dignity of older people. It is extremely popular and well entrenched in our culture, with other retirement and insurance programs built around and on top of it. Its universality, its contributory nature and its redistributive effects seem to me huge pluses worth preserving. We should be reluctant to scrap or drastically alter a program that has worked so well for more than half a century, when options for preserving its merits, while correcting its defects, are available. The Plans on the Table The Administration's plan gets high marks on the most important criterion: adding to national saving. It does that by creating a politically attractive motive for not reducing currently projected surpluses; it preserves them by allocating them largely to saving Social Security and Medicare. The Administration would extend the life of the Social Security trust fund to 2049 by legislating large transfers of general revenues into the fund. It allocates nearly two-thirds of the projected surplus to augment the Social Security trust fund (and another 15 percent for Medicare). Whether this commitment adds to national saving depends, of course, on what you think would happen to the projected surpluses in the absence of a powerful argument to "use" them to replenish the social insurance funds. If you think (and I find this scenario compelling) that the congress would likely use the surpluses to fund tax cuts and other federal spending, then it follows that the Administration's plan gives a huge boost to national saving. It would reduce the debt held by the public -- indeed current projections eliminate it entirely by 2018 -- thus making huge sums available for private (and state and local) investment and lowering the cost of capital. The Administration's plan also preserves the existing Social Security system on the benefit side by locking in the claims of future beneficiaries to the benefits specified under current law or at least by making it much less urgent to reconsider those benefits in the name of fully funding the system. To be sure, the Administration's plan does not achieve full funding, even for 75 years, so benefit cuts or tax increases would still be necessary at some point, but it puts off the day of reckoning. On the income side, the plan does violence to the traditional contributory nature of Social Security by using a huge injection of general revenues to preserve claims to future benefits. Social insurance purists will worry about this. I'm inclined to believe that it would be worth sacrificing a bit of purity to get the addition to national saving inherent in using such a politically attractive excuse for not turning the projected surpluses into tax cuts or current spending. Indeed, whether or not its specific plan is adopted, I believe the Administration has achieved a significant breakthrough in increasing the national understanding of the importance of raising national saving to meet the challenge of an aging society. The mechanics of the Administration's plan are complex and hard to grasp, which made unfair charges of budget gimmickery hard for them to refute, but in the process of defending it, Administration officials have sold the plan's main feature well. Using surpluses to pay off debt held by the public adds to national saving and enhances future growth; the Administration's plan has that big strength. In terms of sorting out the claims to GDP in, say, 2050, the Administration makes a clear choice: it favors future Social Security recipients over other claimants. If the economy continues to do well (enhanced by the additional saving generated by public debt reduction) this tilting of priorities toward the elderly may not be questioned, especially by an electorate increasingly heavily weighted with seniors. If the economic good news peters out, however, and the surpluses disappear, the priorities issue will become more stark. If the commitments to transfer general revenue resources to the Social Security fund have to be met by raising general taxes or drastically cutting spending for other purposes (including investment in infrastructure, worker skills and scientific research that arguably enhance future growth) then many might argue that the priorities were wrong and should be altered. Generations X and Y will likely be gray by then, but their younger counterparts may be equally vocal. The Administration also proposes universal saving accounts, apparently designed to encourage private saving, but has yet to spell out details of the proposal. Others have offered plans that would substitute compulsory contributions to privately managed savings accounts for a significant portion of Social Security benefits, leaving Social Security as a back-up plan for low earners and unsuccessful investors. Martin Feldstein's plan is ingenious and, like the Administration's proposal, adds to national saving by using the projected surpluses to finance retirement savings. In particular, his plan would use the surpluses to fund individual accounts. These accounts would receive government contributions equal to 2.3 percent of the previous year's wages, up to the Social Security maximum. At retirement, the proceeds of each account would be used to purchase an annuity; and the government would guarantee that the combination of traditional benefits and the annuity would be at least as large as the Social Security benefit promised under current law. The Feldstein plan would effectively use the proceeds from the individual accounts to make up the expected shortfall in future Social Security benefits. The individual accounts would presumably be invested, at least partially, in private securities, so like the Administration's proposal, this plan uses the higher rate of return on private securities to help fund the Social Security system. Like the Administration's plan, the Feldstein plan adds to national saving only if one believes that without the proposed transfers to Social Security, the surpluses are likely to disappear into tax cuts and other federal spending. It differs from the Administration plan in that it substitutes privately invested individual accounts for much of the current Social Security structure. If successful, it would presumably be a transition to a retirement system based primarily on compulsory contributions to individuals accounts invested in private securities, with Social Security as we know it becoming a residual safety net. Those of us who believe that the original concept of social insurance has served us well and should continue would be fearful that such a transition would lose the benefits of a universal, redistributive (but not means-tested) system. Where do I come out? In the days before surpluses of such magnitude were anticipated in the Federal budget, solving the Social Security funding shortfall seemed to me a pretty simple problem -- at least conceptually, if not politically. The objective was to preserve the structure of the system, get it into at least 75 year actuarial balance, and add to national saving in the process. Since it seemed inadvisable to raise payroll taxes, I thought it would be necessary to trim future benefits (by raising the retirement age, making the calculation of benefits marginally less generous, making sure that benefits paid were not over-indexed for inflation). The benefit reduction could be minimized by making sure that coverage was extended to all possible recruits and by investing a portion of the proceeds in private markets to increase the rate of return. Admittedly, the private investment aspect was a little suspect, because it did nothing to raise national saving, but it did make the narrow Social Security funding problem easier to solve. The argument that public funds invested in private securities could lead to undesirable attempts to exercise political influences over private firms seemed to me an argument to take seriously, but I regarded the problem as fixable with restrictions and safeguards, as does the Administration. As for individual accounts, I thought the proposal of my colleague, Ned Gramlich, was a sound one, since it involved an add-on to current payroll tax contributions and therefore a net addition to saving. I thought the funds among which an individual would choose ought to be centrally managed to minimize the administrative cost; but I did hope that the experience of owning private securities might induce additional private saving over time. It also might be useful to consider providing a matching government contribution to low-income workers, both to enhance the progressivity of individual accounts and to reduce the disincentive to hire low skilled workers. Now that we have the surpluses in view, however, I believe we have a unique opportunity to increase national saving by reducing the public debt. Combining this opportunity with a solution to the Social Security funding problem makes both political and economic sense. A bipartisan solution that combined the Administration's idea for locking in the surpluses with modest benefit cuts and some type of add-on individual accounts now strikes me as both desirable and fortuitous.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today its approval of the application of Banco de Credito e Inversiones, Santiago, Chile, to establish an agency in Miami, Florida. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Banco de Credito e Inversiones S.A. Santiago, Chile Order Approving Establishment of an Agency Banco de Credito e Inversiones S.A. ("Bank"), Santiago, Chile, a foreign bank within the meaning of the International Banking Act ("IBA"), has applied under section 7(d) of the IBA (12 U.S.C. §3105(d)) to establish an agency in Miami, Florida. The Foreign Bank Supervision Enhancement Act of 1991 ("FBSEA"), which amended the IBA, provides that a foreign bank must obtain the approval of the Board to establish an agency in the United States. Notice of the application, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published in a newspaper of general circulation in Miami, Florida ( The Miami Herald , April 23, 1998). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the application and all comments received. Bank, with total consolidated assets of approximately $5.9 billion, is the sixth largest bank in Chile. Approximately 70 percent of the shares of Bank are held by related parties. The remaining shares of Bank are widely held, with no single shareholder owning more than 5 percent of shares. Bank engages in a full range of wholesale, retail, and investment banking activities, including deposit-taking, private-sector lending, foreign exchange trading, and trade-related financing. Bank operates 139 branches or offices in Chile. In addition, Bank operates six subsidiaries in Chile, which engage in stock brokerage, mutual fund administration, financial consulting, collections, insurance brokerage, and marketing activities, and owns a one-third equity interest in an unincorporated association that engages in electronic funds clearing activities. At present, Bank does not operate any foreign branches, agencies, or subsidiaries. Bank's primary purposes for establishing the proposed agency in Florida are to enhance its ability to serve existing customers and to expand its international customer base. The agency would provide correspondent banking, corporate banking, private banking, and investment advisory and fund management services. Bank does not engage directly or indirectly in any nonbanking activities in the United States. Bank would be a qualifying foreign banking organization within the meaning of Regulation K (12 C.F.R. 211.23(b)). The Superintendencia de Bancos e Instituciones Financieras ("SBIF"), Bank's primary home country supervisor, has indicated that it has no objection to establishment of the proposed agency. In order to approve an application by a foreign bank to establish an agency in the United States, the IBA and Regulation K require the Board to determine that the foreign bank applicant engages directly in the business of banking outside of the United States and has furnished to the Board the information it needs to assess the application adequately. The Board generally also must determine that the foreign bank is subject to comprehensive supervision or regulation on a consolidated basis by its home country supervisor (12 U.S.C. §3105(d)(2); 12 C.F.R. 211.24). The Board also may take into account additional standards as set forth in the IBA and Regulation K (12 U.S.C. §3105(d)(3)-(4); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)). As noted above, Bank engages directly in the business of banking outside of the United States. Bank also has provided the Board with information necessary to assess the application through submissions that address the relevant issues. Regulation K provides that a foreign bank will be considered to be subject to comprehensive supervision or regulation on a consolidated basis if the Board determines that the bank is supervised and regulated in such a manner that its home country supervisor receives sufficient information on the foreign bank's worldwide operations, including the relationship of the foreign bank to any affiliate, to assess the overall financial condition of the foreign bank and its compliance with law and regulation (12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)(1)). With respect to the issue of supervision by home country authorities, the Board has considered the following information. Bank is supervised and regulated by the SBIF. The Board previously determined that another Chilean credit institution was subject to comprehensive supervision on a consolidated basis by the SBIF. The Board has determined that Bank is supervised on substantially the same terms and conditions as that other institution. Moreover, there have been recent enhancements to Chilean supervision in a number of areas, including increasing risk-based capital requirements and promoting information exchanges with foreign supervisory authorities. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that Bank is subject to comprehensive supervision and regulation on a consolidated basis by its home country supervisor. The Board also has taken into account the additional standards set forth in section 7 of the IBA (see 12 U.S.C. §3105(d)(3)-(4); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)(2)). As noted above, the SBIF has indicated no objection to establishment of the proposed agency. Chile's risk-based capital standards conform to those established by the Basle Capital Accord ("Accord"). Bank's capital is in excess of the minimum levels that would be required by the Accord and is considered equivalent to capital that would be required of a U.S. banking organization. Managerial and other financial resources of Bank also are considered consistent with approval of the proposed agency. Bank does not currently have operations outside Chile. Nevertheless, in view of the experience of the proposed agency manager, and given the fact that Bank has had extensive experience conducting the types of activities in which the proposed agency would be engaged, Bank appears to have the experience and capacity to support the activities to be conducted by the proposed agency. Bank has established controls and procedures for the proposed agency to ensure compliance with U.S. law and for its operations in general. Finally, the Board has reviewed the restrictions on disclosure in relevant jurisdictions in which Bank operates and has communicated with relevant government authorities about access to information. Bank and Baquio have committed to make available to the Board such information on the operations of Bank and any affiliate of Bank that the Board deems necessary to determine and enforce compliance with the IBA, the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956, as amended, and other applicable Federal law. To the extent that the provision of such information is prohibited or impeded by law, Bank and Baquio have committed to cooperate with the Board to obtain any necessary consents or waivers that might be required from third parties in connection with disclosure of such information. In addition, subject to certain conditions, the SBIF may share information on Bank's operations with other supervisors, including the Board. In light of these commitments and other facts of record, and subject to the condition described below, the Board concludes that Bank and Baquio have provided adequate assurances of access to any necessary information the Board may request. On the basis of all the facts of record, and subject to the commitments made by Bank and Baquio and the terms and conditions set forth in this order, the Board has determined that Bank's application to establish a state-licensed agency should be, and hereby is, approved. Should any restrictions on access to information on the operations or activities of Bank or its affiliates subsequently interfere with the Board's ability to obtain information to determine and enforce compliance by Bank or its affiliates with applicable federal statutes, the Board may require termination of any of Bank's direct or indirect activities in the United States. Approval of this application is also specifically conditioned on Bank's compliance with the commitments made in connection with this application, and with the conditions in this order. The commitments and conditions referred to above are conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its decision, and may be enforced in proceedings under 12 U.S.C. §1818 or 12 U.S.C. §1847 against Bank, its offices, and its affiliates. By order of the Board of Governors, effective April 12, 1999. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Footnotes Asset data are as of June 30, 1998. Empresas Juan Yarur S.A.C., Santiago, Chile ("Empresas"), which owns 54.7 percent of Bank's shares, is the only shareholder that directly owns more than 5 percent of Bank's shares. Mr. Luis Enrique Yarur Rey, chairman of Bank's board, controls Empresas through two holding companies: Inversiones Petro S.A., Santiago, Chile ("Petro"), which directly owns 55.2 percent of Empresas; and Inversiones Baquio S.A., Santiago, Chile ("Baquio"), which directly owns 5.7 percent of Empresas's shares and directly owns 53 percent of Petro. Together, Mr. Yarur and his wife own all of the shares of Baquio. Mr. Yarur directly owns less than 1 percent of Bank's shares, and persons related to Mr. Yarur directly and indirectly own another 15 percent of Bank's shares. Approximately 12 percent of Bank's shares are held in custodial accounts by Deposito Central de Valores ("DCV"), the clearinghouse for the Santiago stock exchange. DCV acts only as a clearinghouse and custodian of securities and does not exercise any voting authority over shares in its custody. In determining whether this standard is met, the Board considers, among other factors, the extent to which the home country supervisor: (a) ensures that the bank has adequate procedures for monitoring and controlling its activities worldwide; (b) obtains information on the condition of the bank and its subsidiaries and offices through regular examination reports, audit reports, or otherwise; (c) obtains information on the dealings with and relationship between the bank and its affiliates, both foreign and domestic; (d) receives from the bank financial reports that are consolidated on a worldwide basis, or comparable information that permits analysis of the bank's financial condition on a worldwide consolidated basis; (e) evaluates prudential standards, such as capital adequacy and risk asset exposure, on a worldwide basis. These are indicia of comprehensive, consolidated supervision. No single factor is essential, and other elements may inform the Board's determination. See Banco de Chile , 80 Federal Reserve Bulletin 179 (1994). The Board's authority to approve the establishment of the proposed agency parallels the continuing authority of the Florida Department of Banking and Finance to license offices of a foreign bank. The Board's approval of the application does not supplant the authority of the State of Florida and its agent, the Florida Department of Banking and Finance, to license the proposed agency of Bank in accordance with any terms or conditions that the Florida Department of Banking and Finance may impose. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Meyer, Ferguson, and Gramlich.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application of Community Capital Bancshares, Inc. to become a bank holding company by acquiring Albany Bank & Trust, N.A., both in Albany, Georgia. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Community Capital Bancshares, Inc. Albany, Georgia Order Approving Formation of a Bank Holding Company Community Capital Bancshares, Inc. ("CCB") has requested the Board's approval under section 3(a)(1) of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act") (12 U.S.C. §1842(a)(1)) to become a bank holding company by acquiring all the voting shares of Albany Bank & Trust, N.A., Albany, Georgia ("Bank"), a de novo bank. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (64 Federal Register 9155 (1999)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the proposal and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 3 of the BHC Act. CCB is a corporation formed for the purpose of acquiring control of Bank. The Board previously has noted that establishment of a de novo bank enhances competition in the relevant banking market and is a positive consideration in an application under section 3 of the BHC Act. Accordingly, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposal would not have a significantly adverse effect on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in any relevant banking market and that competitive considerations are consistent with approval. Based on all the facts of record, the Board also concludes that the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of CCB and Bank are consistent with approval of the proposal, as are the other supervisory factors the Board must consider under section 3 of the BHC Act. The Board also has considered carefully the effect of the proposal on the convenience and needs of the communities to be served in light of all the facts of record, including a comment submitted on behalf of Business Research and Development, Albany, Georgia ("Commenter"). Commenter contends that Bank will not adequately serve the credit and banking needs of minorities nor of low- and moderate-income ("LMI") individuals and neighborhoods in the Albany area. Commenter also contends that Bank has not sufficiently marketed its proposed products and services to African Americans in Albany. Bank is a de novo insured depository institution and, accordingly, has no record of performance under the Community Reinvestment Act (12 U.S.C. §2901 et seq. ) ("CRA"). Bank, however, has established a comprehensive CRA plan that details the products and services that Bank intends to offer to assist in meeting the credit, service and investment needs of Bank's entire community, including LMI neighborhoods. For example, Bank plans to offer a variety of housing-related loans, including first- and second-mortgages, home equity, and home improvement loans. Bank also plans to originate small business loans guaranteed by the Small Business Administration and lines of credit to help agricultural borrowers meet seasonal demand for credit. In addition, Bank intends to make available consumer loans and student loans to assist in meeting the credit needs of its local community, and to offer workshops in LMI neighborhoods on basic money management skills and the fundamentals of maintaining a bank account. Bank also would offer several types of deposit accounts, including a checking account with a $100 minimum balance, no monthly maintenance fees, and unlimited check-writing privileges. Bank's CRA plan provides that Bank will actively market its products and services throughout its community, including LMI neighborhoods, in several ways, including direct mail and telemarketing programs and the sponsorship of community programs. Bank also has held three public forums in the Albany area to inform members of the local community about Bank's proposed products and services, and Bank plans to hold an additional three public forums in the Albany area before commencing operations. The Board notes, moreover, that Bank's President and Chief Executive Officer and Bank's Executive Vice President and Senior Loan Officer recently served in management positions at insured depository institutions that received "outstanding" ratings at their most recent CRA performance evaluation by their appropriate federal supervisory agency. As noted above, the OCC recently approved Bank's application for a national bank charter after considering Bank's proposed assessment area and plans to meet the credit needs of the local community, including LMI areas, in light of substantially similar comments filed by Commenter. Consistent with the CRA, Bank has delineated a local assessment area within which the OCC, Bank's appropriate federal supervisory agency, will evaluate the performance of Bank under the CRA in future examinations. Bank's delineated assessment area includes all of Dougherty County and the southern half of Lee County, both in Georgia. Bank's assessment area includes all of Albany and does not arbitrarily exclude LMI areas. Based on all the facts of record, and for reasons discussed above, the Board concludes that considerations relating to the convenience and needs factor are consistent with approval of the application. The Board notes that the OCC will evaluate Bank's actual record of meeting the credit needs of the Albany community, including LMI neighborhoods, in future CRA performance examinations of Bank, and the Board will carefully consider that record in acting on future applications by CCB to acquire an insured depository institution. Based on the foregoing, and in light of all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the application should be, and hereby is, approved. The Board's approval is specifically conditioned on compliance by CCB with all the commitments made in connection with the application. For the purpose of this action, the commitments and conditions relied on by the Board in reaching its decision are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The acquisition of Bank shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day after the effective date of this order, or later than three months after the effective date of this order, and Bank shall be open for business within six months following the effective date of this order, unless such periods are extended for good cause by the Board or the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective April 12, 1999. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Footnotes The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency ("OCC") recently approved Bank's application for a national bank charter, subject to the Board's approval of this application. See Letter from John O. Stein, II, Corporate Manager, Southeastern District Office, to Robert E. Lee, dated February 9, 1999. See CFBanc Holdings, Inc. , 85 Federal Reserve Bulletin 52 (1999); Wilson Bank Holding Co. , 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 568 (1996). Commenter also contends that African Americans are not fairly represented in the management of CCB and Bank. The racial composition of an applicant's management is not a factor the Board is permitted to consider in acting on an application under section 3 of the BHC Act. The Board notes that the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission has jurisdiction to determine whether banking organizations such as CCB and Bank are in compliance with Federal equal employment opportunity statutes under the regulations of the Department of Labor. See 41 C.F.R. 60-1.7(a), 60-1.40. Bank also plans to establish an additional branch in downtown Albany during its third year of operation. This branch would further increase Bank's ability to serve the banking and credit needs of its community, including African-American and LMI residents of Albany. Before holding these public forums, Bank advertised the date, location, and purpose of the forums in a newspaper of general circulation in the Albany area. See 12 C.F.R. 25.41(a). Commenter has requested that the Board hold public meetings or hearings on the proposal. Section 3(b) of the BHC Act does not require the Board to hold a public hearing on an application unless the appropriate supervisory authority for the bank to be acquired makes a timely written recommendation of denial. The Board has not received such a recommendation from the OCC. Under its rules, the Board also may, in its discretion, hold a public meeting or hearing on an application to acquire a bank if a meeting or hearing is necessary or appropriate to clarify factual issues related to the application and to provide an opportunity for testimony, if appropriate. 12 C.F.R. 225.16(e). The Board has carefully considered Commenter's request in light of all the facts of record. In the Board's view, Commenter has had ample opportunity to submit its views, and did submit written comments that have been carefully considered by the Board in acting on the proposal. Commenter's request fails to demonstrate why its written comments do not adequately present its evidence and fails to identify disputed issues of fact that are material to the Board's decision that would be clarified by a public meeting or hearing. For these reasons, and based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that a public meeting or hearing is not required or warranted in this case. Commenter also has requested that the Board delay action on the proposal for at least 90 days. The Board is required under applicable law and its processing procedures to act on applications submitted under the BHC Act within a specified time. The Board has reviewed Commenter's request in light of these requirements and the record compiled in this case. As noted above, Commenter was afforded ample opportunity to comment and its comments were carefully considered. Based on a review of all the facts of record, the Board concludes that the record in this case is sufficient to warrant Board action on the proposal at this time, and further delay is not warranted. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Meyer, Ferguson, and Gramlich.
Remarks by Governor Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. Before the National Automated Clearing House Association, Atlanta, Georgia April 13, 1999 The Payments System and Year 2000: Current Preparations and Challenges Thank you for your invitation to speak today on the timely and critical topic of the Year 2000 challenge to the payments system. As an industry, we have a tremendous responsibility to the public to ensure the smooth operation of the payments system through the Year 2000 and beyond. This morning I would like to discuss the global challenge presented by the Year 2000 problem and describe international efforts, particularly those of the Joint Year 2000 Council, to assist the worldwide financial services industry to be ready for the century date change. In particular, I would like to focus on contingency and risk management initiatives undertaken by central banks and the state of readiness of Federal Reserve payment systems, such as Fed ACH. Finally, I will discuss our need to recognize our responsibility to the general public and our need to continue to develop cooperative efforts between public-sector and private-sector organizations. Global Challenge With less than a year left before the millennium change, it still remains difficult to judge its global impact. The good news is that we are not faced with inaction and there are early indications that the financial industry, in general, is working diligently to be prepared. The euro conversion, which I will elaborate on later, demonstrates that the financial industry can manage significant changes to its systems. It is also important to note, however, that the Year 2000 deadline is not a single event; it is arriving in stages based on dates typically used in financial systems that give us an "early warning" of potential problems. As an example, for any financial systems that look ahead one year, the early January 1999 dates provided a test of their Year 2000 readiness. During 1999, other application look ahead dates will provide further indications of our readiness as well as our ability to initiate our contingency plans. Given the sheer number of computers and chip-based systems, and the manual nature of the fixes that have emerged to date, we are likely to experience some degree of disruption. I believe most disruptions will prove to be mild and short-lived and, as reported in a recent article, their severity effect will be labeled as "headaches, not disaster." Consequently, I do not think that we will face global recession. Ultimately I believe the number and extent of computer system disruptions will not be used as the measure of our success in addressing the Year 2000 problem. Instead, our success will be measured by our ability, and the public's confidence in our ability, to conduct business operations effectively for the balance of this year, on January 3, 2000, and thereafter. Current State of International Year 2000 Efforts Some foreign governments and institutions started their Year 2000 program years ago, while others were initially reluctant to recognize that a problem even existed. This reluctance hindered efforts to take early action. In some areas, already limited resources were dedicated to other activities, such as the euro conversion or attempts to restructure weakened economies. Those countries that recognized the problem early and had sufficient resources assembled technical experts from whatever source was available. Recognizing these challenges, in April 1998 the Bank for International Settlements hosted a Year 2000 roundtable to raise international awareness. At the close of the conference, the sponsoring organizations, the Basle Committee on Banking Supervision, the G-10 Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems, the International Association of Insurance Supervisors, and the International Organization of Securities Commissions established the Joint Year 2000 Council. The Council was formed as a direct result of the recognition of the complexity of the global financial services industry and the need to communicate proactively with regulatory and supervisory authorities. As Chairman of the Joint Year 2000 Council, I work with other members of the Council to ensure that a high level of attention is given to the challenge within the global financial supervisory community and to serve as a point of contact with national and international private sector initiatives. To that end, the Council operates with the participation of central banks, insurance and securities regulators, and banking supervisors. It is the first international body that brings together such a range of financial regulators. It is important to note that the Joint Year 2000 Council is not the "international Year 2000 enforcement agency." We do not have on-site examiners, nor are we meant to replace the efforts of national regulators. The Council established an External Consultative Committee, or ECC, to enhance the degree of information sharing between the public and private sectors. This committee includes representatives of internationally-oriented organizations including the Global 2000 Coordinating Group, the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, and financial service providers, such as S.W.I.F.T., Euroclear, and Cedel. Our most important role may be to provide a forum to facilitate information sharing and cooperation among supervisors. To accomplish this, we have developed a global supervisory contact list of over 600 financial regulators and have initiated several mechanisms for communicating with them. Our most visible may be a series of bulletins, which come out monthly, on different themes and topics. Additionally, the Council has, and will continue to, support, cosponsor, and provide assistance in planning conferences and roundtables on the Year 2000 challenge. To date, we have conducted meetings for regulators from Europe, Asia-Pacific, North and South America and the Caribbean, Africa, and the Middle East, which have provided an excellent means of bringing supervisors together to discuss common interests within specific geographic areas. What is the state of "international readiness?" As you can understand, it is difficult to measure accurately the level of international Year 2000 readiness, and certainly no one can predict with confidence exactly how the century date change will unfold internationally. There are three reasons for this difficulty. First, there is no single indicator that can be used to judge the overall Year 2000 readiness of any country, including the United States. Second, the state of readiness is a moving target. Judgements are usually based on anecdotal information obtained either first-hand through interviews or surveys or second-hand through other sources. The best information is subject to change. Finally, while it may be possible to reach conclusions about the Year 2000 readiness of individual industry sectors, it remains difficult to assess the interdependency of critical systems across industry sectors. In addition, the state of Year 2000 readiness of a country's public sector may not be an accurate indicator of the status of its private sector. With that said, I believe that, as with the United States, in most countries the financial sector was probably somewhat ahead of other sectors in recognizing the Year 2000 problem, and is probably somewhat more advanced in testing and business continuity planning. The banking agencies here in the United States have recently finished Phase II evaluations. Of the banks that the Federal Reserve supervises, about 95 percent are making satisfactory progress. Of importance, the same number of 95 percent applies to foreign banking organizations operating here, which as a group had been behind their U.S. counterparts. I can also report that, through the regional meetings of regulators that I referred to earlier, we have now had contact with regulators from over 100 countries, and the degree of awareness among regulators is, I find, uniformly high. Similarly, with respect to regulators, I should mention the recent release of a statement by the Basle Committee on Banking Supervision discussing the results of its second supervisory survey on the Year 2000 issue. The statement highlights the need for continued efforts, especially in several smaller jurisdictions. It is noteworthy, however, that the Committee's survey of more than 100 regulators identified significant progress within the global financial community. A large majority of regulators indicated that they have issued specific Y2K-related guidance to their banks and believe their banks are taking appropriate steps to address the issue. I believe that these results illustrate the benefits of global supervisory cooperation in raising the financial industry's awareness of the issue and in spurring action. Overall, no one can know with certainty the global impact of the century date change. While much good work is being done, much remains. Banking institutions, both domestic and foreign, must not allow complacency to set in. Lessons Learned As I noted earlier, there were concerns last year that scarce programming resources in Europe were primarily focused on the euro conversion and that Year 2000 readiness efforts lagged. The euro conversion is completed and its success can best be measured by its perception by the media and public as a non-event. While the scale of system changes involved in the euro conversion was significantly less than the Year 2000, the characteristics of the problem are similar and the Global 2000 Coordinating Group conducted a workshop on the euro conversion to identify "lessons learned" that could improve Year 2000 preparedness. The results are valuable and I would like to use them as a framework for describing payment system readiness efforts underway at the Federal Reserve. The first lesson was the need for suppliers of liquidity and credit management to offset payment and funding dislocations. Central banks were urged to accept responsibility for these issues and be able to make decisions with "less than perfect information." The Federal Reserve has taken steps to increase its currency order and to be prepared to provide any necessary liquidity over the year-end through open market operations and discount window lending. We are reminding depository institutions that the Federal Reserve is available to meet liquidity needs under appropriate circumstances and encouraging those that are including the Federal Reserve, as a lender of last resort, in their Year 2000 liquidity contingency plans to complete necessary discount window documentation and collateral arrangements as soon as possible. We are also meeting with agencies such as the Federal Housing Finance Board and the National Credit Union Administration to discuss liquidity issues that might affect the institutions they supervise. Another lesson of the euro conversion was the need to provide for timely and accurate information sharing between industry participants and with regulators. Effective information sharing structures, such as communication centers, must be set up that enable fast and reliable communications between market participants; among commensurate organizational levels, from senior management through operations; and with regulators. Although the Federal Reserve has demonstrated its ability to manage crisis situations, we are evaluating and augmenting our existing communication structures where appropriate. We are developing local and national event management centers to maintain a consistent flow of information within the Federal Reserve, with our business partners, and with the public at large. Regarding this last point, we are in the process of improving our information sharing with our most critical supplier, the telecommunication industry, through our participation in the Telecommunications Sector Group of the President's Council on Year 2000 Conversion and links with the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). The Joint Year 2000 Council is undertaking initiatives that will improve cross-border information sharing between countries, particularly plans for business resumption and event management. The third lesson is the need to expand contingency planning beyond operations, to address business continuity, coordinate planning with third-party providers, and test these plans. We established a Century Date Change Council, comprised of senior management officials, to direct the Federal Reserve's approach to business continuity and contingency planning for the Year 2000. The Council considers risk mitigation actions to lessen the likelihood of a problem occurring and to reduce the impact if a problem should occur; and oversees development of contingency response procedures in the event problems do occur. The Federal Reserve's planning for Year 2000 business continuity is well underway. Each business completed an assessment of the adequacy of its existing contingency scenarios for Year 2000 problems last June. In addition, last November each Federal Reserve entity servicing customers documented its plans to respond to the possibilities of customer problems. Although the responsibility for having sound contingency plans lies with the management of the depository institutions, we recognize that Federal Reserve preparations to deal with potential customer problems are an important component of our business resumption planning. Our emphasis now is on continuing to monitor, and where possible, reducing risk and on refining the Federal Reserve's plans through testing, independent reviews, and other means of coordination. Lastly, and not surprisingly, many problems that did occur with the euro conversion could have been identified with more thorough testing. Since mid-year 1998, the Federal Reserve has offered customers the opportunity to test future-dated transactions for payment applications, such as Fed ACH, and other services with electronic data exchanges. We are continuing to offer testing opportunities both during the week and on weekends through early 2000 and, in the second half of 1999, opportunities will be provided to revalidate application readiness and to test contingency procedures. As of the beginning of April 1999, over 6200 institutions had tested with Fed ACH and approximately 94 percent of our larger-volume ACH customers have tested. I am also encouraged by the testing efforts of private service ACH operators. In February, all ACH operators exchanged files future dated to the rollover weekend and a second test is scheduled for May 10. The Federal Reserve and NYACH will test using leap year dates this weekend. We strongly support domestic and international testing efforts by major market participants, such as the New York Clearing House, the Securities Industry Association, and S.W.I.F.T. to test critical data exchanges. Under the leadership of the New York Clearing House and with the support of the Federal Reserve, cross-border testing of major payment transactions and S.W.I.F.T. is planned to take place in June 1999. For all countries participating in this test, June 12 will conform to January 3, 2000; and June 13 will conform to January 4, 2000, the first business day on which all major international money markets are open after the century rollover. Public Outreach The Joint Year 2000 Council strongly recommends enhanced information sharing as critical to readiness efforts and to avoid unnecessary uncertainty in financial markets. In many countries, there is currently a lack of adequate information on Year 2000 readiness. This is of concern because it impedes efficient preparations by market participants and may exacerbate negative perceptions in the marketplace. Financial institutions should share information in order to strengthen confidence that the Year 2000 challenges are being met in all financial sectors worldwide. In February 1999, the FFIEC issued guidance to financial institutions on how to address customer expectations. It emphasizes that maintaining customer confidence in the financial services industry now and after the Year 2000 needs to be a top priority of the institution and its senior management. In 1999, our outreach program will focus on business resumption activities, including Year 2000 risk mitigation and contingency response actions. The first outreach program occurred in December 1998, when officials from the Federal Reserve presented, via videoconference, an interactive session with its depository institution customers on the Federal Reserve's contingency planning for the Year 2000. Banks are urging their regulators and other government officials to promote public confidence by speaking clearly and forcefully about Year 2000 preparedness. Regulators can play a constructive role in making sure that Year 2000 information disseminated to the public is factually accurate, balanced, and broadly distributed. Communications are a shared responsibility. Research tells us that customers want to hear directly from their bank and that the public is interested in specifics, not generalities, about our preparations. The Federal Reserve is expanding its program of outreach, with every Reserve Bank working on an aggressive program of local communications. I urge you to do the same. The public needs to know that the Year 2000 is like other challenges we have met through careful preparation, risk reduction, and contingency planning to allow us to work around any problems that might occur. Public Obligations and Patterns of Behavior As we get closer to the century date change, there will no doubt be more sensational coverage in the media. It is our obligation to be smart consumers of information and to listen to responsible, not alarmist, voices. Remember, as with anything that has a degree of uncertainty, there will always be those who predict the most dire outcomes. They have generally been wrong in the past, and I expect that they will be wrong again. There are likely to be some disruptions from the century date change; nothing this large and complex can be perfectly faultless. We should remember, however, that there have been serious disruptions to service in daily life before, from storms, temporary power outages, disruptions of telephone service, etc. In general, these prove to be annoying and inconvenient, but nothing more. We also need to maintain reasonable and responsible patterns of behavior. It is possible that market participants may reduce clearing and settlement activity on December 31 and January 3. Several participants, however, have indicated plans to reduce activity over a substantially longer period, up to a month. While such a reduction may appear to be prudent to an individual firm, such action by multiple participants raises the possibility of thin markets with accompanying erratic price behavior. Our perspective has been to encourage market participants, especially those who hold themselves out as intermediaries, to consider carefully the overall implications, including for market liquidity, of reductions in trading volume so that risks and benefits of such initiatives are appropriately balanced. I understand that some organizations that normally make payroll or other payments using the ACH are thinking about whether they should make these payments by check in the days immediately following the rollover to the Year 2000 as part of their contingency planning. I hope these organizations carefully consider all of the implications of such a step before making a final decision in this regard. We have a high degree of confidence in the ability of the Federal Reserve and the banking industry to continue to process electronic payments during this period. The drawbacks to the payment recipients of this change to business-as-usual practices may well outweigh any perceived benefits. Conclusion I believe that the financial services industry has made great progress in addressing Year 2000 issues. During this next year you will not only need to do your best to continue to repair and test your own systems, but will also need to evaluate the risk of potential failures and the effect of these failures on your business. Further, you will need to test fallback procedures or work-around processes that mitigate the effect of such failures on your ability to continue to conduct business. Finally, we must continue to be a reliable source of accurate and sound information to maintain the public's trust. I do not doubt that we can collectively rise to these challenges.
Testimony of Governor Edward W. Kelley, Jr. Year 2000 progress Before the Committee on Banking and Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives April 13, 1999 I appreciate the opportunity to appear before this Committee to update you on Year 2000 issues. I will describe the Federal Reserve's continuing efforts with respect to our contingency and event management plans as a central bank to ensure that adequate sources of currency and liquidity are available, and summarize the special attention being given to maintaining public confidence in the banking system. I will also focus on the progress of the banking industry in preparing for the new millennium and our supervisory initiatives, where considerable progress has been made since I last testified in September. Next, I will provide an overview of our efforts to support the President's Year 2000 Conversion Council and the international financial regulators' Joint Year 2000 Council, and close with our perspective on legislative proposals relating to Year 2000. I also will discuss the Board's strong support for passage of H.R. 1094 that would amend the Federal Reserve Act to broaden the range of discount window loans that may be used as collateral for Federal Reserve notes. That is a lot of material to cover and it reflects our extensive interest in and efforts to address the litany of Year 2000 issues. We are approaching the last months before the century date change with a keener understanding of the magnitude of the task the banking industry, our country, and the rest of the world have been confronting. We are continuing our efforts to ensure that our financial system is safe and sound and ready for the century rollover. I am increasingly optimistic that the operational transition will go well and have come to believe that Year 2000 technical issues will not cause major problems in the financial markets of the United States. One issue I am concerned about and have raised with the press is how to ensure that the public has reliable, complete information about the readiness of the financial services industry and the other industrial and infrastructure sectors of the country. Actions taken by the public based upon fear or bad information rather than upon fact-based rationality may pose a greater threat to our economy than those caused by Year 2000 computer problems themselves. The public's perception of the Year 2000 challenge and response to that perception relative to our banking system is of critical importance to us all. The banking agencies are increasingly turning their attention to public education, and, in that regard, I welcome the opportunity this hearing affords to explain the Federal Reserve's perspective on the century date change. Contingency Planning and Event Management Having worked extensively to correct the Year 2000 computer problems in our systems, we are confident that we will be fully prepared for the new millennium. Nevertheless, as the nation's central bank, the Federal Reserve is actively engaged in contingency and event management planning for any operational disruptions or systemic risks. The Federal Reserve's CDC Council, a group of our most senior officials, is coordinating contingency and event management planning across the Federal Reserve System to ensure a cohesive approach to our preparations. In addition, we are completing plans for our supervision function that provide for monitoring and responding to developments during the transition to the Year 2000, including any disruptions that may occur at financial institutions or in key financial markets where we have responsibilities. These plans are being coordinated with other federal, state and foreign regulators and with the Year 2000 Response Center of the President's Council on Year 2000 Conversion. Business Resumption The Federal Reserve's plans for ensuring operational continuity build upon existing business resumption contingency plans. As part of our standard business processes, the Federal Reserve has long maintained and tested comprehensive business resumption plans, which have proven successful in providing for our continued operations during past crisis situations and natural disasters. Last fall, each of the Federal Reserve's business functions completed assessments of the adequacy of existing contingency plans for addressing Year 2000 risks. These plans are being enhanced to address issues unique to the century date change. For example, we are identifying problems external to the Federal Reserve that may arise when the date changes to 2000, such as those affecting telecommunications providers, utility companies, and key market participants. Based on available information we do not expect widespread problems in these areas, but we nevertheless believe it prudent to develop action plans to mitigate or work around them should they occur. Between now and the century date change, we will test and continue to refine these plans as necessary to optimize operational effectiveness at the century rollover. The goal of the contingency planning process is to minimize the chance for surprise disruptions and to minimize their impact should they occur. Year 2000 Event Management Plan Over the years, the Federal Reserve has demonstrated the ability to manage a wide range of crisis situations. Nevertheless, we are augmenting our existing communication and control structures to enhance our ability to collect information and react to issues as they develop during the next six months and, particularly, during the "rollover period," that is, the last few days or weeks of 1999 and the early days of 2000, as well as the leap year at the end of February. The objectives of our event management plan are to: monitor and report the status of internal systems, financial institutions and markets, infrastructure, and other pertinent areas; maintain a consistent flow of information within the Federal Reserve, to our business partners, and to the public at large; and, identify potential or actual problems and resolve them promptly. The CDC Council has established an Event Management Planning Team that is formulating recommendations to meet these objectives. As with any complex institution, this is challenging because it is necessary to integrate the myriad needs and functions of all areas of the Federal Reserve System into one coordinated and cohesive plan. The Event Management Planning Team presented a number of recommendations to the CDC Council last week, and will continue to refine them in coming months. As we finalize our plans, we will coordinate with other federal and state regulators as well as the President's Council on Year 2000 Conversion. This should result in further streamlining and enhancements. Our event management plans should be substantially completed during the second quarter 1999, and will be tested during the third quarter 1999--with September 9, 1999, scheduled as our first operational date. Cash and Liquidity Issues The Federal Reserve does not believe that the public needs to hold excess cash in anticipation of the century rollover. Although there may be isolated problems, we expect the usual payment methods of checks, debit cards and credit cards to operate. Nevertheless, we recognize that there likely will be some increased demand for cash during the period surrounding the century rollover. In developing cash and liquidity contingency plans, depository institutions have been advised and are taking steps to forecast and prepare for potential spikes in year-end cash demands of their customers. Such plans should address how to distribute cash to locations where it is most needed and provide for close coordination with armored carriers and cash suppliers (their Federal Reserve Bank or correspondent bank). Some of the best practices we've seen include plans to increase cash inventories ahead of seasonal and any anticipated Year 2000 related rise in demand. They also include advance identification of prudent trigger points to replenish currency supplies based upon customer demand that take into account the availability and frequency of transportation arrangements. Equally important, they provide for a customer communication program that explains the Year 2000 problem, how the bank is preparing for it, and any plans to work around minor disruptions in services that could affect access to the bank. We have reminded banks that, as part of their Year 2000 contingency cash planning, banks should review their insurance policies and blanket bond limits to ensure they have sufficient coverage. As I have said in previous testimony, we instituted plans to increase our inventory of currency as a precautionary measure, and not because we believe the public should hold more cash because of the Year 2000. Some observers have suggested that this represents a contradictory message to the public. Not so. Regardless of our view that consumers do not need to hold excess cash during this period, the Federal Reserve has been given the mission by Congress to provide currency to the public as demanded and we will be prepared to fulfill this responsibility whatever the level of demand might be. Another related issue for the central bank is the possibility that despite their best efforts, some depository institutions may encounter problems resulting from or affecting relationships with counterparties and customers. To the extent these problems reduce their liquidity, and other sources of funding may no longer be reasonably available, the Federal Reserve is prepared to lend to provide liquidity with adequate collateral. Depository institutions are expected to address liquidity issues in their contingency plans and to take steps necessary to facilitate the process of borrowing from the Federal Reserve, for example, by completing necessary documentation and prepositioning collateral now rather than waiting for the actual event when there may be other organizations seeking additional funding at the same time. We have sent a letter to all depository institutions encouraging them to consider including the Federal Reserve, as lender of last resort, in their funding contingency plans, and, if they do, to complete necessary documentation and collateral arrangements as soon as possible. Public Affairs Program Let me go back to an earlier comment I made regarding the public's perception of the Year 2000 issue. We believe that the best way to engender a strong and positive public attitude is through open and candid discussion. The public is getting information from a variety of sources. We believe that it is important to ensure that the public can look to the Federal Reserve System as a source of accurate information regarding the readiness of the banking industry and the payments mechanisms through the century rollover. Federal Reserve communications activities have been focused on providing accurate, consistent information to the public and keeping the media informed about our Year 2000 activities. The Federal Reserve has initiated a series of public affairs activities related to the Year 2000 designed to provide the public with the information it needs. In this regard, staff is working actively with the communications team for the President's Council on Year 2000 Conversion to develop responses to consumer questions that come in on the Council's Year 2000 "hotline." A Year 2000 consumer web page is being designed to provide easy access to the information already available on the Federal Reserve's . A brochure describing the Year 2000 issue and the Federal Reserve's Year 2000 program will soon be available. Many Federal Reserve officials as well as several Board members have been giving speeches on Year 2000. Reserve Banks have scheduled press conferences and briefing sessions for the media and the media kit that we provide is updated regularly to include current information and new materials. There are a number of other communications programs underway, including joint programs with the other bank regulatory agencies as well as with banking industry trade groups. In this regard, the regulatory agencies are sponsoring consumer research, planning a consumer awareness video, developing a consumer checklist for financial institution customers, and planning to hold joint press briefings. Many people would like to have an ironclad guarantee that there will be no Year 2000 disruptions, but that guarantee cannot be made. We cannot know in advance exactly how the millennium rollover will go. The truth is that no one can guarantee that everything will work perfectly even later this morning, but we have every confidence that it will. In fact, banking systems and utilities experience brief disruptions in service from time-to-time that are transparent to consumers or present only minor inconveniences. Public confidence does not require that everyone believe that everything will work perfectly all the time. Rather, the public needs to be confident that the information it is receiving is complete, reliable, balanced and adequate to identify actions appropriate to their own circumstances. Bank Supervision Turning to our efforts with respect to the readiness of individual banking organizations, let me emphasize today, as I have in the past, that while the bank supervisors have appropriately provided significant guidance and meaningful incentives to the industry to prepare for the Year 2000, we cannot be responsible for ensuring the readiness of any banking organization. The boards of directors and senior management of banks are responsible for ensuring that their organizations are able to provide uninterrupted services and operate in a safe and sound manner after the century date change. With that said, over the past few months the Federal Reserve and the banking agencies have been active in responding to requests for additional guidance about the difficult tasks of testing and contingency planning and the importance of effective customer communication programs. We also have been extremely active in banker outreach and education programs across the country, and in participating in domestic and international securities industry/payment systems work groups such as the Global 2000 Co-ordinating Group. Even more important, we have completed a second round of on-site Year 2000 supervisory reviews of the banking organizations we supervise to assess their progress in testing remediated systems, evaluating customer and counterparty risk, and in developing their business resumption contingency plans. Issuance of Supervisory Guidance Shortly after my testimony to you in September, on October 15, 1998, the FFIEC agencies adopted "Interagency Guidelines Establishing Year 2000 Standards for Safety and Soundness," which apply to all insured depository institutions. The guidelines incorporate important elements of previously issued FFIEC guidance including aggressive milestone dates for testing and implementation. The guidelines were issued under section 39 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act, which authorizes the Federal Reserve and other banking agencies to direct an insured depository institution to prepare an acceptable corrective action plan and comply with such a plan, without having to initiate an administrative proceeding. The guidelines, therefore, provide an expedited enforcement tool to address serious Year 2000 deficiencies at insured depository institutions and may be useful in addressing any serious deficiencies over the next few months, when time is of the essence. On December 11, 1998, the FFIEC issued "Questions and Answers Regarding Year 2000 Contingency Planning" to answer frequently asked questions received by the agencies. The statement underscores the importance of implementing an effective business resumption plan that establishes a course of action to resume core business processes in the event of a system failure. On February 17, 1999, the FFIEC issued additional guidance to assist financial institutions with customer communications on the Year 2000. The guidance supplements the May 1998 FFIEC policy statement on Year 2000 Customer Awareness Programs and emphasizes that maintaining customer confidence in the financial services industry needs to be a top priority of bank management. The guidance outlines key subject matters that could be incorporated into bank customer communication statements. The two papers together emphasize that it is essential for banks to establish customer communication programs and train staff so that they are able to respond to customer inquiries about their readiness. Outreach to Banking Industry We stress the importance of customer communications whenever we meet with bankers, and we do that often. We participated in 101 programs during the fourth quarter 1998 that were attended by 5,000 participants. We participated in a total of 497 programs during 1998 that were attended by over 26,000 participants. So far in 1999, we have participated in over 75 programs reaching over 6,600 participants. We think these programs have been extremely useful to all parties because they provide attendees with an opportunity to hear about our expectations "up close and personal" and to ask questions. They also provide us with an opportunity to hear about the concerns, problems and accomplishments being experienced by participants and their colleagues. Phase II Supervision Program The Federal Reserve has just completed Phase II of its Year 2000 supervision program, which ran from July 1, 1998, through March 31, 1999. During Phase II we performed a risk-focused Year 2000 assessment of approximately 1,500 supervised institutions, including state member banks, bank holding companies with at least $1 billion in total assets or with significant information processing activities, and U.S. branches and agencies of certain foreign banking organizations. Our Phase II program called for an evaluation of a bank's overall Year 2000 program and progress relative to FFIEC guidelines and milestone dates. Based on our reviews, 95 percent of the banking organizations we supervise are making satisfactory progress in their Year 2000 programs and are in substantial compliance with the FFIEC milestone dates. Any financial institution rated less than satisfactory is required to file an acceptable corrective action plan within 30 days of receiving a deficiency notification letter from the Federal Reserve. These institutions are placed on an intensified monthly monitoring plan, and depending on the severity of the deficiencies identified, the use of an appropriate informal or formal supervisory action is considered. This "watch list" program for monitoring less than satisfactory banks has proven extremely effective in bringing the issues to the attention of boards of directors and management, and obtaining an appropriate response. We find that most banks are able to intensify their programs and begin making satisfactory progress within a few months. For the small minority of financial organizations found to be making less than satisfactory progress, the deficiencies most frequently noted during Phase II reviews have been relatively manageable and include delays in completing evaluations of customer risk, weaknesses or delays in completing remediation or testing programs, and insufficient communication between management and boards of directors. The progress of institutions that lagged behind the December 31, 1998, FFIEC milestone for completion of internal testing is being closely monitored. With respect to the readiness of bank customers and counterparties, it does appear that banks are formulating policies for managing credit risk and are incorporating Year 2000 considerations into their underwriting and loan review practices. We are just beginning to see instances where credit standards and collateral requirements are being tightened where a counterparty or customer is not able to provide sufficient assurances of Year 2000 readiness. We expect to see an increase in the number of banks acting to minimize credit risks over the next few months. In addition to reviewing the status of banking organizations, the Federal Reserve participates with the other FFIEC agencies in Year 2000 reviews of certain large national and regional data processing service providers and software vendors serving financial institutions. Sixteen national Multiregional Data Processing Servicers (MDPS), twelve national Shared Application Software Review (SASR) software vendors, and approximately 250 other independent service providers and software vendors are in the review program. Because of their importance to the Year 2000 readiness of financial institutions, service providers and software vendors subject to review by the FFIEC agencies were reviewed on site at least twice by December 31, 1998. Review reports for service providers and software vendors are sent to banks that are direct customers for their information. These entities also are subject to quarterly reviews and were contacted during the first quarter of 1999 to assess the availability of testing programs for their bank customers. Based on reviews completed and other available information, nearly all vendor software products have been renovated and internally tested, and financial institutions are actively testing these products within their own environments. Proxy testing has been pursued by many institutions that rely on a specific vendor software product for its core banking systems when their hardware/software platform and operating environment are identical to the one that was used to perform direct testing with the servicer. National and regional service providers also have implemented Year 2000-ready services and are testing with their customers. Overall, the service providers and software vendors have made meaningful progress in meeting the testing and implementation needs of their financial institution customers. The few service providers that are not rated satisfactory are subject to intense oversight by the FFIEC agencies and the review reports detailing deficiencies or problems being experienced have been sent to their bank customers. While I'm on the subject of testing with service providers, I'd like to update you on the Federal Reserve's customer testing program. As I informed you last September, beginning June 29, 1998, the Federal Reserve is offering customers the opportunity to test future-dated transactions for Fedwire funds and securities transfer, Fed Automated Clearing House, the Integrated Accounting System, Treasury Tax and Loan, Check, and other services with electronic data exchanges. To date, over 8,000 institutions have tested with us, and the Financial Management Service (FMS) of the U.S. Treasury has conducted interface testing for social security payments. We are continuing to offer testing opportunities through the end of 1999. Phase III Supervision Program In January, we distributed guidance on our Phase III program, including intensified monitoring procedures for institutions that are rated less than satisfactory, and established broad criteria under which it will be presumed that the Federal Reserve will take an informal or formal enforcement action against such an institution. These procedures provide guidelines for addressing problem institutions through the century date change. Looking forward to the critical months remaining until the century date change, the Federal Reserve has initiated a Phase III program for monitoring the Year 2000 readiness of banking organizations. Our Phase III supervision program--which began April 1 and runs through December 31, 1999--calls for risk-based Year 2000 reviews of financial institutions during the second and third quarters of 1999 to confirm that all FFIEC milestone dates have been met. Our examiners have been instructed to confirm that every state member bank is in compliance with FFIEC guidelines by the end of the third quarter 1999. Financial institutions of special importance to key financial and payment systems in the United States will be subject to at least monthly contacts after June 1999, and the top 50 bank holding companies will be subject to at least quarterly contacts, to ensure that implementation is completed and that appropriate risk management policies and contingency plans are up to date. Service providers and software vendors that service large numbers of banking organizations will continue to be subject to at least quarterly contacts to review the status of third party testing and contingency planning. By June 30, 1999, financial institutions are expected to comply with critical FFIEC milestone dates for completing all Year 2000 internal and external testing, implementation of remediated mission critical systems, and contingency planning. A major emphasis of our supervision program through the century date change will be the adequacy of contingency plans, which should incorporate not only operational issues but liquidity, funding, customer/ counterparty risk, customer and community communications, and other subject matters. Through the end of the year, financial institutions will be expected to continue to monitor customer and counterparty credit risk, and to update contingency plans as necessary to respond to internal and external events or other Year 2000-related developments that could affect operations. I must emphasize that the FFIEC milestone dates are not hard and fast deadlines, but rather important benchmarks for ensuring that a financial institution is managing its Year 2000 program in a prudent manner - one that provides a six month cushion to tie up loose ends, continue testing activities, complete work on non-mission critical systems, and observe renovated and newly-installed systems in a production environment. During Phase III reviews, we will apply our best judgement in assessing an institution's progress in meeting FFIEC milestones, most importantly the June 30 date. Let me caution, however, that this process is very complex and it should not be surprising to see some testing activity prescribed by the FFIEC policy statements extend past the milestone dates. If, during our Phase III reviews we find that it is taking an institution a little longer to complete its preparations, we will assess the risk presented and respond accordingly, either through increased monitoring and supervision, or through intelligent use of enforcement actions and disclosure. While ratings provide an objective measure of our assessment of an organization's progress relative to the FFIEC's milestones, during Phase III the actual Year 2000 status of an organization through and into the Year 2000 will be the focus of our supervisory activities. Our Reserve Banks will be assessing each financial institution reviewed under the program by the end of the third quarter 1999. Obviously we want these assessments to reflect the Year 2000 progress and status of each banking organization accurately, and Reserve Banks to be consistent in assigning ratings to organizations within their Districts. In this regard, each Reserve Bank will have an internal review process to ensure that organizations that are similarly situated relative to the extent of work remaining will be comparably rated. Moreover, in our discussions with Reserve Banks, we have established certain parameters that limit somewhat the flexibility examiners have when rating an organization. Our staff in Washington reviews all reports for organizations rated less than satisfactory as well as a sampling of "satisfactory" reports to ensure that there is consistency across Districts. Implicit in all of this is the understanding that our examiners have a "hands on" understanding of each organization - including the scope of its Year 2000 project and status, the track record of management in responding to challenges and meeting regulatory directives, and the adequacy of the organization's resources. These factors provide the depth and intelligence necessary to formulate realistic and fair appraisals of banking organizations. FFIEC Contingency Planning Working Group There is one other supervisory initiative I would like to mention. The FFIEC agencies have established a Year 2000 Contingency Planning Working Group to identify and coordinate contingency planning issues of common interest. The group has agreed upon many areas of common interest and is considering how contingency planning efforts in these areas can be coordinated among the agencies. The subjects for review include communications with the public, monitoring of large institutions, international/payment systems, liquidity, fraud, non-viable and viable financial institutions, service providers and software vendors, and resource sharing among agencies. The Conference of State Banking Supervisors also participates. Where appropriate, the group is preparing guidance and planning how to coordinate responses to problems that may arise in these areas. President's Council on Year 2000 Conversion, Financial Sector Group The Federal Reserve has been extremely active in assisting the government's coordination of the nation's Year 2000 preparations. The Federal Reserve represents the banking industry on the President's Council on Year 2000 Conversion and a senior Board official chairs the Financial Sector Group (FSG), which is made up of 27 U.S. government agencies and corporations, government-sponsored enterprises and state regulatory associations that play a role in the credit, equity, debt and exchange-traded derivatives markets. The financial sector includes depository institutions, credit unions, the securities industry, stock markets, clearing and settlement firms, and the insurance industry. The sector group also includes over 50 trade associations that represent U.S. financial market participants. The FSG is charged with increasing awareness of the importance of Year 2000 readiness in the financial services industry, as well as promoting communications and cooperation with public and private organizations within the sector. It serves as a forum for addressing interagency issues and developing positions on important matters before the President's Council. For example, the FSG recently took the lead in developing a cross-sector paper examining the pros and cons of establishing a special Year 2000 holiday and related proposals for the President's Council. The FSG also is assisting in the Council's event management planning and will participate in its national communication center during the last quarter of 1999 and first quarter of 2000. The FSG sponsored a trade association summit meeting in December 1998. The theme of the meeting was infrastructure readiness, and Senator Bennett was our keynote speaker. Over 250 trade association representatives and members of the press attended this informative event, which significantly expanded the dialogue and opened the door for better coordination of Year 2000 efforts between the financial services industry and the electric power and telecommunications sectors. The FSG is sponsoring a second summit on April 15, addressing the themes of contingency planning and customer awareness. Congressman Leach will be our keynote speaker. Joint Year 2000 Council The Joint Year 2000 Council was established in April 1998, by the Basle Committee on Banking Supervision, the G-10 Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems, the International Association of Insurance Supervisors, and the International Organization of Securities Commissions. My colleague, Governor Roger Ferguson, chairs the Council. The Council provides a vital forum for communication among international regulatory and supervisory authorities on Year 2000 issues. It also serves as a point of contact with various national and international private sector initiatives. Among its initiatives, the Council has developed a global supervisory contact list of over 600 financial regulators, and initiated several mechanisms for communicating with them. It is publishing a series of bulletins on different Year 2000 topics, and has issued six guidance papers on key phases in the Year 2000 process including papers on testing, information sharing, and contingency planning, which are published on its web site. The Council has conducted regional Year 2000 roundtables for regulators in Europe, Asia-Pacific, North and South America and the Caribbean, the Middle East, and Africa. These conferences provide an excellent means of bringing supervisors together to discuss common interests within specific geographic areas. Another round of regional meetings is being planned for this year, with a focus on the important issues of implementing remediated systems, information sharing, testing, and contingency planning. The international arena remains an area that needs to be watched closely by all market participants and supervisors. The Year 2000 readiness survey conducted by the Basle Committee on Banking Supervision late last year identified significant progress in the international financial community's efforts to prepare for the century date change and help prevent serious problems. Of the 100 banking supervisors that responded to the survey, all indicated that they had contacted their banks regarding the Year 2000 issue and the large majority --including all major markets--had initiated supervisory programs to ensure that banks allocate the necessary resources to identify any potential Year 2000 problems. However, much work remains to be done, particularly in smaller, less industrial and emerging countries. While we do not know with certainty what the outcome will be around the globe, the level of Year 2000 awareness of financial services regulators is now quite high. Moreover, the effect of applying the FFIEC policy statements to the U.S. operations of foreign banking organizations had a salutary effect in making their parent organizations abroad aware of the problem and the need to formulate Year 2000 programs. In light of the recent increase in information showing that the Year 2000 problem is receiving increased attention and resources, and that progress is being made abroad, it is increasingly likely that Year 2000 technical issues will not cause significant problems in the most active foreign global markets. However to achieve that goal, it is critical that the current momentum and level of resources be maintained. It also is essential that countries coordinate with each other across financial and other sectors to share information and develop contingency plans in areas of common interest. Legislative Matters Federal Reserve Note Collateral The Board strongly supports adoption of H.R. 1094 that would amend the Federal Reserve Act to broaden the range of discount window loans that may be used as collateral for Federal Reserve notes. Section 16 of the Federal Reserve Act requires the Federal Reserve to collateralize Federal Reserve notes when they are issued. In other words, we are required to hold certain kinds of assets in an amount at least equal to the amount of currency in the hands of the public. The list of eligible collateral includes Treasury and federal agency securities, gold certificates, Special Drawing Right certificates, foreign currencies, and discount window loans made under section 13 of the Federal Reserve Act. The reference to discount window loans made under section 13 was in the original Federal Reserve Act. Subsequently, however, when the Federal Reserve Act, including section 13, was amended to allow discount window loans to be made against a wider array of collateral, section 16 was not similarly amended. Thus, section 16 currently limits the types of discount window loans the Federal Reserve can use to collateralize the currency. For example, certain discount window loans under section 10B of the Act secured by mortgages on one-to-four family residences cannot be used. The margin of available extra currency collateral has been shrinking due to the growth of retail sweep accounts, which reduces reserve balances and causing a corresponding reduction in Treasury securities held by Reserve Banks. In this context and in light of the potential for depository institutions to seek access to the discount window because of events related to the Year 2000, we believe that it would be prudent to amend the Federal Reserve Act to expand the types of assets eligible to collateralize the currency to include all types of discount window loans, thereby assuring flexibility in times of high loan demand. Year 2000 Holiday Various segments of the financial services industry, particularly those operating abroad, have suggested that governments adopt an additional holiday around the century date change. There are a number of dates proposed for a Year 2000 holiday--Friday, December 31; Monday, January 3; and even Tuesday, January 4--although there does not appear to be any consensus which date would be most desirable. Adding to the uncertainty is the question whether the holiday should be mandatory (requiring all businesses to close) or permissive (permitting but not requiring businesses to close). In the United States, most holidays are permissive and December 31 will be such a federal holiday. The Federal Reserve announced last year that the Reserve Banks will be open for business on that day and on Monday, January 3, 2000, and we understand that most businesses plan to be open on those days as well. We do not support the concept of a special Year 2000 holiday. Some have suggested that a Year 2000 holiday facilitate the transition to the next century. For example, a December 31, 1999, holiday would provide additional time to complete end-of-day (December 30) as well as at least some end-of-quarter and end-of-year processing before the rollover to January 1. A January 3, 2000, holiday--as contemplated by H.J. Res. 14--would provide an additional day for organizations to confirm that computer, telecommunications, and embedded systems are operating properly and to identify and resolve any Year 2000 disruptions that may occur, although, since the holiday would be permissive, the extent to which organizations would take advantage it is unclear, and it could engender even more confusion as to who is open and who is not. The recently proposed January 4 holiday purportedly would provide time to process and react to any problems that appear on the first business day of the new millennium. In our view, the drawbacks to a Year 2000 holiday are significant and include additional operational burdens, potential contractual and taxation issues, and potential adverse public reaction. The adoption of a mandatory Year 2000 holiday may require banks to initiate additional procedural and operational changes. Internal systems would have to be reprogrammed to include the new holiday and to treat it as a non-business day for purposes of completing transactions. Because these changes are date-related, systems that already have been remediated would require additional Year 2000 testing to ensure that the changes did not inadvertently create date-related processing problems. Banks would have to revise their test scripts, create different future-dated computing environments to simulate the new sequence of business days, generate new test data to reflect the holiday, and then retest systems that were previously designated as Year 2000 ready. This would place significant additional burdens on firms and may increase, rather than reduce, the risk of disruption. Moreover, the task would divert already scarce resources away from the primary task of completing Year 2000 testing, implementation and contingency planning. We should understand that all of this work would have to occur long after the FFIEC milestone dates for completion of testing and implementation of remediated systems. Declaring a new Year 2000 holiday also would further increase transaction volume on the last and first business days of the year, when volume is traditionally higher than average. This may exacerbate workloads on adjacent days, complicating the transition and the resolution of any problems. A special Year 2000 holiday also would affect contractual and other payment obligations, and there would be potential tax implications attendant to any pre- or post- Year 2000 payments made as a result of the new holiday. Finally, and equally troubling, changes to existing holiday laws would send a signal to the public that the government has serious concerns about the potential for significant Year 2000 problems within the financial services industry. We do not believe significant problems will occur and we are opposed to taking actions that could unnecessarily erode public confidence in the industry, where erosion of confidence can create significant destabilizing effects on our economy. The Federal Reserve first discussed the holiday issue with the financial industry over a year ago. At that time, proponents of a Year 2000 holiday emphasized that the decision must be made no later than the first quarter 1998 for organizations to derive the intended benefits without incurring undue costs and risks. They correctly believed that declaration of a Year 2000 holiday at a later time would impede an organization's ability to limit changes to remediated systems during the period surrounding the century date change. Indeed, many institutions such as the Federal Reserve have adopted change management policies in order to limit the risks to information systems posed by changes in the second half of 1999. Changes in holidays or payment schedules at this late date would run counter to the risk mitigation objectives of these policies. Some agencies have asked whether rescheduling payments from early January to late December should be considered as part of their contingency planning. While this initially may seem to be a prudent approach, the premise underlying the proposal must be that either the financial system will be unable to deliver payments to recipients' bank accounts or that, once payments have been delivered, recipients will be unable to use those funds because of problems at their banks. With respect to the ability of the financial system to deliver payments to banks, we have a high degree of confidence that the Federal Reserve will continue to process payments during this period. Further, our understanding of the readiness of private sector providers of payment services, gained through our supervisory efforts and the efforts of the other financial supervisory agencies, gives us confidence that other wholesale providers of payments services will also continue to process payments during this period. With respect to individuals and businesses' ability to use their funds at their banks, we believe that it is reasonable to assume, based on the Year 2000 progress being made by the banking industry, that access to those funds will continue unabated. To assume otherwise could engender problems more severe than the problems that people are seeking to avoid. For example, if a large number of individuals interpret an early payment to mean that they will be unable to access their bank account, or make payments by other means, such as credit cards, for some period, they may seek to withdraw large quantities of cash. Moreover, cash is in many respects an inefficient payment vehicle--the risk of loss or theft is great and its delivery to remote payees can be difficult and time-consuming. While there may be particular circumstances that warrant rescheduling payments during the Year 2000 rollover period, we would caution against actions that may themselves lead to problems as severe or even more severe than the problems that they are designed to avoid. Credit Union Liquidity In an area related to issues of cash availability and liquidity of financial institutions, the Federal Reserve has been working with representatives of the credit union industry and the National Credit Union Administration to address logistical problems that might arise due to any need for a large number of credit unions to obtain liquidity beyond the considerable amount they already have available. Although this work is still in the preliminary stages, we are confident that a relatively cost effective, efficient means can be found to channel funds through the corporate credit union system to natural person credit unions in need of liquidity. Such a structure would seek to rely to the extent possible on existing credit relationships and documentation. Litigation Issues There has been a great deal of talk about litigation that may arise due to Year 2000 problems. This has led to the introduction of a number of bills designed to limit litigation relating to Year 2000, including H.R. 775, the proposed "Year 2000 Readiness and Responsibility Act," as well as concerns whether existing consumer laws limiting liability for bona fide errors should be clarified. We do not have a position as to whether H.R. 775 should be adopted. We do believe that no legislation should be construed to limit the financial supervisory agencies' ability to bring enforcement actions based on Year 2000 related problems. To do so could interfere with the agencies' ability to encourage supervised institutions to address Year 2000 issues appropriately. Accordingly, we recommend that any legislation limiting liability in civil actions should exclude actions brought by a Federal, state or other public entity, agency or authority acting in a regulatory, supervisory or enforcement capacity. A similar exclusion was incorporated in the Year 2000 Information and Readiness Disclosure Act. The issue of banking agency enforcement authority may be of particular significance with respect to section 605 of H.R. 775, "Suspension of Penalties for Certain Year 2000 Failures by Small Business Concerns." That section would provide that, as a general rule, no agency shall impose a civil penalty on a small business concern for a first time error resulting from a Year 2000 failure. Some banking institutions and their affiliates may come within the definition of small business concerns to which this provision applies. Again, we are concerned that this provision could interfere with the financial supervisory agencies' ability to encourage supervised institutions to address Year 2000 issues appropriately and urge that this limitation not apply to any penalty imposed by a Federal banking agency as defined in the Federal Deposit Insurance Act. Finally, with respect to the bona fide error provisions contained in many consumer laws, in our view, computer malfunctions and programming errors due to Year 2000 problems appear to be covered by statutory provisions dealing with "bona fide errors." Accordingly, we do not see a need for additional clarifying legislation. Conclusion In closing, I would like to thank the Committee for the opportunity to share this information with you. We appreciate your concern and assistance in identifying the appropriate focus of our efforts during the last months before the Year 2000. Financial institutions are continuing their efforts and making significant progress in renovating their systems to prepare for the century rollover. The Federal Reserve is committed to a rigorous program of industry testing and contingency planning and, through our supervisory initiatives, to identifying those organizations that most need to apply additional attention to Year 2000 readiness programs. We are committed to working with national and international counterparts and other groups, including the President' Council on Year 2000 Conversion, the Joint Year 2000 Council, and industry trade associations to assist the industry in preparing for the rollover to the Year 2000. Federal Reserve Year 2000 Web site: Federal Reserve Century Date Change Project: Federal Financial Examination Council: President's Council on Year 20000 Conversion: Bank for International Settlements & Joint Year 2000 Council: Global 2000 Co-ordinating Group:
Remarks by Governor Laurence H. Meyer Before the World Economic Forum, U.S.A. Regional Meeting, U.S. Chamber of Commerce's National Chamber Foundation, Washington, D.C. April 14, 1999 The Global Economic Outlook and Challenges Facing Monetary Policy around the World My theme today is that this is a particularly interesting and challenging time to be a central banker, virtually anywhere in the world. Interestingly, despite the common backdrop of weak world growth and turbulence in world foreign exchange and financial markets, there is an unusual diversity of domestic macroeconomic experiences across countries and therefore quite different challenges faced by monetary policymakers around the world. The crises in many emerging market economies and the resulting turbulence in global foreign exchange and financial markets and slowdown in world growth have been the dominant events of the last year and a half. The policy adjustments and recoveries in these countries will importantly shape the global economy this year and next. But, trade flows, current account balances, and foreign exchange movements have also been importantly affected by the unusual diversity in cyclical conditions across the industrial economies. Another theme in the global economy has been the steady decline in inflation, now to the point where, at least among the industrial countries, price stability has been achieved or is in sight. There has been some ambivalence about whether, as a result, to celebrate the achievement of price stability or to shift the focus of concern from inflation to "deflation," particularly in light of the deflation under way in Japan. Finally, the birth of the euro, and with it a new supra-national central bank, is an event of clearly global significance, as well, and one that is likely to have important implications for the world economy over the longer run. I want to emphasize at the outset that the views I present this afternoon, both about the economic outlook and monetary policy, are my own views and should not be interpreted as an expression of the views of the Board of Governors or the FOMC. I. Global Influences on Domestic Economies and Challenges to Monetary Policy Around the World Domestic macroeconomic performance and policy around the world are being dramatically affected by global developments. The Global Slowdown The common backdrop for economies around the world is, of course, the slowdown in global growth. World economic growth was in the range of 4% to 5% in 1996 and 1997, measured on a fourth quarter to fourth quarter basis, above the trend rate of 3 ï¿½% over the last couple of decades. In 1998, global growth slowed to just 2%, the lowest 4-quarter growth rate since the 1982 recession in the U.S. The roughly 2 ï¿½ percentage point slowdown from 1996 to 1998 was, in addition, the sharpest over any two-year period since 1978-80, the second OPEC oil shock, when world growth slowed to around 2 ï¿½%. Because the U.S. accounts for a relatively large share of world GDP, global growth usually hits its lows during U.S. recessions. What was unusual about 1998 was that this slowdown in global growth occurred during a period of exceptionally rapid and indeed strengthening U.S. growth. As a result, the excess of U.S. growth over foreign growth in 1998 was the largest in nearly two decades. Sources of the Global Slowdown The largest contributor to the global slowdown from 1996 through 1998 was emerging Asia, where growth slowed from the 9% to 10% range during the mid-1990s (1994 - 96) to a little over 2% in 1998, accounting for two-fifths of the 2 ï¿½ percentage point slowdown of global growth from 1996 to 1998. Also making major contributions were Latin America, which has been subject to contagion from Asia, by way of Russia, and Japan, which has been depressed by ongoing structural problems in its financial sector and slid from slow growth in 1997 into recession in 1998. Given the importance of trade relations between Japan and the emerging market economies of Asia, the developments in these two areas were powerfully mutually reinforcing. The sharp slowdown of Japan over the past two years, for example, subtracted almost 2/3 percentage point from world GDP growth, and was part of the adverse shocks that contributed to the downturn among the emerging Asian economies. The crises among emerging-market economies then reinforced the weakness in Japan. The reversal of earlier huge capital inflows to the Asian developing countries from industrial countries--a reversal sparked by signs of overinvestment and financial sector weakness--also clearly played an important role in the crisis among the Asian emerging market economies. Global Disinflation The global disinflation trend, typically interrupted late in cyclical expansions, has resumed during the past year. Among the industrial countries, inflation has declined over the last 25 years from a peak of about 15% in 1974, at the time of the first OPEC oil shock, to around 1ï¿½% in 1998. This disinflation trend has been less steady, but cumulatively no less impressive, among developing economies over the same period. The recent disinflation is partly due to the global slowdown, but also reflects some of the same favorable supply shocks (declining oil prices, for example, and, for the developed economies, an appreciation in exchange rates relative to developing economies) that have been at work with respect to U.S. inflation. Other forces that may also be at work, both abroad and at home, are increased global competition and cost-reducing technological changes. Going forward, inflation among the industrial countries might well decline even further this year, reflecting the deflation under way in Japan and a continuation of low and relatively well-contained inflation elsewhere. Global Growth Prospects Looking forward, the consensus outlook is for continued slow growth in the world economy this year, with a modest pickup likely in 2000. This outlook reflects the balancing of a moderate decline in growth in the industrial economies, reinforced by weaker growth in Latin America this year, and a more pronounced pickup in Asian emerging market countries this year, and likely in Latin America next year. Among industrial economies, growth is expected to remain low in the U.K. this year, to remain slightly below trend in the euro area, to become at least less negative in Japan, and to slow from an unsustainably high level in the U.S. While the projected slowdown among the industrial countries is dominated by the expected slowing in the U.S., it also reflects the expectation that growth will not materially pick up in the U.K. or the euro area, and that Japan will remain weak. The basis for a moderate recovery in Asia seems already to have been established in some key emerging market countries in the region, most notably Korea. The swing in the region from a decline in output to low positive growth is expected to be the major positive contribution to higher world growth this year. However, it appears that this positive contribution will be largely offset by the expected slowing in the U.S. economy and a further slowing in Latin America, as the result of difficulties in Brazil and elsewhere in the region. As Latin America moves toward recovery next year and emerging Asian economies continue to strengthen, the developing economies may provide the major boost in world growth in 2000. Diversity among the Industrial Economies The diversity in growth rates across the industrial countries has been an important feature of the global economy over the past year. The greatest contrast, of course, has been between the exceptional strength of the U.S. economy and the deepening slump in Japan. These disparities in cyclical conditions and resulting changes in their real interest rate differentials have had important impacts on the pattern of exchange rates, net exports, and current account balances across these countries. In the case of the U.S., these growth rate differentials and exchange rate movements have resulted in a persistent drag from net exports on real output growth and a widening of the current account deficit, on the one hand, and restraint on inflation, on the other hand--reinforcing the effects of the crises among emerging market economies on U.S. net exports and inflation. This diversity in cyclical experience across the industrial economies also has made it difficult to set a common policy prescription among industrial countries in support of the global economy and has led to the variety of challenges faced by monetary authorities around the industrial world. In light of concerns about wide swings in the exchange rates among major currencies, some have called for a system of target zones for exchange rates. But, the variety of economic conditions across industrial countries itself highlights the inherent difficulties associated with such suggestions. Moving to such a system would require assigning monetary policy to the task of targeting exchange rates, and countries are free to do so if they wish. But, given the very different domestic conditions across industrial countries today, the cost of ignoring domestic considerations in order to stabilize exchange rates would, in my judgment, be considerable. My preference is to use monetary policy to stabilize the U.S. economy and I can imagine that central bankers in other major economies would share this sentiment with respect to their own economies. The Effect of the Asian Crisis on the U.S. and Other Industrial Economies The crises among emerging-market economies have resulted in a complex set of shocks to industrial economies. The most obvious spillover is the adverse external demand shock, via the decline in net exports, as a result of the combination of sharp declines in economic activity and dramatic devaluation of currencies in many emerging market economies. But, the net effect on demand, both in the U.S. and in other industrial economies, has also been influenced by how each economy has been affected by other developments set in motion by these crises. First, there have been safe haven capital flows into the U.S. that have lowered long-term interest rates and buoyed equity markets. Second, the slowing of aggregate demand globally has also depressed the prices of oil and other commodities. While the U.S. oil and agricultural sectors have been hurt by this downturn in the prices of their output, the economy as a whole has benefited on balance because the U.S. is a net consumer and importer of oil and many other commodities. The decline in energy and other commodity prices have helped to restrain inflationary pressures, and households have benefited accordingly. Until the Russian default and devaluation, the positive effects of lower interest rates and lower oil and non-oil commodity prices appeared to have contributed importantly to the strength of domestic demand in the U.S., offsetting, at least in part, the adverse effect on net exports. After the default and devaluation in Russia, increased perception of and reduced tolerance for risk resulted in turbulence in domestic financial markets in industrial economies, as demonstrated by increased risk spreads and reduced liquidity, especially in the U.S. While risk spreads may have been unduly narrow to begin with, the degree to which they increased in reaction to that event surprised most observers, myself included. One reason these market developments appeared to be so serious for the U.S. was that they threatened to reverse the improvement in domestic financial conditions that had been so important in blunting the adverse demand shock from abroad. Restoring Global Growth What can be done to restore growth to more desirable levels on a global scale? Clearly, in light of diverse cyclical conditions around the world, appropriate policy prescriptions will differ region to region. In addition, it should be appreciated that, just as Tip O'Neal said with respect to the U.S. that "all politics are local," all economic policy is national or, in the case of the ECB, regional. As a result, we might look for situations where domestic policy objectives coincide with the global interest of sustaining growth. In developing Asian economies, a strengthening of investor confidence--leading to a strengthening of domestic currencies--has made it possible to use both monetary and fiscal policy to support recovery. This must be complemented by continued progress toward structural reform in order to lay the foundations for longer-term growth. Conversely, some Latin American economies probably will have to endure a further period of tightened economic policies until fiscal positions are strengthened, and the inflationary response of recent devaluations of their currencies (most notably the Brazilian real) can be restrained. These disciplined policy responses are crucial in the rebuilding of investor confidence, so that full access to international capital markets can be regained. With growth remaining well below historical levels in the emerging market economies, and with no scope for a further pickup in growth in the U.S., attention naturally focuses on the remaining industrial countries to support global growth. Many of these countries, with their subdued rates of inflation and high levels of unemployment, are likely to have the greatest flexibility to ease monetary and fiscal policies--in fact, arguably, it is in these countries that a mutuality of domestic and global interest in stronger growth is most likely to exist. The scope for fiscal expansion may be constrained in Japan by the very large deficits resulting from the huge fiscal measures that have already been taken, and in Europe by the fact that key countries are already bumping up against the limits set by the Maastricht Treaty. As a result, attention is focused on monetary policy in these countries and around the world. The Challenges Facing Monetary Policy around the World As I noted earlier, despite the common backdrop of weak world demand and turbulence in global financial markets, the diversity of domestic economic conditions around the world translates into an unusual variety of challenges facing central banks. Before I turn to the country-specific challenges, let me return to the recent trend of global disinflation. As I note earlier, this trend has now brought inflation rates among the industrial countries to the vicinity of price stability. Even before we have had time to celebrate the victory, concern is being raised by a new potential problem--global deflation. It should be recognized that once price stability is achieved, there will be increased risk that a downturn in economic activity could result in cyclical episodes of deflation. Assuming that deflation is to be as much avoided as inflation, and some would say more, the challenge for central banks is to be symmetrical in the pursuit of their inflation targets. That is, just as when inflation is above target, monetary policy is focused on restoring inflation to target, so should policy respond when inflation falls below target. Indeed, one could argue that there is a case for an asymmetric policy response, one favoring a more timely and sharper policy response to inflation below than above target. The reason is that, while monetary policy can always lower inflation by lowering money growth and raising interest rates, recent experience in Japan suggests that monetary policy might be limited in its ability to bolster aggregate demand and hence combat deflation, once short-term nominal interest rates have been driven to zero. Japanese monetary policymakers are confronting precisely this problem. They face the challenge of escaping from recession, amidst gathering deflation and serious banking and financial sector problems at a point when monetary policy, with short-term interest rates almost at zero, appears now to have all but exhausted the potential for stimulus associated with conventional measures. The Bank of Japan is, as a result, operating in uncharted waters and, frankly, the questions they face are easier to pose than to answer. Is it possible, for example, once short rates have been pushed to zero, to use open market operations in long-term markets to lower long rates relative to short rates? Is it possible to push long-term rates consistently below 2%, even when short-term rates are driven to zero? The U.S. experience in the Great Depression at least raises some doubts. Even if monetary policy cannot affect short or long-term rates, is it possible nevertheless to stimulate demand by forcing liquidity into the system and raising monetary growth, and, if so, through what channels would that operate? Does the continuing weakness in the banking sector limit the ability of easier monetary policy in Japan to stimulate domestic demand, especially given the dominant role of the banking system in the allocation of credit to the private sector in Japan? Will the recent accelerated measures to resolve the banking crisis in Japan have a near-term positive payoff to growth, or will it initially worsen the credit crunch? Finally, if, as a result of reaching a zero short-term interest rate and lingering banking problems, the major channel for stimulus is depreciation of the yen, are the emerging market economies in Asia strong enough to withstand this development without a relapse? The euro area is facing its own unique challenges. The initial policy setting was skillfully managed despite tension between the new central bank and finance ministries of the member countries. The need for the ECB to establish credibility, to demonstrate its independence relative to finance ministries, and to establish a euro-wide perspective in a structure that gives considerable power on the ECB's Governing Council to national central banks had weighed against a policy easing earlier this year. But growth has slowed to below trend, and, in the context of already very high unemployment, not all of which is structural, and low inflation, the ECB moved last week to significantly reduce its main lending rate from 3% to 2 ï¿½%. With the additional easing having taken place, European policymakers will now have to focus more on structural changes needed to deal with Europe's labor market rigidities in order to ensure continued healthy economic expansion in the longer term. Nowhere, however, is the challenge to monetary policymakers greater than in emerging economies around the world. Here the issues have centered on how aggressively to raise interest rates to defend pegged exchange rate regimes and, in the event of a change to floating rates, how aggressively to tighten to avoid overshooting of exchange rates and how to establish a monetary policy framework to control inflation. The challenge of setting monetary policy following a move from fixed to floating rates has proved to be especially difficult, as events in Brazil have illustrated. Monetary policymakers have had to balance the role of higher interest rates in avoiding overshooting of the currency and controlling inflation, against their effects on the real economy, on financial instability in light of potential banking and corporate debt problems, and on fiscal deficits via higher debt-service burdens. How well they meet these challenges in the period ahead will have an important bearing on the outlook for the U.S. and the global economy. II. The U.S. Outlook and Challenges Facing U.S. Monetary Policy That brings me to the U.S. Many would ask what challenges could monetary policymakers possibly face in the U.S., given the remarkable combination of consistent above-trend growth and declining inflation? The first inclination, to be sure, is to celebrate. The next is to line up to take some of the credit, although I have urged some caution here. Recent performance is both better than expected and better than most of us thought the structure of the economy would allow. Humility seems very much in order. Indeed, the uncertainties about the structure of the economy, in light of the unexpected nature of recent performance, and about the outlook going forward, in light of the recent poor record of forecasting, highlight the challenges facing U.S. policymakers. The U.S. economy has been blessed over the last three years with above-trend growth, declining unemployment rates, soaring equity prices, and declining inflation. Mixing these elements together yields the following story. The unexpected strength in equity prices has combined with other positive demand surprises across a wide range of spending components to produce faster-than-expected growth and a progressive tightening of labor markets. At the same time, some combination of temporary but nevertheless persistent favorable supply shocks and perhaps more permanent supply-enhancing structural changes have prevented the pickup in inflation that otherwise would have been expected from persistently robust demand and unusually high and rising labor utilization rates. To square the circle, investor optimism about the implications of possible structural changes for business profitability have helped to fuel the run-up in equity prices. Important sources of restraint on inflation in the current episode have come from the decline in energy prices over 1997 and 1998; the appreciation of the dollar over the three years through mid-1998 and the resulting decline in non-oil import prices; sharper-than-previous declines in computer prices over the past three years; and a slower rate of increase in health care prices, including the cost of health care insurance. Given that all of these developments have at best a transitory effect on inflation, as the inflation benefits of the shocks dissipate or as the shocks reverse, inflation is likely to rise somewhat. Indeed, virtually every forecast projects a modest rise in broad measures of U.S. inflation this year, reflecting the dissipation or reversal of favorable supply shocks, most importantly the reversal in the path of oil prices, the stabilization of commodity prices and non-oil import prices, and some rebound in health care costs. But the more serious question is to what degree thereafter tight labor markets begin to exert upward pressure on wage change and hence inflation. Even with generous allowances for structural change, labor utilization would seem to be at a level that might eventually begin to put persistent and growing pressure on labor costs and prices. As a result, the challenge for monetary policy, to the extent recent U.S. performance has been driven by temporary supply shocks, is to facilitate a transition from the current exceptional but unsustainable state, to a less exceptional but more sustainable one, prior to the supply shocks dissipating or inflation increasing by an unacceptable amount. Supply-enhancing structural changes include both an apparent decline in the NAIRU (raising the sustainable level of output) and a possible increase in the trend rate of productivity growth (raising the sustainable growth rate of output). Together these structural changes would imply that the economy can now operate at a lower unemployment rate and at a higher growth rate than previously without inflationary consequences. To the extent that recent performance has been driven by these more permanent structural changes, the role of monetary policy might be to accommodate this more favorable performance rather than to constrain it. Such a policy prescription stands in sharp contrast to what would be appropriate if the recent performance were driven predominately by favorable temporary supply shocks. The fundamental challenge to monetary policy in the U.S. is, therefore, to set a strategy that respects the uncertainty about the sources of the recent exceptional experience, takes advantages of any opportunities for better performance, while mitigating the risks of overtaxing the limits of sustainable production and growth. The key, in my judgment, is to understand that, even if the limits to the level and growth rate of GDP have been relaxed, the old rules about the consequences of overtaxing the economy's productive capacity still apply to the new limits. How has monetary policy navigated these challenges over the last few years? For much of that period, monetary policy remained on hold, as declining inflation delivered a rise in the real federal funds rate that was viewed as appropriate in light of the steady rise in labor utilization rates and accommodative conditions in other sectors of the financial markets. Thus, despite our inactivity, monetary policy "leaned against the cyclical winds" in quite a traditional manner and indeed in line with the prescription for monetary policy from the Taylor Rule. The turbulence in financial markets and abrupt deterioration in the outlook for foreign growth prompted three easing moves late last year, from the end of September through mid-November. This reflected both a recognition that the rising risk spreads and lower liquidity in the securities markets and correction in the equity markets had, in effect, tightened overall financial conditions, requiring an easing simply to maintain the same degree of tightness or stimulus. In addition, the sharp downward revision in the forecast for growth over 1999 suggested the need for more accommodative policy. As events unfolded, the economy retained more momentum than expected, and financial market conditions have improved, though, to be sure, had the Federal Reserve not responded as quickly and aggressively, there is some question as to whether financial markets would have recovered as much as they have. In any case, the real federal funds rate is now lower than prior to the easings, at the same time that the unemployment rate is lower and projected growth higher than it was prior to the easings. This suggests some delinking of the real federal funds rate from movements in labor utilization. This might be understood as having occurred, in large part, as a result of reluctance to respond in traditional ways to rising labor utilization rates, in light of uncertainties about the estimate of NAIRU and, indeed, about the relevance of this model of inflation dynamics. To some extent, it also reflected a continuing appreciation of asymmetric downside risks related to the global economy. The question that has to be confronted is whether such an accommodating policy remains appropriate, going forward, especially once the unemployment rate has declined to the low end or below the low end of the range of estimates of NAIRU. This tension could be resolved in several ways. Growth may slow going forward; at least preventing further increases in labor market tightness, and perhaps even unwind some of the prevailing tightness in labor markets. This has long been the presumption in the consensus forecast. Second, growth could remain above trend and the unemployment rate could continue to fall, while, at the same time, inflation fell still further. This would reproduce the pattern of passive increases in the real federal funds rate, coincident with rising utilization rates. However, if inflation does not move lower, while growth remains above trend and labor markets tighten further, it would, in my view, be appropriate to relink real federal funds rate movements back to changes in labor utilization rates. The failure to do so could run the risk of unleashing inflation pressures that would be disruptive to reverse. Let me conclude where I began. Despite the common global backdrop, central banks around the world face rather unique challenges. Hopefully, we will have the wisdom to make the right choices and contribute to meeting our respective domestic objectives and to strengthening the global economy at the same time.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of a Combined Order to Cease and Desist and Order of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty against Paul P. Piper, Jr., a former institution-affiliated party of First National Summit Bankshares, Crested Butte, Colorado, a former registered bank holding company, and the First National Summit Bank, Gunnison, Colorado, a former national bank. Mr. Piper, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order in connection with his alleged involvement in the acquisition of control of more than 25 percent of the outstanding voting shares of First National Summit Bankshares without the prior approval from the Board of Governors. Mr. Piper paid a fine of $25,000. A copy of the Order is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today its approval of the application of ING Bank, N.V., Amsterdam, The Netherlands, to establish a representative office in New York, New York. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. ING Bank, N.V. Amsterdam, The Netherlands Order Approving Establishment of a Representative Office ING Bank, N.V. ("Bank"), Amsterdam, The Netherlands, a foreign bank within the meaning of the International Banking Act ("IBA"), has applied under section 10(a) of the IBA (12 U.S.C. §3107(a)) to establish a representative office in New York, New York. The Foreign Bank Supervision Enhancement Act of 1991, which amended the IBA, provides that a foreign bank must obtain the approval of the Board to establish a representative office in the United States. Notice of the application, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published in a newspaper of general circulation in New York, New York ( New York Times , September 14, 1998). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the application and all comments received. Bank, with assets of $298.5 billion, is the third largest bank in The Netherlands. Bank has 380 offices in The Netherlands, and approximately 125 offices in more than 50 countries. Bank's parent company, ING Groep, N.V., ("ING Group") Amsterdam, The Netherlands, with total assets of $460.6 billion, is one of the world's largest financial services providers, offering life and non-life insurance, commercial and investment banking, asset management and related products and services. ING Group has operations in Europe, North America, South America, Africa, Asia, and Australia. The proposed representative office's activities would include marketing the products of Bank, maintaining relationships with U.S. corporate clients, and supporting Bank's Latin American offices on such matters as product development and marketing. In acting on an application to establish a representative office, the IBA and Regulation K provide that the Board shall take into account whether the foreign bank engages directly in the business of banking outside of the United States, and has furnished to the Board the information it needs to assess the application adequately. The Board also shall take into account whether the foreign bank and any foreign bank parent is subject to comprehensive supervision or regulation on a consolidated basis by its home country supervisor (12 U.S.C. §3107(a)(2); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(d)(2)). In addition, the Board also may take into account additional standards as set forth in the IBA and Regulation K (12 U.S.C. §3105(d)(3)-(4); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)(2)). As noted above, Bank engages directly in the business of banking outside the United States. Bank also has provided the Board with information necessary to assess the application through submissions that address the relevant issues. With respect to supervision by home country authorities, the Board previously has determined, in connection with applications involving other banks in The Netherlands, that those banks were subject to home country supervision on a consolidated basis. Bank is supervised by De Nederlandsche Bank (the "Central Bank") on substantially the same terms and conditions as those other banks. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that Bank is subject to comprehensive supervision and regulation on a consolidated basis by its home country supervisor. The Board also has taken into account the additional standards set forth in section 7 of the IBA and Regulation K ( see 12 U.S.C. §3105(d)(3)-(4); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)(2)). The Central Bank has no objection to the establishment of the proposed representative office. With respect to the financial and managerial resources of Bank, taking into consideration Bank's record of operations in its home country, its overall financial resources, and its standing with its home country supervisors, the Board has also determined that financial and managerial factors are consistent with approval of the proposed representative office. Bank appears to have the experience and capacity to support the proposed representative office and has established controls and procedures for the proposed representative office to ensure compliance with U.S. law. With respect to access to information about Bank's operations, the Board has reviewed the restrictions on disclosure in relevant jurisdictions in which Bank operates and has communicated with relevant government authorities regarding access to information. Bank and its parents have committed to make available to the Board such information on the operations of Bank and any of its affiliates that the Board deems necessary to determine and enforce compliance with the IBA, the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956, as amended, and other applicable federal law. To the extent that the provision of such information to the Board may be prohibited by law, Bank and its parents have committed to cooperate with the Board to obtain any necessary consents or waivers that might be required from third parties for disclosure of such information. In addition, subject to certain conditions, the Central Bank may share information on Bank's operations with other supervisors, including the Board. In light of these commitments and other facts of record, and subject to the condition described below, the Board concludes that Bank has provided adequate assurances of access to any necessary information that the Board may request. On the basis of all the facts of record, and subject to the commitments made by Bank and its parents, as well as the terms and conditions set forth in this order, the Board has determined that Bank's application to establish the representative office should be, and hereby is, approved. Should any restrictions on access to information on the operations or activities of Bank and its affiliates subsequently interfere with the Board's ability to obtain information to determine and enforce compliance by Bank or its affiliates with applicable federal statutes, the Board may require termination of any of Bank's activities in the United States. Approval of this application also is specifically conditioned on compliance by Bank and its parents with the commitments made in connection with this application and with the conditions in this order. The commitments and conditions referred to above are conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its decision and may be enforced in proceedings under 12 U.S.C. §1818 against Bank and its affiliates. By order of the Board of Governors, effective April 19, 1999. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Footnotes Unless otherwise indicated, data are as of January 5, 1998. Ninety-nine percent of the outstanding voting shares of ING Group are owned by a Dutch trust, Stichting Administratiekantoor ING Groep (the "Trust"). The Trust engages in no activity other than holding shares of ING Group. Interests in the Trust are evidenced by bearer receipts which carry no voting rights. Other than the Trust, no person owns more than 10 percent of the voting shares or bearer receipts. Data as of December 31, 1998. In assessing this standard, the Board considers, among other factors, the extent to which the home country supervisors: (i) ensure that the bank has adequate procedures for monitoring and controlling its activities worldwide; (ii) obtain information on the condition of the bank and its subsidiaries and offices through regular examination reports, audit reports, or otherwise; (iii) obtain information on the dealings with and relationship between the bank and its affiliates, both foreign and domestic; (iv) receive from the bank financial reports that are consolidated on a worldwide basis or comparable information that permits analysis of the bank's financial condition on a worldwide consolidated basis; (v) evaluate prudential standards, such as capital adequacy and risk asset exposure, on a worldwide basis. These are indicia of comprehensive, consolidated supervision. No single factor is essential, and other elements may inform the Board's determination. See MeesPierson, N.V., 80 Federal Reserve Bulletin 662 (1994); Cooperatieve Centrale Raiffeisen-Boerenleenbank B.A., Rabobank Nederland , 80 Federal Reserve Bulletin 947 (1994). The Central Bank also receives information on ING Group with regard to its nonbanking operations. The Central Bank and the Insurance Supervisory Board have entered into a protocol for the purpose of jointly regulating groups with interests in both banks and insurance companies. The Board's authority to approve the establishment of the proposed representative office parallels the continuing authority of the State of New York to license offices of a foreign bank. The Board's approval of this application does not supplant the authority of the State of New York and the New York State Banking Department ("Department") to license the proposed office of Bank in accordance with any terms or conditions that the Department may impose. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Meyer, Ferguson, and Gramlich.
Testimony of Richard A. Small Assistant Director, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation Reporting requirements under the Bank Secrecy Act Before the Subcommittee on General Oversight and Investigations and the Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit, Committee on Banking and Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives April 20, 1999 Footnote The Working Group now consists of senior staff representatives from 13 federal agencies, including the Federal Reserve, the other federal financial institutions regulators, the FBI, the U.S. Secret Service, the Departments of Justice and Treasury, including the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network, the IRS's Criminal Investigation Division, and the SEC. The Working Group meets monthly, and its various subcommittees meet more frequently when necessary.
Testimony of Kenneth Buckley Assistant Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems Veterans' benefit payments and Y2K Before the Committee on Veterans' Affairs, U.S. Senate April 20, 1999 I am pleased to appear before the Committee to discuss the arrangements the Federal Reserve is making to ensure the timely delivery of veterans' benefit payments made by direct deposit during the rollover to the Year 2000. Veterans and their families depend on Federal Reserve systems to reliably deliver their payments electronically to their banks. We believe that they should feel confident that their benefits will be paid as usual during and after the rollover to the Year 2000. I will review the Federal Reserve's role in processing these payments and address the Federal Reserve's Year 2000 preparations. I will also be pleased to answer any questions you may have. The Federal Reserve Banks provide a variety of payment services to banks and U.S. government agencies. These services range from electronic payment mechanisms, such as Fedwire funds transfer and automated clearing house (Fed ACH), to check collection. As fiscal agents of the United States, the Reserve Banks use these services to collect and disburse payments on behalf of government agencies. Government payments are typically originated by federal agencies through the Treasury Department's Financial Management Service (FMS), which in turn delivers payment instructions to the Federal Reserve for subsequent delivery to banks or processors. Most government payments are made electronically using the Fed ACH service. For veterans' benefit payments, the Department of Veterans Affairs provides instructions to FMS about the payments to be made and the method to be used. (Currently seventy-five percent of veterans' payments are made by ACH and twenty-five percent by check. ) FMS in turn creates an ACH payments file that includes the payment amount, beneficiary identification, settlement date, receiving bank routing information, and total dollar amount for all payments in the file. FMS sends the file electronically to the Federal Reserve three to four days before the payment date. The Fed ACH software edits the data for accuracy, sorts the payment information by receiving bank, sends a payment file to each receiving bank, and initiates accounting entries that will debit the Treasury's account and credit the receiving banks' accounts on the payment date. Receiving banks credit customers' accounts on the scheduled payment date. Because of our intermediary role as a payments processor, the Federal Reserve's Year 2000 readiness preparations involve both our internal systems and our external interfaces to other organizations, such as banks and FMS. Along with other federal banking regulators, we have advised banks to test, at a minimum, all mission-critical systems by June 30, 1999, and we have provided the facility for banks to test their interfaces with us. We are also working with U.S. government agencies to test their automated interfaces with the Federal Reserve by exchanging ACH test files. The Federal Reserve's mission-critical systems used to deliver veterans' benefit payments through the ACH are Year 2000 ready and in production. FMS has tested its interface to the Fed ACH system and has reported no problems. In fact, the GAO recently reviewed critical Federal Reserve systems, including Fed ACH, and determined that the Federal Reserve has effective management controls for its internal Year 2000 program. The GAO's report, which was released earlier this month, noted no concerns about the Federal Reserve's Year 2000 readiness. , Beginning in June 1998, the Federal Reserve offered to the Treasury, other government agencies, banks, and processors the opportunity to test future-dated ACH transactions and related accounting functions. We are encouraging all banks, especially those that originate a large volume of ACH payments, to test with the Federal Reserve as soon as possible. As of last week, about 6,400 banks, representing 67 percent of the Federal Reserve's ACH customers, had tested their automated interfaces with the Federal Reserve by exchanging Fed ACH test files that contain post-1999 dates. We will continue to offer testing opportunities through early 2000. We realize that the success of our Year 2000 program will be measured by our ability, and the public's confidence in our ability, to conduct business on and after January 3, 2000. Thus, the Federal Reserve will have contingency and business resumption plans in place for ACH payments. We are coordinating these efforts with the Treasury and other government agencies. Back-up arrangements being offered by the Reserve Banks include magnetic tape options and paper listings from which banks could post accounts. We believe, however, that if there are any disruptions, they will be mild and short-lived. Boards of directors and senior managers of banks are working to ensure the Year 2000 readiness of their systems. Bank regulators are providing guidance, encouragement, and strong incentives to the banking industry to address the Year 2000 challenges, but management bears the responsibility for their institutions' readiness. In 1997, the Federal Reserve and the other Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council agencies started a three-phase Year 2000 supervision program for the banks they oversee. This program is intended to elevate the awareness of Year 2000 issues, monitor the progress of banks' Year 2000 planning and readiness efforts, and require banks that are lagging in their Year 2000 preparedness efforts to develop specific plans to remedy deficiencies. Based on the assessments of bank supervisors at the Federal Reserve and the other banking agencies, we believe that the industry has made great progress in Year 2000 preparedness. The Federal Reserve actively participates in the President's Council on Year 2000 Conversion and a senior Federal Reserve official chairs the Council's Financial Sector Group. This Group comprises federal agencies with large payment volumes, including the Department of Veterans Affairs. We are also coordinating closely with numerous other government and industry entities to ensure that payments flow normally as the year rolls over. In conclusion, preparation for the Year 2000 will continue to be one of the Federal Reserve's highest priorities. Internal Federal Reserve systems used to deliver veterans' benefit payments have been modified, tested, and placed into production. As I have indicated, testing with banks and the Treasury is continuing. Extensive business resumption plans are being developed and reviewed. Every bank's Year 2000 preparedness efforts have been examined twice, and the Federal Reserve, like the other regulators, has found that the majority of institutions are making satisfactory progress in their Year 2000 readiness programs. Those institutions identified as lagging in their Year 2000 efforts have been targeted for additional follow-up and, if necessary, formal enforcement actions. While we expect that the industry may experience some minor or localized problems during the rollover, the Federal Reserve fully expects to conduct business as usual through the Year 2000. Veterans and their families should feel confident that their benefits will be paid as usual. Footnotes For purposes of this discussion, the term "bank" includes all depository institutions, such as savings and loans and credit unions. Federal Reserve Banks pay Treasury issued checks as fiscal agents of the Treasury. Year 2000 Computing Crisis: Federal Reserve Has Established Effective Year 2000 Management Controls for Internal Systems Conversion (GAO/AIMD-99-78, April 9, 1999). In addition, major private sector ACH operators -- the American Clearing House Association, the New York Automated Clearing House, and Visa USA -- have reported that their computer systems are Year 2000 ready.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Foxdale Bancorp, Inc., the Foxdale Bank, both of South Elgin, Illinois, the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, and the Illinois Office of Banks and Real Estate. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
Remarks by Governor Edward M. Gramlich Before the Wharton Public Policy Forum Series, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania April 22, 1999 Governor Gramlich presented an identical speech at the Jerome Levy Economics Institute, Bard College, Annandale-on-the-Hudson, New York, April 23, 1999 A Stabilization Policy Strategy Former Federal Reserve Chairman William McChesney Martin had a famous line about how to conduct monetary policy: "You have to take away the punch bowl when the party is warming up." While that may seem straightforward guidance (if not always easy politically!), it is not so simple in practice. Considering the broader question of stabilization policy, there are two sets of authorities that could take away the punch bowl, monetary policymakers or fiscal policymakers. Which should, under what conditions? Another question involves the heat--exactly how warm should the party be? A third involves timing--should the bowl be taken away slightly in advance of when the party is expected to warm up, or once it is clear that the party really has warmed up? Economists and others have debated these questions of stabilization policy strategy for years, with many issues still unresolved. In this talk I take the opportunity to give my own views. Fiscal and Monetary Policy in Theory In domestic macroeconomic theory either fiscal or monetary policy can be used to stabilize output and employment around their trend levels, and hence prevent booms or recessions from getting out of hand. When this domestic model is broadened to open the economy to international trade and capital flows, this conclusion no longer holds but the results depend on the flexibility of the nation's exchange rate. Suppose first that a nation's exchange rate is flexible, which means that the central bank generally does not intervene in currency markets and allows private markets to set the value of its currency. In response to an incipient recession, expansionary fiscal policy will raise interest rates, attract international funds, drive up the value of the nation's currency, and reduce net exports. In a strict small country model, this process will continue until the fiscal expansion has no impact at all on the nation's output and is ineffective as a stabilization policy measure. In less strict models the international link greatly reduces the expansionary impact of the fiscal change and still makes it generally unproductive to use fiscal policy for stabilization purposes. By contrast, the impact of a monetary expansion is enhanced by flexible exchange rates. Monetary expansion will lower interest rates, lower the value of the nation's currency, raise net exports, and generally have a more stimulatory impact on output and employment than it would have without changing exchange rates. In this exchange regime it makes sense for a country to rely on monetary policy as its primary stabilization tool and let fiscal policy influence the nation's overall saving rate. It might seem like this assignment of responsibilities would consign fiscal policy to oblivion, but in fact not so. In the long run the most important policy a country has to influence its long run living standards is fiscal policy, operating through just this influence on national saving. Interestingly, these conclusions are totally inverted if a country is following a fixed exchange rate policy, which means that its central bank intervenes in markets to set the value of its currency. A great variety of exchange arrangements fall into this category--a gold standard, a currency board, dollarization, and exchange rate zones would all be considered as fixed exchange rate regimes for these purposes. In these cases, central bank policy (if indeed there is a domestic central bank at all) must be dedicated to setting the exchange rate and cannot be used to stabilize output and employment. Interest rates cannot deviate from the level necessary to determine the pre-set exchange rate. Fiscal policy becomes the preeminent stabilization tool by necessity. As expansionary fiscal policy threatens to raise interest rates and drive up the exchange rate, the process induces a rise in the money supply to preserve the fixed interest and exchange rates, accommodating a larger rise in output than would be the case in a closed economy. For this reason the impact of fiscal policy on the economy is even greater than it would be in a closed economy. Timing Issues Since stabilization policy is dedicated to mitigating business cycles that can be of relatively short duration, timing also matters in developing a stabilization strategy. Fiscal policy contains automatic stabilizers--basically tax revenues that rise in booms and fall in recessions, hence stabilizing overall spending demands. These stabilizers cut the amplitude of cycles in output and employment, but they do not eliminate the cycles. To eliminate cycles altogether, policymakers must act in time for their policies to offset incipient booms or recessions. The average postwar recession in the United States has been slightly less than a year long, which narrows the time horizon for what are known as discretionary policies considerably. Two types of lags can cause problems, inside lags and outside lags. Inside lags involve the time between the need for action and the action, outside lags the time between policy action and its impact on the economy. An inevitable component of the inside lag is simply the time it takes policymakers, whether on the monetary or fiscal side, to recognize shifts in economic indicators. Policymakers can rely on forecasting models, but these can be sufficiently wide of the mark that policymakers often prefer to see real world data before they act. In most countries first reports on economic data come out about a month after the quarter or month for which the data are reported, but these first reports are subject to considerable short run noise, often revised substantially, and in fact are themselves often little better than forecasts. If there were a sharp but unexpected change in the pace of activity, policymakers would probably not have a good statistical idea of this change until a month or more after the fact. The other component of the inside lag is the time between recognition and action. For monetary policy this time period is usually relatively short. Central bank monetary policy committees generally meet at two to six weeks' intervals throughout the year. Normally these committees respond to changes in economic information at the first meeting after the fact, sometimes the second. If the change were to be extreme, most committees have the ability to make inter-meeting changes in policy. Summing the two components, for monetary policy the inside lag is probably on the order of a quarter, less if the monetary authorities are prepared to act on the basis of forecasts. For fiscal policy, the time between recognition and action is long in parliamentary countries, seemingly interminable in the United States. In the U.S. if the need for action is recognized in the fall of the year, the President's budget message can reflect that. But the budget message, which comes out in early February, lays the groundwork for Congressional debate on the budget, which most of the time is not quite completed by the time the fiscal year starts in October. Hence, at best this component of the inside lag for U.S. discretionary fiscal policy is about a year, already longer than the average recession, and the lag can be substantially longer than that if the relevant action is at all controversial. In parliamentary countries it is possible to act faster, but even in these countries there can be substantial procedural bottlenecks to altering a budget that has already been submitted. Most of the time even parliamentary countries will wait for the next budget cycle to incorporate new discretionary fiscal policies. The second lag is what is known as the outside lag--the time between the action being taken and an observable impact on the real economy. For monetary policy this lag was formerly thought to be long--on the order of nine months to a year in most developed countries. Monetary policy has traditionally operated through changes in short term interest rates, which then change long term rates with some lag, and real spending with some further lag. But there are reasons why this lag may have speeded up in recent years--credit markets have now become more forward-looking and asset values have a sizeable and relatively quick impact on spending through the wealth effect. For fiscal policy, tax changes that alter withholding probably operate within a quarter or two, though those that raise spending such as for construction can take many years to plan routes, purchase land, let contracts and the like. The upshot of all of this is that it does seem possible to use monetary policy as an effective stabilization instrument. Because of its relatively short inside lag and possibly reduced outside lag, monetary actions are likely to have some effects within a half-year of the recognition of the need for a change, perhaps even faster when authorities act on the basis of forecasts. But what is possible for monetary policy seems basically impossible for discretionary fiscal policy. When the extra year-long piece of the inside lag is added on, it is hard to escape the conclusion that fiscal policy should be used for stabilization purposes only in the deepest and longest of recessions. If an economy has flexible exchange rates, no harm is done by this conclusion, because the economics of flexible exchange rates suggest that monetary policy is best used for stabilization and fiscal policy for long-term policies in any case. If the economy operates under fixed exchange rates, the lesson here is that discretionary fiscal policy should generally only be used to deal with long run needs. The only operative stabilization force in these economies is then the automatic fiscal stabilizers--indeed, this suggests a potential problem for countries on fixed exchange rates. Fiscal Policy in the United States Turning now from the general to the specific, I examine these issues in more detail for the United States. The first point to make is that for nearly three decades the U.S. has operated under flexible exchange rates. Neither the Federal Reserve nor the Treasury typically intervenes in exchange markets to try to influence exchange rates. This means both that monetary policy is free to operate on stabilization needs, and should be able to do that effectively. Fiscal policy, on the other hand, is best devoted to longer run considerations. The second salient point is that for two decades American fiscal policy has been hamstrung by low national saving rates. Much attention lately has been devoted to the low rate of personal saving in the United States--the rate that just recently dipped below zero. But while personal saving is one important component of national saving, it is only one component. A country with high business and/or government saving can provide plenty of resources for new capital investment, even with low personal saving. The overall national saving rate, based on a summation of saving in all sectors of the economy, is the key indicator of how much a country is providing for its future. Through an accounting identity, it can be shown that this overall national saving rate equals output less private and public consumption, perhaps an easier way to think about the concept. This overall rate of net national saving in the United States averaged 11.4 percent of net national product from 1950 to 1970, but then fell to 6.1 percent in the 1980s and to 5.2 percent in the 1990s. In the long run this drop is bound to show up in a reduced growth path for per capita output. Now, when the United States is on the verge of a dramatic rise in potential entitlement spending, seems a particularly poor time for such a sharp drop. But national saving is a long run concept, and the fact that the U.S. rate has fallen does not inevitably make for economic problems. Indeed, Alan Greenspan has recently attributed much favorable recent economic performance to significant capital gains on wealth. These wealth gains are not counted in income from production but they raise consumption, implying a drop in national saving. They also can raise investment, implying an investment boom financed by the saving of foreigners. Of course the current account balance of payments deficit implied by the rise in investment and drop in saving may not be sustainable. Nor might the capital gains persist. If a nation could consistently count on large-scale capital gains and foreign capital inflows, it would not need as much saving. But capital gains come and go, and inflows may not be sustainable. To provide a strong and consistent basis for future growth, a developed nation will generally need to do its own saving. While there are a number of policy changes that could in principle raise national saving, the tried and true method is through contractionary fiscal policy. Higher budget surpluses imply lower public and/or private consumption and permit more funds to be devoted to capital investment. Making the same point from another perspective, higher surpluses retire some of the outstanding public debt and free up more funds for investment. In this regard, the recent return of overall budget surpluses is most welcome, and it has already begun to raise national saving. The overall net national saving rate in the budget surplus year of 1998 was 7.5 percent, significantly above the decade average for the 1990s, despite the fact that the personal saving rate fell. Since contractionary fiscal policy is at the heart of the national saving issue, it is natural to seek out budget procedures that promote saving. One, used by many national governments and most American states, is the convention of separating accounts into a current and capital budget. There would normally be restrictions against borrowing on current account, but not against borrowing to finance capital investment. While there have been arguments that the U.S. federal government should use a capital budget, such a change is unlikely to help promote saving in the present environment. One problem is that the federal government does remarkably little direct investment spending, so the current budget deficit or surplus would differ little from the overall deficit or surplus. And, at the present time the main policy issue is that the current budget is likely to run a surplus, in which case restrictions against current deficit spending would be irrelevant. Countries that have come upon large petroleum resources have hit on another contractionary budget procedure. They have often devoted the resources to a special trust fund, insuring that the rise in income does not translate to a rise in consumption. For many years the United States has had a budgetary device that operates in a similar manner, involving its Social Security trust fund. While generally considered within the federal budget, Social Security has operated as a budget within a budget--being financed so that current and future payroll tax revenues are sufficient to cover the current and future benefits scheduled under present law, looking ahead for the next 75 years. Several times in the past two decades this long run actuarial budget constraint for Social Security has been responsible for cuts in future benefits to bring the forward-looking Social Security budget into long term actuarial balance. Many have argued for strengthening this separation by removing Social Security altogether from the federal government's budget. In his proposed budget for year 2000 and beyond, President Clinton came up with another way to promote national saving, ironically by reducing the segmentation between Social Security and the rest of the budget. He proposed making general revenue transfers out of the anticipated general budget surplus and to the Social Security trust fund. The idea is similar to the special trust fund employed by oil producing countries. While such a move may make for more responsible general budgets, one wonders what happens on the other side of the transfer. Since Social Security's long term budget constraint has been responsible for significant forward benefit cuts, it may not be as feasible, or as easy, to make these cuts in future benefits if there is now the tradition of making general revenue transfers to fill Social Security's revenue gaps. What may encourage national saving in one budget may discourage it in another. While these budget structures are interesting and potentially worth exploring, my own view is that they are not likely to work in the United States. To me, a capital budget is unlikely to solve any problems and the arrangements involving the Social Security trust fund are best left alone. In the end, I believe that the way to promote the desirable fiscal goal of raising national saving is simply to argue for it. Paying down the national debt reduces interest costs and adds to long term fiscal flexibility. The implicit rise in saving also generates new funds for raising investment, adding skilled jobs and raising living standards in the long run. One would hope that these benefits could be defended in their own right. Monetary Policy Previously we saw that it often makes sense to use monetary policy for stabilization purposes. Precisely how is this to be done? The textbook way of thinking about monetary policy still runs in terms of quantities. The central bank operates so that some measure of the money stock or liquidity grows in some relation to the desired growth in real output. But the sharp changes in money velocity in the early 1990s have changed many economists and central bankers from being money quantity watchers to being interest rate watchers. Rather than trying to guess the optimal rate of monetary expansion, many analysts now focus directly on interest rates--should they be lower, higher, or the same? John Taylor has worked out a simple way of thinking about this question. Under what is known as the Taylor Rule, monetary authorities first determine an equilibrium level of a target interest rate, say the real federal funds rate. The authorities can then adjust the actual funds rate relative to this equilibrium rate depending on inflation relative to its target, and unemployment relative to its target. If, for example, inflation were above its target and unemployment were close to its target, monetary authorities would raise the real funds rate above its equilibrium value. While Taylor's Rule provides a useful framework for policymakers to think about policy, as an operating rule it too is beginning to encounter empirical difficulties. The Taylor Rule requires precise point estimates of the equilibrium real funds rate and targets for inflation and unemployment. None of these estimates is easily come by. The equilibrium real funds rate is difficult to estimate, and may change with productivity growth and national saving rates. On the inflation side, there are a number of different price indices, any of which could be used as a target. All of these indices can tell different stories about whether or not inflation is heating up, and there are a number of measurement problems with the Consumer Price Index, the most widely watched of these measures. On the unemployment side, the fear that inflation will accelerate if unemployment drops below an estimated natural rate has at this point proven groundless--inflation has not accelerated when unemployment has remained in a zone that would have been felt to be well below the estimated natural rate. Over this recent period the Taylor Rule would have called for higher federal funds rates to raise unemployment, a policy change that may well prove to be unwarranted when the final history is written. One ad hoc remedy would be to drop the unemployment term, the one that seems to be giving trouble, from the Taylor Rule. Less drastically, the policy weight on the inflation term might be raised and that on the unemployment term lowered. In these cases the Taylor Rule comes very close to an inflation-targeting rule, which indeed many economists have also advocated. But there is uncertainty about more than the unemployment target, and there may be an even better way to modify the Taylor Rule. Whenever there is doubt about the point estimates of the equilibrium funds rate, the inflation target, or the unemployment target, the Taylor Rule can be converted to a change rule. If levels of inflation and unemployment seem to be at least within their target bands, if not at unknown point estimates of the target, monetary policy can just try to keep inflation and unemployment in these desirable bands. Policy would respond only when movements in the economy threaten to take inflation and/or unemployment out of their preferred bands. Solving a standard model of the macro-economy, such a policy would effectively convert monetary policy into what might be called "speed limit" form, where policy tries to insure that aggregate demand grows at roughly the expected rate of increase of aggregate supply, which increase can be more easily predicted. This version of the Taylor Rule goes back to the spirit of Martin's initial remark, where the monetary authority is happy with the cocktail party temperature at present but moves against anything that increases its warmth. Should demand growth threaten to outrun supply growth (the party to warm up), the seeds of accelerating inflation may be planted and monetary policy should curb the growth of demand by raising interest rates. Should demand growth threaten to fall behind supply growth, rising unemployment is probably in the works, and monetary policy should try to boost the growth in demand by lowering interest rates. As long as inflation and unemployment remain in the acceptable band, this change version of the rule simply tries to maintain a good thing, without requiring precise quantification of inflation and unemployment policy goals. This approach has not addressed the question of supply shocks, which are dealt with in the general formulation of Taylor's Rule. But one can incorporate supply shocks into the change rule as well. If there are temporary supply shocks that do not seem likely to be incorporated into the broader inflation process, they should be ignored. If there are positive or negative shocks that do seem likely to be incorporated, the change rule may not work well, and one may have to go back to the general form of the rule. Policy Strategies This all amounts to what might be considered a stabilization policy strategy. Given the flexible exchange rate regime, fiscal policy should be used to influence overall national saving, which is still lower than it has been for most of the postwar period for the United States. I personally would argue for a rise in national saving, especially in view of the likely increase in future government entitlement spending. But I would not argue for any of the recently suggested changes in budget procedures that are alleged to help in this process. On the monetary side, authorities should try to stabilize the economy without anticipating help from fiscal policy. Generally this would involve following the dictates of the Taylor Rule, assuming that one can choose the equilibrium real funds rate and target values for inflation and unemployment. If not, and if both inflation and unemployment seem to be safely within their target bands, this policy could be simplified to a change form--in which interest rates are used to keep the growth in aggregate demand near the more easily predictable growth in aggregate supply.
Remarks by Governor Laurence H. Meyer At the European Institute's Conference "Challenges to the European Millennium," Four Seasons Hotel, Washington, D.C. April 26, 1999 The Euro in the International Financial System I am very pleased to be here today with such a distinguished group of European officials to speak about the monetary adventure that commenced in Europe earlier this year. These are challenging days for policymakers, with or without a new currency to worry about. Our task today is to celebrate and speculate. We celebrate an important international event, the creation of the European Economic and Monetary Union, and with it the birth of a new currency, the euro, and a new supra-national central bank, the ECB. We recognize the leadership this spring of Germany as President of the European Union. And we speculate about the implications of monetary union and the euro--for the euro area, for the United States, for the world economy, and especially for the international monetary system. In my remarks today, I would like to touch on four issues. First, the role of an international currency and the likelihood that the euro could displace the dollar to some extent over the years ahead; second, the pros and cons associated with having a preeminent international currency; third, the role that the exchange rate plays in monetary policy formulation; and, finally, the implications of the euro for international monetary cooperation. Today marks the 81st trading day of the euro since its debut on January 4. Since its introduction, Europe's single currency has depreciated against the U.S. dollar by nearly 9 percent. The consensus seems to be that the euro's depreciation has resulted largely from a slowing in growth relative to expectations in the euro zone, while, at the same time, growth in the U.S. has been stronger than expected. If this is the case, and I believe it is, then the movement of the euro has simply mirrored what would have occurred in the currencies of the euro area in the absence of monetary union. It also stands in sharp contrast to the speculation, in the years leading up to the euro's debut, that there might be a massive and rapid reallocation of investor portfolios out of dollars and into Europe's new currency. Some experts estimated that such a reallocation of official and private portfolios could total in the range of $500 billion to $1 trillion. Such a massive reallocation would, of course, have resulted in an appreciating euro and depreciating dollar in the early stages of monetary union. We now know that, at least in this initial period, rapid portfolio reallocation does not seem to have occurred and the euro's exchange value relative to the dollar has moved exactly contrary to what some had predicted. The macroeconomic factors--the outlook for growth and interest rates--so far have dominated the new currency's movements, just as macroeconomic factors were the driving force behind movements in the euro's chief predecessor currency, the German mark. But the absence of dramatic near-term consequences should not lead us to conclude that this bold adventure will have negligible consequences for the euro area, for the global economy or for the United States. Rather it should remind us that the consequences of the euro for international financial relationships are likely to evolve over some considerable period of time. The consequences might include a more competitive and healthy euro-wide economy, a greater role for the euro as an international currency, a growing role for euro-denominated assets in global portfolios more generally, and changes in the global pattern of exchange rates and current account balances. For example, if economic policies in Europe are sound, the dollar's international status would likely diminish somewhat and the euro's international status would increase, reflecting the prosperity of the euro-area economy and its role in the global marketplace. The international status of a currency involves a number of different functions that correspond generally to the classic uses of money as a unit of account, a means of payment, and a store of value. Since the end of the Second World War, the dollar has been preeminent in the global financial system in terms of the currency in which contracts are denominated and paid, official reserves are held, and financial instruments are issued. But, just as the German mark increased in international importance and eroded slightly the dollar's status, so is the euro likely to continue this trend. Inertia and so-called network externalities are key to explaining why a shift away from the dollar would not occur overnight. Inertia probably explains why it is that until relatively recently a number of traded commodities were quoted and priced in sterling. If the dollar is used in enough different ways in the international arena, then it is cheaper to use the dollar rather than some alternative--I will use the dollar simply because you and everyone I do business with uses the dollar--that is, there is a network externality associated with using the dollar. But the international financial consequences of the euro will be driven most importantly to the extent euro-denominated assets play a growing role in global portfolios, displacing to some degree the role of dollar-denominated assets. Such an expanded role for euro-denominated assets would depend upon and follow from the development of a broad, liquid euro securities market to rival the dollar securities markets. But I am talking only of potential. A growing and ultimately significant international role for the euro is not automatic. Instead, the euro area will have to earn its place in the international financial system, and earn it the old fashioned way--by pursuing policies that produce a healthy euro-area economy. By improving price discovery within the euro zone, the euro itself may increase competitiveness across Europe, and thereby benefit low-cost producers, trade competitiveness, and European consumers. But the key to the success of the euro area would still appear to be the same set of policies that would have been essential in France, Germany, and other euro countries in the absence of the euro: structural reforms, especially those related to reducing the rigidities in European labor markets, and disciplined monetary and fiscal policies. Does the euro make structural reforms and disciplined policy more or less likely? Frankly, I do not know the answer to that question. Fortunately, we do not live in a zero sum world. The structural reforms and monetary and fiscal policies that would make the euro area stronger and more competitive would certainly enhance the strength of the world economy as well. Whenever the world economy is strengthened, the U.S. benefits. However, this should not lead us to understate or neglect the significant changes in trade flows, current account balances, and exchange rates that might be part of the transition to an increased international role of the euro, and the importance of careful management of this transition. It is only fair, however, to warn my euro friends that having a preeminent international currency has its pluses and minuses--it is not an unmitigated free ride, as some of the discussion has suggested. There is a burden that accompanies having an international currency. Policy changes that are undertaken for domestic purposes can have important effects on others, effects that are magnified when a country or region is not only a large part of the world, in terms of goods production and trade, but also a large part of the global financial system and a foundation of the international monetary system. For example, Federal Reserve policy in the early years of Paul Volcker's chairmanship involved a large increase in short-term interest rates designed to reign-in high domestic inflation. For countries in Latin America that had borrowed heavily in dollars at floating interest rates, the change in U.S. monetary policy had enormous consequences. Thus, when a country's currency is widely used internationally, the international spillovers to domestic policy actions can be intensified, so that domestic policy actions quickly seem to become everyone's business and can generate criticism in international circles. I might note that we at the Federal Reserve steadfastly resist the call to be the world's central bank. We are the central bank of the U.S. and Congress has given us a quite specific and narrow mandate: promote price stability and full employment at home, period. While their mandate is not identical to that of the Federal Reserve, the ECB will have to wrestle with the same issues, and increasingly so, as the euro becomes a major player in the international monetary system. On the other hand, having an international currency can provide substantial benefits. The most direct benefit is seignorage revenue. With about $300 billion of U.S. currency notes in the hands of foreigners, the United States earns roughly $15 billion per year (less than 0.2 percent of GDP) in seignorage. With the euro as another major currency in the world's economy--and, in light of the potential attractiveness of euro notes when they are introduced in 2002 to countries in eastern Europe and former Soviet states--we could stand to lose a considerable fraction of the interest-free loan that the rest of the world provides to us. This will, obviously, not be a major event for us and I would hope it is not the major benefit for the euro countries of the birth of the euro! Some believe that the major benefit from the United States having the premier international currency and the broadest and most liquid financial markets is that we are able to finance our large current account deficit more cheaply than would otherwise be the case. That is true only to the extent that the international status of the dollar brings lower interest rates on dollar liabilities. This suggests that international currency status might affect a country's (or in the case of the euro, the region's) equilibrium real exchange rate and real interest rate. But looking at exactly the same phenomenon in another way, those who seek international currency status should not forget that an appreciating currency--and one that is very often a safe haven in times of economic and political crisis--implies a reduction in competitiveness and a drag on economic growth through a declining current account balance. As the international role of the euro increases, the demand for euros will increase --both directly as currency and indirectly via euro-denominated assets--potentially leading to an appreciation of the euro. I say potentially because we all know that the price of anything, including the euro, is affected by supply as well as demand. And the euro will encourage an increase in both the issuance of euro-denominated liabilities as well as in the demand for euro-denominated assets. As a result, there is some uncertainty about the effect of portfolio decisions on the price of the euro. Even if the euro appreciates, this consideration suggests, the magnitude of the appreciation may not be very large. But let us nevertheless explore the implications of a net increase in the demand for euros and hence an appreciation of the euro over time, given that this is the result many have emphasized and one with particularly important implications for the international financial system. The effect of a large reallocation of portfolios away from the dollar and dollar-denominated assets and into the euro and euro-denominated assets would, by definition, imply a swing from current account surplus to deficit for the euro area as investors acquire net claims on the region. Indeed, the appreciation of the euro would be the cause of the euro-area's move from surplus to deficit. But such an appreciation of the euro would bring a reduction in competitiveness that could provide additional pressure for structural reform in continental European product and labor markets. And the counterpart to this from our side would be a reduction in net claims on the United States, and might be just the medicine the doctor ordered to help us move to a more sustainable external position. I'd like to say a few words about how monetary policymakers think about the exchange rate when judging the appropriate level for domestic short-term interest rates. As you know, the American economy is relatively closed when compared with individual European countries--U.S. exports of goods and services, for example, are only 14 percent of our GDP, compared with Germany where exports are 31 percent of GDP. With monetary union, the euro area's openness to trade with countries outside the single currency region becomes more similar to the United States. For U.S. monetary officials, the dollar through its implications for U.S. net exports and the growth of real GDP as well as for inflation is one of many important economic variables that is input into policymaking. The dollar is not, in-and-of itself an explicit goal for policy: The dollar and its performance are very, very important for the United States. But the Federal Reserve sets its target for the Fed funds rate taking into account all the performance variables in the economy and does not try to target the exchange rate. The European Central Bank now confronts a similar situation relative to the euro's value. The depreciation of the euro since its introduction should provide a boost to net exports and put some upward pressure on inflation in the euro zone. The ECB must weigh the effects of the euro's depreciation along with many other factors affecting the region's economy in judging the appropriate policy stance. Some experts have alleged that the Federal Reserve--and now the ECB--treat the exchange value of their currency with benign neglect. I have some problems with this characterization. In the United States, we have had a system of flexible exchange rates since the breakdown of the Bretton Woods system in the early 1970s. By definition, a flexible exchange rate system is one in which policymakers have complete discretion over monetary policy. That is, we do not devote monetary policy to the maintenance of a particular value for the exchange rate. That is not benign neglect. That is the implication of a system in which we retain total flexibility for monetary policy actions in order to best stabilize the domestic economy, of which the international sector is an important component. The importance of maintaining the focus of monetary policy on domestic objectives has clear implications for the suggestion that international monetary cooperation be directed toward the maintenance of target zones for exchange rates. Some have suggested that now that we have three major currencies--the dollar, the euro, and the yen--it may be easier to achieve such cooperation. The importance of maintaining monetary policy focused on domestic objectives, however, rules out, in my view, assigning monetary policy the objective of maintaining exchange rates within target zones. Frankly, given the volatility of international capital flows, I doubt we could accomplish such an objective even if we assigned monetary policy with the responsibility to enforce such an agreement. And, as I said, we should not even want to try to do so. What we should want is a system that permits the United States, the euro area, and Japan to pursue policies to achieve domestic objectives, without generating wide and unsustainable swings in exchange rates. But cyclical swings in exchange rates and trade deficits that naturally arise from cyclical divergences across the countries should neither be avoided nor regretted. These movements are potentially stabilizing and part of the benefits of a flexible exchange rate regime. We have seen that very clearly recently. Monetary policy responses to cyclical developments tend to reinforce the cyclical swings in exchange rates, and these exchange rate movements are very much part of the stabilizing power of monetary policy. So, in general, these movements should not be avoided or regretted. However, when cyclical swings are of longer duration or deeper than normal, fiscal policy must come into play. Fiscal policy adjustments allow a country to meet its stabilization objective more by bolstering domestic demand and correspondingly less by encouraging external demand at the expense of other countries. In addition, in times of global economic stress, relying on cyclical swings in the exchange rates to stabilize individual countries amounts to relying on a redistribution of demand across the countries rather than on policies which raise global demand. Changes in structural fiscal deficits--bringing changes in national saving rates and in relative real interest rates around the world--are a major contributor to non-cyclical swings in exchange rates and current account balances. Divergent fiscal policies may generate movements in exchange rates and current account balances that are large and unsustainable, subjecting the global economy not only to an inevitable reversal of these movements, but to the threat of a disorderly correction. More dialogue among the dollar, euro and yen countries might have produced a set of policy mixes across these countries that avoided some of the wider swings in exchange rates that we have witnessed during the past 25 years. We have learned much from this period, and will all work toward putting our knowledge to good use. Let me conclude once again by congratulating the euro area on a remarkably smooth birth of their new currency and new central bank. I personally wish the euro area great success with this bold initiative.
Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan H.R. 10 and financial modernization Before the Subcommittee on Finance and Hazardous Materials, Committee on Commerce, U.S. House of Representatives April 28, 1999 I would like to thank the Committee for the opportunity to present the views of the Federal Reserve on the current version of H.R. 10, the approach to financial modernization most recently approved by the House Banking Committee. Last year, I testified at length before this Committee on many of the issues related to your deliberations on this legislation. Our views have not changed on the need to modernize our banking and financial system, on consolidated supervision, on the emphasis on reduced regulation, on the unitary thrift loophole, and especially on continuing to prohibit banks from conducting through their subsidiaries those activities that they are prohibited to do themselves. In the interest of time, however, I thought it might be best if I limit my formal comments only to the latter, that is, the setting of the underlying structure of American banking in the 21st century. The issue is whether the important new powers being contemplated are exercised in a financial services holding company through a non-bank affiliate or in a bank through its subsidiary. Such a decision would be of minor significance, and decidedly not a concern of legislators and regulators, if banks were not subsidized. We at the Federal Reserve strongly support the new powers that would be authorized by H.R. 10. We believe that these powers, however, should be financed essentially in the competitive market place, and not financed by the sovereign credit of the United States. This requires that the new activities be permitted through holding companies and prohibited through banks. Operating Subsidiaries The Board believes that any version of financial modernization legislation that authorizes banks to conduct in their subsidiaries any activity as principal that is prohibited to the bank itself, is potentially a step backward to greater federal subsidization, and eventually to more regulation to contain the subsidies. I and my colleagues, accordingly, are firmly of the view that the long-term stability of U.S. financial markets and the interests of the American taxpayer would be better served by no financial modernization bill rather than one that allows the proposed new activities to be conducted by the bank, as proposed by H.R. 10. For reasons I shall discuss shortly, the Board is not dissuaded from this view by provisions that have been incorporated in H.R. 10 to address our concerns. Subsidies. Government guarantees of the banking system--deposit insurance and direct access to the Fed's discount window and payments system guarantees--provide banks with a lower average cost of capital than would otherwise be the case. This subsidized cost of capital is achieved through lower market risk premiums on both insured and uninsured debt, and through lower capital than would be required by the market if there were no government guarantees. The lower cost of funding gives banks a distinct competitive advantage over nonbank financial competitors, and permits them to take greater risks than they could otherwise. The safety net subsidy is reflected in lower equity capital ratios at banks, that are consistently below those of a variety of nonbank financial institutions. Importantly, this is true even when we compare bank and nonbank financial institutions with the same credit ratings: banks with the same credit ratings as their nonbank competitors are allowed by the market to have lower capital ratios. While the differences in capital ratios could reflect differences in overall asset quality, there is little to suggest that this factor accounts for more than a small part of the difference. Under H.R. 10, the subsidy that the government provides to banks as a byproduct of the safety net would be directly transferable to their operating subsidiaries to finance powers not currently permissible to the bank or its subsidiaries. The funds a bank uses to invest in the equity of its subs are available to the bank at a lower cost than that of any other potential investor, save the United States Government, because of the subsidy. Thus, operating subsidiaries under H.R. 10 could conduct new securities, merchant banking, and other activities with a government subsidized competitive advantage over independent firms that conduct the same activity. That is to say, the use of the universal bank structure envisioned in H.R. 10 means the transference of the subsidy to a wider range of financial businesses, producing distortions in the competitive balance between those latter units that receive a subsidy and identical units that do not--whether those units are subs of holding companies or totally independent of banking. H.R. 10 does not contain provisions that effectively curtail the transfer of the subsidy to operating subsidiaries or address this competitive imbalance. The provisions of H.R. 10 that would require the deduction of such investments from the regulatory capital of the bank (after which the bank must still meet the regulatory definition of well-capitalized) attempt, but fail, to limit the amount of subsidized funds that an individual bank can invest in its subs. What matters is not regulatory capital, but actual or economic capital. The vast majority of banks now hold significantly more capital than regulatory definitions of "well-capitalized" require. This capital is not "excess" in an economic sense that is somehow available for use outside the bank; it is the actual amount required by the market for the bank to conduct its own activities. The actual capital maintained by a bank is established in order to earn the perceived maximum risk-adjusted rate of return on equity. Unless this optimum economic capital is equal to, or less than, regulatory capital, deductions from regulatory capital would in no way inhibit the transfer of the subsidy from the bank to the subsidiary. Some have argued that the subsidy transference to subsidiaries of banks is no different from the transfer of subsidized bank dividends through the holding company parent to holding company affiliates. The direct upstreaming of dividends by a bank to its holding company parent that in turn invests the proceeds in subsidiaries of the holding company, while legally permissible, in fact does not occur--and for good reasons, as I will explain below. In the 1990's, dividend flows from banks to their parent holding companies have been less than the sum of holding company dividends, interest on holding company debt, and the cost of holding company stock buy backs, a substitute for dividends. Thus, the empirical evidence indicates that, on net, at the largest organizations there has been no financing of a bank's holding company affiliates with subsidized equity of the associated banks. All of that part of the subsidy reflected in earnings has flowed to investors. (There are a few large individual institutions that have, in some years, upstreamed dividends in excess of investor payments, but the cumulative amounts are very small and the conclusions are unchanged.) That bank dividends are not used to finance holding company subsidiaries should not be surprising. It simply is not in the interest of the consolidated banking organization to increase bank dividend flows beyond parent company capital-servicing cash flow needs because the resultant decline in bank capital would increase funding costs of the bank. Research at the Federal Reserve indicates that, over the past quarter of a century, for the largest banks the cost of uninsured bank funds has tended to rise as a bank's capital ratio fell and vice-versa. This is just what one should expect: As the risk-absorbing equity cushion falls, the risk for uninsured creditors rises. The flow of dividends from the bank to the parent holding company reduces bank capital. That reduction, in turn, reduces the risk buffer for uninsured creditors, increasing the funding cost of the bank on all the uninsured liabilities by more--the data show--than the small subsidy transference of funding the additional equity investment in the affiliate. Thus, were a bank holding company to finance its nonbank affiliates from bank dividends--that is, to directly pass on the bank's subsidy to the holding company's affiliates-- the profitability of the consolidated organization would decline. If there were no net costs to the bank from upstreaming dividends to its parent for affiliate funding, it would be the prevalent practice today. In short, the subsidy appears to have been effectively bottled up in the bank. The Federal Reserve Board believes that this genie would be irreversibly let out of the bottle, however, should the Congress authorize wider financial activities in operating subs. Subsidized equity investments by banks can be made in their own subsidiaries without increasing funding costs on all of the bank's uninsured liabilities because the consolidated capital of the bank would not change in the process. But since the activities authorized to banks' subsidiaries cannot differ from those available to the bank itself, there is no additional profit to the overall banking organization in shifting bank powers to a subsidiary. But H.R. 10 would permit activities not now permitted in a bank. Those activities, when performed in bank subsidiaries and financed with bank equity capital would increase the potential profit to the overall banking organization. It would also inevitably induce the gravitation to subsidiaries of banks, not only of the new powers authorized by H.R. 10, but all of those powers currently financed in holding company affiliates at higher costs of capital than those available to the bank. H.R. 10 thus effectively authorizes all holding company powers to be funded in the bank at funding costs significantly lower than the funding costs of its holding company. For the 35 of the 50 largest bank holding companies for which comparisons are available, ratings on debentures are always somewhat higher at the bank than at the holding company parent and, of course, higher ratings translate into lower interest rates. As might be expected, the data show that the value of these differences in bond ratings is higher during periods of market stress, when subsidies are more valuable, because the market is more risk sensitive. But even today, when losses in the financial system are quite low, the cost of debt capital to banks still averages 10 to 12 basis points below that of the parent holding companies. That difference in bond ratings today between banks and bank holding companies, let alone the larger difference between banks and other financial institutions, is a significant part of the 20 to 30 basis point gross margin on A-rated or better investment grade business loans--more than enough significantly to change lending behavior if it were not available. Business loan markets are particularly competitive, and hence there is little leeway for a competitor with higher funding costs to pass on such costs to the borrower. For example, the weakened credit standing of the Japanese banks has engendered a risk premium that these entities have paid--and today would have to pay--to fund their U.S. affiliates; this has required them to sharply reduce their business loan volume in the United States. Japanese bank branches and agencies in the United States have reduced their share of business loans from over 16 percent of the market in 1995 to less than 11 percent today. In short, the subsidy is a critical competitive issue in competitive markets. Allowing the bank to inject federal subsidies into the proposed new activities could distort capital markets and the efficient allocation of both financial and real resources. New affiliations, if allowed through banks, would accord them an unfair competitive advantage over comparable nonbank firms. The holding company structure, on the other hand, fosters a level playing field within the financial services industry, contributing to a more competitive environment. Safety and Soundness. In addition to our concern about the extension of the safety net that would accompany the widening of bank activities through operating subsidiaries, the Federal Reserve Board is also sensitive to the implications of operating subsidiaries for the safety and soundness of the parent bank. Most of the new activities contemplated by H.R. 10 would not be accompanied by unusually high risk, but they could imply more risk. The Board believes these activities add the potential for new profitable opportunities for banking organizations, but it is almost always the case that the more potentially profitable the activity, the riskier it is. Although, to be sure, diversification can reduce that risk, the losses that would accompany riskier activities from time to time would fall on the insured bank's capital if the new activities were authorized in bank subsidiaries. Such losses at holding company affiliates would, of course, fall on the uninsured holding company. This is an important distinction for the deposit insurance funds and potentially the taxpayer. This potential for loss and bank capital depletion is another reason for urging that the new activities be conducted in a holding company affiliate rather than in a banking subsidiary. H.R. 10 is supposed to virtually eliminate this concern. As I earlier noted, the bank's equity investment in the bank subsidiary under H.R. 10 would be deducted from the bank's regulatory capital, with the requirement that the remaining regulatory capital still meet the well-capitalized standard. At the same time, the OCC has asserted that it would order an operating sub immediately to be sold or declared bankrupt and closed before its cumulative losses exceeded the bank's equity investment in the failing sub. Combined with the provision of H.R. 10 adjusting regulatory capital for investment in subs, this provision is intended to cap the effect on the bank of subsidiary losses to the amount of the bank's original investment. Since that amount would have already been deducted from the bank's regulatory capital, the failure of the subsidiary, it is maintained, could not affect the regulatory capital of the bank. The Board is concerned that this regulatory accounting approach, that does not address the actual capital of a bank, could provide a false sense of security. We had extensive experience with attempts to redefine reality by redefining regulatory capital in the thrift industry in the 1980's. This approach was widely viewed as a major mistake whose echoes we are still dealing with today. Regulatory capital at the time soon began to mean nothing to the market, and, as a consequence, Congress in FDICIA ordered the banking agencies to follow Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP) whenever possible. In the current context, there is--as in the 1980's--no reason to believe the new regulatory definitions will change the reality of the market place. Economic, as opposed to regulatory, capital of the bank would not, as I have noted, be changed by this special regulatory capital accounting and such deductions from equity capital would not be reflected under GAAP. It is the economically more relevant GAAP statements to which uninsured creditors of banks look when deciding to deal with a bank, and they will continue to do so after financial modernization. Bank creditors will, in any event, continue to view the investment in the bank subsidiary as part of the capital protecting their position--for the simple reason that it does. If they see the economic and GAAP capital at the bank declining as operating sub losses occur, they will react as any prudential creditor should--regardless of artificial regulatory accounting adjustments or regulatory measures of capital adequacy. Perhaps more to the point, it seems to me particularly relevant to underline that losses in financial markets--large losses--can occur so quickly that regulators would be unable to close the failing operating sub as contemplated by H.R. 10 before the subsidiaries capital ran out. Indeed, losses might even continue to build, producing negative net worth in the subsidiary. At the time of closure of a subsidiary, there is nothing to prevent the total charges for losses against the parent bank's regulatory capital from exceeding the prior deduction required by H.R. 10. Our experience following the stock market crash of 1987--when a subsidiary of a major bank not only lost more than the bank's investment in its sub, but the bank was unable to dispose of the subsidiary for several years--underscores the seriousness of such concerns. H.R. 10 would exclude from permissible bank subsidiaries only insurance underwriting and real estate development. One of the permissible activities is merchant banking, which does not have a long or significant 20th century history in this country. Merchant banking currently means the negotiated private purchase of equity investments by financial institutions, with the objective of selling these positions at the end of some interval, usually measured in years Merchant banking has become so important an element of full service investment banking in this country, so much so that to prohibit bank-related investment banks from participating in these activities would put them at a competitive disadvantage. The Board has consequently supported merchant banking as an activity of a holding company subsidiary, but believes it is potentially the most risky activity that would be authorized by H.R. 10, and would be especially risky if permitted to be conducted in bank subsidiaries. Existing law permits some limited exceptions to the otherwise prohibited outright ownership of equity by banks and their subsidiaries, but these are quite limited both in the aggregate and in the kinds of businesses in which equity can be purchased, as well as in the scale of each investment. True merchant banking, as envisioned by H.R. 10, would place no such limits--either per firm or in total. The potential rewards for such equity investments are substantial, but such potential gains are the mirror image of the potential for substantial loss. In addition, poor equity performance generally occurs during periods of weak nationwide economic performance, the same intervals over which bank loan portfolios are usually under pressure, raising concerns about the compounding of bank problems during such periods. Functional Regulation The holding company structure--especially for the new activities--also has the significant benefit of promoting effective supervision and the functional regulation of different activities. The holding company structure, along with the so-called "Fed-lite" provisions in H.R. 10, focuses on and enhances the functional regulation of securities firms, insurance companies, insured depository institutions and their affiliates by relying on the expertise and supervisory strengths of different functional regulators, reducing the potential burdensome overlap of regulation, and providing for increased coordination and reduced potential for conflict among functional regulators. Executive Branch Prerogatives There is a final point I want to make since it appears to have driven Treasury's recent opposition to financial modernization legislation that has not adopted the universal bank model. It is not necessary to adopt the universal bank model in order to preserve the executive branch's supervisory authority for national banks or federal savings associations; nor is it necessary in order to preserve the share of this nation's banking assets controlled by national banks and federal savings associations. In fact, the share of assets controlled by national banks is predominant and growing, in part the result of the enactment of interstate branching authorities, an initiative the Federal Reserve fully supported. As shown in the tables in the to my statement, national bank assets have increased in each of the last three years while state bank assets have declined over the past two years. As of year-end 1998, 58.5 percent of all banking assets were under the supervision of the Comptroller of the Currency, up from a little over 55 percent at the end of 1996. As the clearly suggests, the largest banks, especially those with large branching systems, tend to be national banks, providing a distinct advantage to national banks in an environment of interstate branching. Furthermore, Congress for sound public policy reasons has purposefully apportioned responsibility for this nation's financial institutions among the elected executive branch and independent regulatory agencies. Action to alter these responsibilities would be contrary to the deliberate steps that Congress has taken to ensure a proper balance in the regulation of this nation's dual banking system. Summing Up The Board is a strong advocate of financial modernization in order both to eliminate the inefficiencies of the current Great Depression regulatory structure and to create a system more in keeping with the technology and markets of the 21st century. We strongly support the thrust of H.R. 10 to accomplish these objectives. Equally as strongly, however, we also believe that the new activities should not be authorized for banks through operating subsidiaries. We believe that the holding company structure is the most appropriate and effective one for limiting transfer of the Federal subsidy to new activities and fostering a level playing field both for financial firms affiliated with banks and independent firms. It will also, in our judgement, foster the protection of the safety and soundness of our insured banking system and the taxpayers, enhance functional regulation, and achieve all of the benefits of financial modernization for the consumer and the financial services industry. Table 1 Net Change in Commercial Bank Assets from De Novos, Mergers, and Charter Conversions Assets ($ Billions) 1995-1998 National Banks 1995 1996 1997 1998 12/31/94- 12/31/1998 Additions From: De Novo Banks 4.5 6.8 7.6 5.3 24.2 Mergers with Other Charter Types 22.0 86.4 119.6 41.3 269.3 Charter Conversions 20.6 52.5 60.4 15.8 149.3 Total Additions 47.1 145.7 187.6 62.4 442.8 Deletions From: Failures 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 Mergers with Other Charter Types 16.2 136.5 8.2 20.6 181.5 Charter Conversions 49.7 6.0 9.2 17.3 82.2 Total Deletions 65.9 142.6 17.4 37.9 263.8 Net Increase in National Bank Assets from De Novos, Mergers, and Charter Conversions (18.8) 3.1 170.2 24.5 179.0 State Banks 1995 1996 1997 1998 12/31/94- 12/31/1998 Additions From: De Novo Banks 11.1 3.5 2.4 2.9 19.9 Mergers with National Banks 16.2 136.5 8.2 20.6 181.5 Charter Conversions 47.9 8.2 14.7 22.0 92.8 Total Additions 75.2 148.2 25.3 45.5 294.2 Deletions From: Failures 0.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.7 Mergers with National Banks 22.0 86.4 119.6 41.3 269.3 Charter Conversions 18.9 52.4 47.0 13.6 131.9 Total Deletions 41.6 138.8 166.6 54.9 401.9 Net Increase in State Bank Assets from De Novos, Mergers, and Charter Conversions 33.6 9.4 (141.3) (9.4) (107.7) Table 1 Net Change in Commercial Bank Assets from De Novos, Mergers, and Charter Conversions Assets ($ Billions) 1995-1998 National Banks 1995 1996 1997 1998 12/31/94- 12/31/1998 Additions From: De Novo Banks 4.5 6.8 7.6 5.3 24.2 Mergers with Other Charter Types 22.0 86.4 119.6 41.3 269.3 Charter Conversions 20.6 52.5 60.4 15.8 149.3 Total Additions 47.1 145.7 187.6 62.4 442.8 Deletions From: Failures 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 Mergers with Other Charter Types 16.2 136.5 8.2 20.6 181.5 Charter Conversions 49.7 6.0 9.2 17.3 82.2 Total Deletions 65.9 142.6 17.4 37.9 263.8 Net Increase in National Bank Assets from De Novos, Mergers, and Charter Conversions (18.8) 3.1 170.2 24.5 179.0 State Banks 1995 1996 1997 1998 12/31/94- 12/31/1998 Additions From: De Novo Banks 11.1 3.5 2.4 2.9 19.9 Mergers with National Banks 16.2 136.5 8.2 20.6 181.5 Charter Conversions 47.9 8.2 14.7 22.0 92.8 Total Additions 75.2 148.2 25.3 45.5 294.2 Deletions From: Failures 0.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.7 Mergers with National Banks 22.0 86.4 119.6 41.3 269.3 Charter Conversions 18.9 52.4 47.0 13.6 131.9 Total Deletions 41.6 138.8 166.6 54.9 401.9 Net Increase in State Bank Assets from De Novos, Mergers, and Charter Conversions 33.6 9.4 (141.3) (9.4) (107.7) Table 2 Percent Distribution Various Indicators of Relative Size By Charter Class of Commercial Bank As of December 31, 1998 Charter Class Indicator National State Member State Nonmember (OCC) (FR) (FDIC) Top 25 By Size Consolidated Assets 71.7 26.9 1.4 Domestic Deposits 80.5 17.1 2.4 Offices in U.S. 88.9 7.4 3.7 Top 50 By Size Consolidated Assets 69.1 29.0 1.9 Domestic Deposits 75.2 21.9 2.9 Offices in U.S. 82.2 13.7 4.1 All Consolidated Assets 58.5 24.1 17.4 Domestic Deposits 57.4 19.5 23.1 Offices in U.S. 57.3 16.6 26.1 Number of Banks Operating Full-service Facilities in: 2 states 53 15 35 3 states 8 8 6 4 states 4 2 1 5 states 3 0 0 More than 5 states 11 1 1 Table 2 Percent Distribution Various Indicators of Relative Size By Charter Class of Commercial Bank As of December 31, 1998 Charter Class Indicator National State Member State Nonmember (OCC) (FR) (FDIC) Top 25 By Size Consolidated Assets 71.7 26.9 1.4 Domestic Deposits 80.5 17.1 2.4 Offices in U.S. 88.9 7.4 3.7 Top 50 By Size Consolidated Assets 69.1 29.0 1.9 Domestic Deposits 75.2 21.9 2.9 Offices in U.S. 82.2 13.7 4.1 All Consolidated Assets 58.5 24.1 17.4 Domestic Deposits 57.4 19.5 23.1 Offices in U.S. 57.3 16.6 26.1 Number of Banks Operating Full-service Facilities in: 2 states 53 15 35 3 states 8 8 6 4 states 4 2 1 5 states 3 0 0 More than 5 states 11 1 1 Footnote Moreover, should creditors of the subsidiary choose to attempt to recover their funds from the bank parent, the removal of the loss charged against the bank's capital could occur only when a court has affirmed both the bankruptcy and the rejection of the claims on the bank made by the subsidiary's creditors. This process could and would take some time, during which, even if the court eventually found for the bank and/or the regulator, further losses by the subsidiary could continue to impinge on the bank's capital. And, again, the point is that the bank would have been at risk during that interval.
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan Currency reserves and debt Before the World Bank Conference on Recent Trends in Reserves Management, Washington, D.C. April 29, 1999 One way to address the issue of the management of foreign exchange reserves is to start with an economic system in which no reserves are required. There are two. The first is the obvious case of a single world currency. The second is a more useful starting point: a fully functioning, fully adhered to, floating rate world. All requirements for foreign exchange in this idealized, I should say, hypothetical, system could be met in real time in the marketplace at whatever exchange rate prevails. No foreign exchange reserves would be needed. If markets are functioning effectively, exchange rates are merely another price to which decisionmakers--both public and private--need respond. Risk-adjusted competitive rates of return on capital in all currencies would converge, and an optimized distribution of goods and services enhancing all nations' standard of living would evolve. Only liquid reserves denominated in domestic currency would be required by public and private market participants. And in the case of a central bank of a fiat currency regime, such reserves can be created without limit. But, clearly, the real world is not perceived to work that way. Even if it did, it is apparent from our post World War I history, that national governments are disinclined to grant currency markets unlimited rein. The distributions of income that arise in unregulated markets have been presumed unacceptable by most modern societies, and they have endeavored, through fiscal policies and regulation, to alter the outcomes. In such environments it has been the rare government that has chosen to leave its international trade and finance to what it deems the whims of the marketplace. Such attitudes very often are associated with a mercantilist view of trade that perceives trade surplus as somehow good, deficits bad. Since in the short run, if not in the long run, trade balances are affected by exchange rates, rates that are allowed to float freely are few and far between. In a crisis, of course, monetary authorities are often overwhelmed, and lose any control of the foreign exchange value of their domestic currency. Most nations, for good or ill, have not been indifferent to the foreign exchange value of their currency. I say most, but not all. Arguably, immediately following the dollar's float in 1973, U.S. authorities did not intervene and left it to others to adjust their currencies to ours. We did not sense a need to hold what we perceived to be weaker currencies in reserve because presumably we could always purchase them in the market, when, and if, the need arose. We held significant reserves in only that medium we judged a "harder" currency, that is gold. It has become a general principle that monetary authorities reserve only those currencies they believe are as strong or stronger than their own. Thus, central banks' reserve balances except in special circumstances hold no weak currencies of which I am aware, other than standard transaction balances that are not viewed as stores of values. We in the United States built up modest reserve balances of DM and yen only when we perceived that the foreign exchange value of the dollar was no longer something to which we could be indifferent, as when, in the late 1970s, our international trade went into chronic deficit, inflation accelerated, and international confidence in the dollar ebbed. The choice of building reserves in a demonstrably harder currency is almost by definition not without costs in real resources. The budget cost of paying higher interest rates for the domestic borrowings employed to purchase lower yielding U.S. dollar assets, for example, is a transfer of real resources to the previous holders of the dollars. The real cost of capital because of risk is higher in a weaker currency country. Countries with weaker currencies apparently hold hard currency reserves because they perceive that the insurance value of those reserves at least equal their cost in real resources. Reserves, like every other economic asset, have value but involve cost. Thus, the choice to build reserves, and in what quantities, is always a difficult cost-benefit tradeoff. In general, the willingness to hold foreign exchange reserves ought to depend largely on the perceived benefits of intervention in the foreign exchange markets. An evaluation along these lines would appear to require a successful model of exchange rate determination, and a clear understanding of the influence of sterilized intervention. Both of the above have proved to be a challenge for the economics profession. The two main policy tools available to monetary authorities to counter undesirable exchange rate movements are sterilized intervention operations in foreign exchange markets and monetary policy operations in domestic money markets. Empirical research into the effectiveness of sterilized intervention in industrial country currencies has found that such operations have at best only small and temporary effects on exchange rates. One explanation for the limited measurable effectiveness of sterilized intervention is that the scale of typical operations has been insufficient to counter the enormous pressures that can be marshaled by market forces. In one sense, this is true by definition. Another is that the assets bought and sold in intervention operations are such close substitutes in the minds of investors that they willingly accept changes in the currency composition of their holdings without compensating changes in asset prices or exchange rates. A more recent strand of research into this topic claims that intervention operations can be effective when they signal future monetary policy operations, which are perceived to be more effective in altering asset prices, including exchange rates. The problem with this view is that it means that sterilized intervention is not an independent tool that can be used to influence exchange rates. It needs a supporting monetary policy stance to be effective. We are left with the conclusion that foreign exchange market-sterilized intervention by itself has only a limited impact on exchange rates. This is underscored by the reported intervention by Japanese authorities of roughly $20 billion against the yen in April of last year that barely budged the dollar/yen exchange rate. Hence, reserve assets do not expand, in a meaningful way, the set of macroeconomic policy tools that is available to policy makers in industrial countries. In addition, there is scant evidence that the rapid development of new financial instruments and products has undermined the liquidity, efficiency, or reliability of the market for major currencies. U.S. monetary authorities have intervened only once in foreign exchange markets since August of 1995. It seems likely that industrial countries' official needs for foreign exchange reserves is more likely to have declined over time, than to have increased. The introduction of the euro is clearly going to significantly alter reserve holdings. As markets for euro-denominated assets develop, the euro should become increasingly attractive as a world reserve currency. The bid-ask spreads on average of, say, the separate currency government bonds of the Euro-11 countries before January 1, were wider than the spreads on average that should eventually emerge for new euro-denominated issues. Such increased liquidity should reduce the cost of holding reserves, though conceivably the credit risk of bonds, not denominated in a currency fully controlled by a domestic central bank, would rise. To some extent the increased attractiveness of the euro should reduce the demand for dollars. But history suggests that this effect is likely to be limited and evolutionary. While the stock of foreign exchange reserves held by industrial countries has increased over time, those increases have not kept pace with the dramatic increases in foreign exchange trading or gross financial flows. Thus, in a relative sense, the effective stock of foreign exchange reserves held by industrial countries has actually declined. In recent years volatility in global capital markets has put increasing pressure on emerging market economies, and this has important implications for financial management in those economies. There have been considerable fluctuations in the willingness of global investors to hold claims on these economies over the last two years. Between 1992 and 1997, yields on a broad range of emerging market debt instruments fell relative to those on comparable debt instruments issued by industrial country governments. But this pattern reversed sharply with the onset of the Asian financial crisis in the second half of 1997, and again following the ruble's devaluation in August of 1998. These changes in foreign investors' willingness to hold claims on emerging market economies had a particularly severe impact on currencies operating under fixed or pegged exchange rate regimes. Accordingly, those countries' foreign exchange reserves, and reserve policy, played an important role in the recent financial crises. In both Thailand and Korea the monetary authorities allowed their foreign exchange reserves, net of forward contracts and other obligations, to fall almost to zero. Once this became obvious to market participants, subsequent downward pressure on the baht and the won intensified substantially. In contrast, a number of countries (Taiwan and Singapore, for example) introduced greater exchange rate flexibility without exhausting their foreign exchange reserves. These countries did not suffer the same violent downdrafts in their foreign exchange markets. In recent years Hong Kong, Taiwan, and China have all accumulated substantial stocks of foreign exchange. While the motives for these buildups were not all economic, they may have helped these economies to weather recent financial turbulence at less cost than other emerging market economies in the region. The Asian crisis has focused attention on the adequacy of information about official reserves. In Thailand and Korea, in particular, limited disclosure of these data by the authorities contributed to misperceptions by market participants of resources available to the authorities to maintain the prevailing exchange rate regime. Moreover, once the crisis broke, inadequate data undermined efforts by the international financial community to resolve the situation. In response, the G-10 central banks initiated an effort to establish standards for disclosure of on- and off-balance-sheet foreign currency activities of the public sector by countries that participate, or aspire to participate, in international capital markets. The focus of this work was the authorities' foreign currency liquidity position, which consists of foreign exchange resources that can be easily mobilized, adjusted for potential drains on those resources. While greater disclosure is not a panacea for international financial crises, adherence to the standards developed in the wake of the 1997 crisis would go a long way toward preventing future stresses and facilitating responses to those that do occur. Some have argued that an equally important issue is a disclosure standard for private participants in international capital markets, especially highly leveraged entities. Such disclosure could be useful, and work on this topic is proceeding. But progress on official disclosure should not be delayed pending the outcome of these efforts. The Asian financial crises have reinforced the basic lesson that emerging market economies should pay particular attention to how they manage their foreign exchange reserves. But managing reserves alone is not enough. In particular, reserves should be managed along with liabilities--and other assets--to minimize the vulnerability of emerging market economies to a variety of shocks. In this context some simple principles can be outlined that are likely to be useful guidelines for policymakers. It may also be useful to consider somewhat more nuanced approaches to this problem. Considerable progress has been made in recent years in developing sophisticated financial instruments. These developments create added complexity that all financial market participants, including policymakers from emerging market economies, must manage. However, they also create opportunities that emerging market economies should seek to exploit. In doing so there are lessons they can learn from advances in risk management strategies developed by major financial institutions. In his remarks at the recent G-33 Seminar in Bonn, Pablo Guidotti, the Deputy Finance Minister of Argentina, proposed a simple guideline for policymakers in emerging market economies that a number of my colleagues at the Federal Reserve believe is worth considering. Guidotti suggested that countries should manage their external assets and liabilities in such a way that they are always able to live without new foreign borrowing for up to one year. That is, usable foreign exchange reserves should exceed scheduled amortizations of foreign currency debts (assuming no rollovers) during the following year. This rule could be readily augmented to meet the additional test that the average maturity of a country's external liabilities should exceed a certain threshold, such as three years. The constraint on the average maturity ensures a degree of private sector "burden sharing" in times of crisis, since in the event of a crisis, the market value of longer maturities would doubtless fall sharply. Short-term foreign creditors, on the other hand, are able to exit without loss when their instruments mature. If the preponderance of a country's liabilities are short term, the entire burden of a crisis would fall on the emerging market economy in the form of a run on reserves. Some emerging countries may argue that they have difficulty selling long-term maturities. If that is indeed the case, their economies are being exposed to too high a risk generally. For too long emerging market economies have managed their external liabilities so as to minimize the current borrowing cost. This short-sighted approach ignores the insurance imbedded in long-term debt, insurance that is often well worth the price. The essential function of an external balance-sheet rule should be to make sure that actions of the government do not contribute to volatility in the foreign exchange market. Consequently it makes sense to apply the rule to all of the government's foreign assets and all sovereign liabilities denominated in, or indexed to, foreign currencies. Forward foreign exchange transactions should be recognized as liabilities, while such things as contingent credit lines, if they are truly available on demand, should be counted as foreign currency assets. In addition, key contingent liabilities should be included. This means that the foreign currency assets and liabilities of financial intermediaries that have access to the safety net--e.g., banks--probably ought to be included in the scope of the analysis. It is important to note that adherence to such a rule is no guarantee that all financial crises can be avoided. If the confidence of domestic residents is undermined, they can generate demands for foreign exchange that would not be captured in this analysis. But controlling the structure of external assets and liabilities could make a significant contribution to stability. The adoption of any rule is not a substitute for appropriate macroeconomic, exchange rate, and financial sector policies. Indeed, the endeavor to substitute such a regime for the more difficult fundamentals of sound policy will surely fail. Countries that choose to follow this simple rule may reduce their vulnerability to financial crises. At a minimum this framework can highlight signs of vulnerability. For example, Korea's short-term debts, including those of Korean banks, were more than three times its foreign exchange reserves in December of 1996. An external balance-sheet rule could generate substantial benefits for the international community as well. If followed, it would likely limit the size of future international rescue packages, since the size of such packages is often related to the size of a country's short-term liabilities less its reserves. In applying any simple rule, it is important to anticipate endeavors to get around it. For example, the IMF has identified more than $30 billion in outstanding emerging market debt instruments with put options. This suggests that maturity calculations ought to eschew notional maturities that would not prevail in times of crisis. In any event, it would probably be desirable to move beyond simple balance-sheet rules and to work towards a standard that is stochastic, i.e., that takes into account the foreseeable risks that countries face. One approach would be to calculate a country's liquidity position under a range of possible outcomes for relevant financial variables (exchange rates, commodity prices, credit spreads, etc.). It might be possible to express a standard in terms of the probabilities of different outcomes. For example, an acceptable debt structure could have an average maturity--averaged over estimated distributions for relevant financial variables--in excess of a certain limit. In addition, countries could be expected to hold sufficient liquid reserves to ensure that they could avoid new borrowing for one year with a certain ex ante probability, such as 95 percent of the time. Such a "liquidity-at-risk" standard could handle a wide range of innovative financial instruments--contingent credit lines with collateral such as the one maintained by Argentina, options on commodity prices, put options on bonds, etc.--in an appropriate manner. Such a standard would encourage countries to manage their exposure to financial risk more effectively. For example, such a standard could force countries to think realistically about the cost of selling put options with their bonds. Of course, this approach will not work if policymakers are committed to the letter, but not the spirit, of the exercise. There is no credible way to fully preclude a counterproductive effort to gain costless benefits with new financial products that convert long-term liabilities to short. Clearly it would not be feasible at present for most emerging market countries to implement a policy regime based on liquidity at risk. It might not even be feasible for most emerging market economies to adhere to a more simple external balance-sheet rule, since many countries will require some time to build up foreign exchange reserves, and to adjust the structure of their external liabilities. It is almost certainly desirable, however, for countries to begin to think about managing their assets and liabilities, or just monitoring their vulnerabilities, in a more sophisticated way. An external balance-sheet rule is probably a good place to start. Over the medium term, it would be desirable for emerging market economies to develop a more sophisticated approach to the problem of managing their liquidity. There is an obvious connection between "value-at-risk" techniques used by large financial institutions to manage their exposure to risk and the liquidity-at-risk approach proposed here. It would be productive were those large financial institutions to play a role in helping countries develop their own capabilities to implement this approach, perhaps with technical assistance from G-7 supervisory authorities and international financial institutions.