For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today unveiled a new design for its web site on the Internet. The new design is constructed to make Federal Reserve information on the Internet easier to navigate through an improved format accompanied by an attractive presentation. New features include: "Breaking News," with direct links to announcements, statements and documents released in the past day or two; "What's New," which lists the items carried under Breaking News as well as information about statistical releases and other items posted over the past two weeks; "Publications Schedule," which shows what is expected to be posted on the web site during the next two months, including speeches, Congressional testimony, Federal Open Market Committee material, and statistical releases; and "Site Map," featuring a complete list of the links found immediately under the main subject categories. Some categories also have been consolidated: The "Monetary Policy" site now contains Federal Open Market Committee information, the Beige Books, and Humphrey-Hawkins reports and testimony. The "Banking" site combines the material listed under Regulation and Supervision and under Supervision Manuals. "Research and Data" contains articles from the Federal Reserve Bulletin along with material listed under Domestic and International Research. The broad range of information available on the Board's web site also includes Board actions, press releases, consumer topics, reports to Congress, and connections to other banking regulators and the Federal Reserve Banks. The web site was inaugurated in March 1996, and now contains more than 13,000 documents. The site averages 80,000 daily requests during the week and 45,000 daily requests on weekends. The Internet address is -- http://www.federalreserve.gov
For immediate release The Basle Committee on Banking Supervision (Basle Committee) recently issued for comment a paper entitled "Credit Risk Modeling: Current Practices and Applications." The paper describes the structure of various credit risk models used by commercial banks worldwide and identifies related supervisory issues pertaining to the use of such models as a basis for regulatory capital standards. Comment is requested by October 1, 1999. The Committee was established by the central bank Governors of the Group of Ten countries in 1975 and operates under the auspices of the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) in Basle, Switzerland. It consists of senior supervisory authorities representing the world's largest banking systems and works to strengthen bank supervisory and regulatory practices worldwide. The is available on the BIS Internet site.
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan The American economy in a world context At the 35th Annual Conference on Bank Structure and Competition of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois May 6, 1999 Any evaluation of the international financial crisis of the past two years would be incomplete without an understanding of the extraordinary strength of the U.S. economy that has acted as a buffer for much of the rest of the world. There can be little doubt that the marked widening in our trade deficit on goods and services has played an important, possibly a critical role in supporting world stability during these trying years. Domestic demand growth in the United States has accounted for about one third of the world total since 1996. Now that there are tentative signs that we may be through the worst of the crisis abroad, an issue to which I shall return shortly, it would be useful to address the benevolent, but bedeviling, question of how the American economy, at least to date, has managed to remain an oasis of prosperity, in sharp contrast to badly sagging economies in the developing world, recession in Japan, and tepid growth in much of Europe. And, can we project how long our economy will be able to provide support to the rest of the world? Forecasts of inflation and of growth in real activity for the United States, including those of the Federal Open Market Committee, have been generally off for several years. Inflation has been chronically overpredicted and real GDP growth underpredicted. An increase in inflation doggedly forecast to follow the ever lower unemployment rate--now the lowest in three decades--has not occurred. In fact, even after accounting for the reduced bias in our price statistics resulting from methodological improvements, some measures of inflation have even continued to ease. Subdued inflation, of course, has resulted, in part, from the sharp fall in oil prices from mid-1997 through early this year. Moreover, there has been a significant weakening in non-oil import prices since 1995, owing largely to a combination of declining world commodity prices and a strengthening dollar in our foreign exchange markets through last summer. The decline in prices of oil and non-oil imports are clearly "one-off" events. Indeed, oil prices have moved up sharply of late. The remaining easing in the inflation rate owes to disinflation in domestic value added excluding oil. The latter, in turn, is more than accounted for by a decline in the rate of increase in unit costs of output, inasmuch as profit margins have increased significantly since 1993. A pickup in the growth of labor productivity--beyond the effects of the business cycle--appears to have been an essential factor behind the slowing in inflation. Growth in labor productivity, which had averaged less than a 1 percent annual rate in the early 1990s, rose to approximately 3 percent in the four quarters ending in the first quarter of 1999. Increased labor productivity growth has directly lowered the growth of unit labor costs. And that reduction in costs, in combination with declining import prices, has also apparently engendered lower price inflation and inflation expectations that, in turn, have curbed both nominal wage growth and unit interest costs. Consolidated unit nonlabor costs, excluding interest, have played little role in the inflation accounting exercise in recent years. Apparently, the effects of falling equipment prices have matched the upside influence of shorter service lives on the average depreciation rate to keep unit capital consumption charges stable. I say that accelerated labor productivity is arguably at the root of declining domestic valued-added price inflation because it can be misleading to identify a single variable as the exogenous force in an essentially interactive process of cause and effect. But in this case, the notion that labor productivity acceleration has been largely, though not wholly, exogenous, appears persuasive. Its unexpected emergence also apparently explains much of the shortfall in forecasting of overall economic growth in recent years. I have hypothesized before this group on several occasions that the synergies that have developed, especially among the microprocessor, the laser, fiber-optics, and satellite technologies, have dramatically raised the potential rates of return, not only on new telecommunications investments, but more broadly on many types of equipment that embody or utilize the newer technologies. The newest innovations, which we label information technologies, have begun to alter the manner in which we do business and create value, often in ways not readily foreseeable even five years ago. I do not say we are in a new era, because I have experienced too many alleged new eras in my lifetime that have come and gone. We are far more likely, instead, to be experiencing a structural shift similar to those that have visited our economy from time to time in the past. These shifts can have profound effects, often overriding conventional economic patterns for a number of years, before those patterns begin to show through again over the longer term. There was far greater justification to view the future with the unbridled optimism of a presumed new era a century ago than today. Technological change was truly awesome around the turn of the century. In a very short number of years the world witnessed an astounding list of new creations: electric power and light, radios, phonographs, telephones, motion pictures, x-rays, and motor vehicles, just to begin the list. As this century comes to an end, the defining characteristic of the current wave of technology is the role of information. Prior to the advent of what has become a veritable avalanche of IT innovations, most of twentieth century business decisionmaking had been hampered by limited information. Owing to the paucity of timely knowledge of customers' needs and of the location of inventories and materials flows throughout complex production systems, businesses required substantial programmed redundancies to function effectively. Doubling up on materials and people was essential as backup to the inevitable misjudgments of the real-time state of play in a company. Judgments were made from information that was hours, days, or even weeks old. Accordingly, production planning required adequate, but costly, inventory safety stocks, and backup teams of people to maintain quality control and for emergency response to the unanticipated and the misjudged. Large remnants of information void, of course, still persist and forecasts of future events on which all business decisions ultimately depend are still inevitably uncertain. But the recent years' remarkable surge in the availability of real-time information has enabled business management to remove large swaths of inventory safety stocks and worker redundancies, and has armed workers with detailed data to fine tune product specifications to most individual customer needs. Moreover, information access in real-time resulting from processes such as, for example, checkout counter bar code scanning and satellite location of trucks, fostered marked reductions in delivery lead times on all sorts of goods, from books to capital equipment. This, in turn, has reduced the relative size of the overall capital structure required to turn out our goods and services, and, as a consequence, has apparently added to growth of multifactor productivity, and thus to labor productivity acceleration. Intermediate production and distribution processes, so essential when information and quality control were poor, are being bypassed and eventually eliminated. The increasing ubiquitousness of Internet web sites is promising to significantly alter the way large parts of our distribution system are managed. The process of innovation goes beyond the factory floor or distribution channels. Design times have fallen dramatically as computer modeling has eliminated the need, for example, of the large staff of architectural specification drafters previously required for building projects. Medical diagnoses are more thorough, accurate, and far faster, with access to heretofore unavailable information. Treatment is accordingly hastened, and hours of procedures eliminated. In addition, the dramatic advances in biotechnology are significantly increasing a broad range of productivity-expanding efforts in areas from agriculture to medicine. The evident acceleration of the process of "creative destruction," which has accompanied these expanding opportunities and which has been reflected in the shifting of capital from failing technologies into those technologies at the cutting edge, has been remarkable. Owing to advancing information capabilities and the resulting emergence of more accurate price signals and less costly price discovery, market participants have been able to detect and to respond to finely calibrated nuances in consumer demand. The process of capital reallocation has been assisted through a significant unbundling of risks made possible by the development of innovative financial products, not previously available. The proliferation of products of all different designs and qualities has opened up the potential for the satisfaction of consumer needs not evident even twenty years ago. The accompanying expansion of wealth has been large, though regrettably the gains are not as widely spread across households as I would like. Thus, in summary, the technological innovation observed in recent years does not appear to be a story of pure economic endogeneity. The aforementioned technologies appear largely sui generis to the post World War II period, indeed to the last twenty years. They were unanticipated, and evolved, for the most part, independent of the ebbs and flows of economic activity. While the amount of capital investment that has carried these technologies into use has been, of course, affected by the costs of capital and labor, and by consumer demand, the rates of return offered by this new equipment have been largely rooted in the relative state of technology. It is the observation that there has been a perceptible quickening in the pace at which technological innovations are applied that argues for the hypothesis that the recent acceleration in labor productivity is not just a cyclical phenomenon or a statistical aberration, but reflects--at least in part--a more deep-seated, still developing, shift in our economic landscape. Indeed it remains a hypothesis, since in economics, unlike in the physical sciences, we can never conduct fully controlled experiments for an overall economy. The evidence, nonetheless, for a technology-driven rise in the prospective rate of return on new capital, and an associated acceleration in labor productivity is compelling, if not conclusive. Starting in 1993, capital investment, especially in high-tech equipment, rose sharply beyond normal cyclical experience, presumably, as always, the result of expected increases in rates of return. Had the profit expectations not been realized, one would have anticipated outlays to have fallen back. Instead, their growth increased through the remainder of the decade. More direct evidence supporting an improved underlying profitability has become increasingly evident in company data. It seems likely that the synergies of advances in laser, fiber optic, satellite, and computer technologies with themselves and with older technologies have enlarged the pool of opportunities to achieve a rate of return above the cost of capital. The bulge in the exploitation of these "excess" potential rates of return has been stimulated by the accelerating decline in the prices of high-tech equipment starting in 1995. The amount of capacity plowed into limited areas of technology led to extra heavy price discounting. The rapid pace of innovation that has fostered shortened product life cycles also has contributed to driving down prices of high-tech equipment. Few business people report any significant perceived diminution of the backlog of these as yet unexploited profitable synergies. In recent years, businesses often have indicated a capability to dip into this backlog for capital investments that can quickly displace labor costs should they be perceived as about to rise. This view is reinforced by securities analysts who presumably are knowledgeable about the companies they follow. This veritable army of technicians has been projecting increasingly higher five-year earnings growth, on average, since early 1995, according to I/B/E/S, a Wall Street research firm that compiles these estimates for the S&P 500. In January 1995, the analysts projected five-year earnings to rise on average by about 11 percent annually. After successive upward revisions, the March 1999 estimate was set at about 13.5 percent (profit weighted), a peak for this expansion. While there are ample data to conclude that these estimates are biased upward, there is scant evidence to suggest the bias has changed. There appears little reason to doubt that analysts' continuous upward revisions reflect what companies are reporting to them about improved cost control, which on a consolidated basis for the economy overall, adds up to accelerating labor productivity. The alternative explanations--more rapid growth in earnings from operations abroad, a rising rate of increase in value-added prices received, or from an economy-wide prospective, ever faster labor force growth--are not credible. Thus, companies are apparently conveying to analysts that, to date, they see no diminution in expectations of productivity acceleration. This does not mean that the analysts are correct, or for that matter the companies, only that what companies are evidently telling the analysts about their productivity and profits are doubtless reflected in the longer-term profit projections. The macroeconomic data to date certainly suggest little evidence of a slowdown in productivity growth. I said the evidence for technology-driven acceleration in productivity is compelling, but not conclusive. Indeed, there are a large number of economists who doubt that the rise in productivity growth is anything more than a cyclical phenomenon or some type of statistical aberration. To be sure, they say, nonfarm productivity growth has risen in recent years, but they note that there have been other periods in our postwar records that exhibited similar patterns of acceleration only to fall back to subnormal growth. Many analysts offer as the explanation of the recent acceleration the slow pace of labor productivity growth earlier this decade. The current surge is judged a mere catch-up. The recent acceleration is admittedly not sufficient proof of an irreversible trend for a variable as statistically volatile as labor productivity. But catch-up or not, the evidence appears to be mounting that, even if productivity does not continue to accelerate, the pickup already observed does seem to explain much of the extraordinary containment of inflation despite the ever-tightening labor markets of recent years. The newer technologies, as I indicated earlier, have facilitated a dramatic foreshortening of the lead times on the delivery of capital equipment over the past decade, presumably allowing businesses to react more expeditiously to an actual or expected rise in nominal compensation costs than, say, they could have in the 1980s. The newer technologies and foreshortened lead times apparently have made capital investment distinctly more profitable, enabling firms to substitute capital for labor and other inputs far more productively than they could have a decade or two ago. Capital, as economists like to say, has deepened significantly since 1995. The surge in investment not only has restrained costs, it has also increased industrial capacity faster than the rise in factory output. The resulting slack in product markets has put greater competitive pressure on businesses to hold down prices, despite taut labor markets. Purchasing managers have been reporting virtually no material shortages for more than three years. Technology is also damping inflation through its effect on international trade, where technological developments and a move to a less constrained world trading order have progressively broken down barriers to cross-border trade. All else equal, the enhanced competition in tradeable goods enables excess capacity previously bottled up in one country to augment worldwide supply and exert restraint on prices in all countries' markets. The resulting price discipline also has constrained nominal wage gains in internationally tradeable goods industries. As workers have attempted to shift to other sectors, gains in nominal wages and increases in prices in nontradeable goods industries may have been held down as well. The process of price containment has doubtless become, to some extent, self-reinforcing. Lower inflation in recent years has altered expectations. Workers no longer believe that large gains in nominal wages are needed to reap respectable increases in real wages. Moreover, incongruously, at the same time that labor markets tightened, workers' fear of job skill obsolescence rose, apparently, as a consequence of the rapid changes in technology that have induced the accelerated churning in the nations' capital stock with which our workforce must interact day by day. Job security has seemingly become more relevant than wage gains as a result. The return of experienced workers for further schooling is remarkable and attests to the surprising depth of worker job insecurity in the face of ever tightening labor markets. Because neither business firms nor their competitors can currently count any longer on a general inflationary tendency to validate decisions to raise their own prices, each company feels compelled to concentrate on efforts to hold down costs. The availability of new technology to each company and its rivals affords both the opportunity and the competitive necessity of taking steps to boost productivity. This contrasts with our experiences through the 1970s and 1980s, when firms apparently found it easier and more profitable to seek relief from rising nominal labor costs through price increases than through cost-reducing capital investments. It is difficult to judge how much of our benign overall price behavior during the past half decade is attributable to these significant shifts in the environment in which firms function. Undoubtedly, other factors have been at work as well, including those temporary oil and import price declines that I mentioned earlier and some more lasting influences that I have not discussed, such as worldwide deregulation and privatization, and the freeing up of resources previously employed to produce military products that was brought about by the end of the cold war. There also may be other contributory forces lurking unseen in the wings that will only become clear in time. Over the longer run, of course, the actions of the central bank determine the degree of overall liquidity and, hence, the rate of inflation. It is, thus, up to us at the Federal Reserve to secure the favorable inflation developments of recent years and remain alert to the emergence of forces that could dissipate them. For, at root, it has been the remarkably quiescent inflation that has provided the favorable financial conditions and stable economic environment in which businesses have been able to function most efficiently. Were that not the case, the innovations of the last decade could not have been implemented and the 1990s would surely have looked far less impressive. In the event, the performance of the American economy over the past seven years has been truly phenomenal. The breadth of technological advance and its application has engendered a major upward revaluation of business assets, both real and intangible. That revaluation has induced a spectacular rise in equity prices that to many has reached well beyond the justifiable. Of most concern is how long this remarkable period of prosperity can be extended. As I have said on previous occasions, there are imbalances in our expansion that, unless redressed, will bring this long run of strong growth and low inflation to a close. Although productivity has accelerated in recent years, the impressive strength of domestic demand, in part driven by sharply rising equity prices, has meant that the substitution of capital for labor has been inadequate to prevent us from steadily depleting the pool of available workers. This worker depletion constitutes a critical upside risk to the inflation outlook because it presumably cannot continue without eventually putting increasing pressure on labor markets and on costs. The number of people willing to work can be usefully defined as the unemployed component of the labor force plus those not actively seeking work, and thus not counted in the labor force, but who nonetheless say they would like a job if they could get one. This pool of potential workers aged sixteen to sixty-four currently numbers about 10 million, or just 5-3/4 percent of the corresponding population. This is the lowest such percentage on record--which begins in 1970--and is 2-1/2 percentage points below its average over that period. The rapid increase in aggregate demand has generated growth of employment in excess of the growth in population, causing the number of potential workers to fall since the mid-1990s at a rate of a bit under one million annually. We cannot judge with precision how far this level can decline without sparking upward pressures on wages and prices. Accelerating productivity may have appeared to break the link between labor market conditions and wage gains in recent years, but it cannot have changed the law of supply and demand. At some point, labor market conditions can become so tight that the rise in nominal wages will start increasingly outpacing the gains in labor productivity, and prices inevitably will then eventually begin to accelerate. Under those circumstances, inflation premiums embodied in long-term interest rates would doubtless rise. The attendant increased risk premiums would boost real interest rates as well, as investors become less certain about future price prospects. Thus, while rates of return on new capital equipment might remain elevated, the real cost of capital could rise enough to suppress capital expenditures and, perhaps of greater relevance to the outlook, the stock market. Our negative personal saving rate indicates that the wealth effect is alive and well. The latter has unquestionably been a key factor in the rise in domestic demand, which despite productivity improvements has exerted increasing pressure on labor markets. Thus, should equity markets retrench, consumer and business investment demands would, doubtless, weaken considerably. A more distant concern, but one that cannot be readily dismissed, is the very condition that has enabled the surge in American household and business demands to help sustain global stability: our rising trade and current account deficits. There is a limit to how long and how far deficits can be sustained, since current account deficits add to net foreign claims on the United States. It is very difficult to judge at what point debt service costs become unduly burdensome and can no longer be sustained. There is no evidence at this point that markets are disinclined to readily finance our foreign net imbalance. But the arithmetic of foreign debt accumulation and compounding interest costs does indicate somewhere in the future that, unless reversed, our growing international imbalances are apt to create significant problems for our economy. Finally, while it is reasonable to conclude that some of the gains in output per hour have been driven by fundamental forces, and are not only a cyclical phenomenon or a statistical aberration, it remains a wholly separate question of whether they can be extended. The rate of growth of productivity cannot increase indefinitely. While there appears to be considerable expectation in the business community, and possibly Wall Street, that the productivity acceleration has not yet peaked, history advises caution. As I have noted previously, history is strewn with projections of technology that have fallen wide of the mark. With the innumerable potential permutations and combinations of various synergies, forecasting technology has been a daunting exercise. There is little reason to believe that we are going to be any better at this in the future than in the past. Hence, despite the remarkable progress witnessed to date, we have to be quite modest about our ability to project the future of technology and its implications for productivity growth and for the broader economy. For, if productivity growth should level out or actually falter because additional technology synergies fail to materialize, or because output per hour has been less tied to technology in the first place, inflationary pressures could reemerge, possibly faster than some currently perceive feasible. For, obviously if productivity growth slows, unit labor costs would rise, first pressuring profit margins, and then prices. Indeed, we cannot rule out such a process if labor productivity growth simply levels out. Our ability to forecast, when a diminishing pool of potential workers begins to raise costs or when productivity trends change, is limited. We do know, however, that if, and when, either materializes, inflation pressures are likely to again surface. To return to my opening question: can we project how long the economy of the United States can act as a buffer to weakness elsewhere? The answer: not easily. History counsels us that sharp changes in direction are rarely, if ever, anticipated. Indeed, were these changes readily apparent, presumably, businesses would adjust to that anticipation and, hence, significantly damp the cyclical tendencies in the economy. The outlook for the American economy is particularly relevant to the realization of a full recovery of East Asia. To be sure, there are definite signs of activity bottoming out in Indonesia and Hong Kong and evidence of some gains in Thailand and Malaysia, with the most progress reported in Korea. Japan, whose economy is considerably larger than the rest of East Asia combined, excluding China, is still bedeviled by its inability to restore a vibrant banking system, though they seem to be making some progress. But the emergence of East Asia out of its severe crisis, though real, remains fragile. The very improvements now under way could be threatening the resolve of a number of countries to adhere to the disciplined plans that have been instrumental in their recovery to date. Brazil has managed to stem a prospective implosion that followed in the wake of its currency crisis. But there, as well as some other parts of Latin America that seem to have dodged the bullet of a Brazilian-induced contagion, the potential for a letdown in their policy discipline that has served them well, also is a concern. But, in general, discipline is likely to hold, because the lessons of 1997 and 1998 are too recent and vivid to be soon forgotten. Hence, with a little backing and filling, the emerging nation crises of the last two years are likely to gradually dissipate and these countries should move onto a significant recovery path. The overhang of debt and difficult unresolved structural problems, however, are likely to keep a vigorous recovery at bay. But, in the end, their outlook will be influenced importantly by developments in Japan, Europe, and especially the United States. In Europe, gains in real GDP have remained modest, though inflation appears nonexistent. Arguably, the rapidity of the introduction of cutting-edge technologies has not seemed to be as evident in Europe as in the United States. Though somewhat puzzling, this is surely temporary, unless the thrust of innovation in the United States comes to an unexpected halt, or existing rigidities in European markets unexpectedly persist in the face of growing international competition. Europe, as a consequence, is likely to remain a positive contributor to world economic stability in the years ahead. Let me conclude with an observation I have made before: We policymakers have been engaged in a lot of on-the-job training in recent years. The remarkable American economy, whose roots are still not conclusively known, and the Asian crises that caught us by surprise, among other humbling experiences, have made policymakers particularly sensitive to how fast the world can shift beneath our feet. We need to be alert to the dramatic changes that are continuously confronting us, but recognize that neither the fundamental laws of economics, nor human nature, on which they are based, has changed, or is likely to change. This will be an especially important notion to keep in mind as we continue to grapple with the rapidly changing global economic environment and its regulatory structure, which this symposium has been convened to address.
Testimony of Patrick M. Parkinson Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics Hedge funds, leverage, and the lessons of Long-Term Capital Management Before the Committee on Banking and Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives May 6, 1999 I am pleased to appear before this Committee to discuss the President's Working Group on Financial Markets' Report on Hedge Funds, Leverage, and the Lessons of Long-Term Capital Management. Under Secretary Gensler has made a comprehensive presentation of the report's conclusions and recommendations. Chairman Greenspan participated actively in the Working Group's discussions and supports the contents of the report. My remarks this morning will be limited to highlighting a few key conclusions and recommendations. Leverage and Market Discipline As the title of its report indicates, the Working Group has concluded that the central public policy issue raised by the Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM) episode is excessive leverage. Leverage plays a positive role in our financial system, resulting in greater market liquidity, lower credit costs, and a more efficient allocation of resources in our economy. But leverage poses risks to firms and their creditors, and the LTCM episode demonstrated that a single firm could become both so large and so highly leveraged that failure of its business strategies could pose risks to the financial system as well. While LTCM is a hedge fund, excessive leverage is neither characteristic of, nor necessarily limited to, hedge funds. Available data indicate that no other hedge fund was or is as large as LTCM and no other large hedge fund was or is so highly leveraged. Indeed, a large majority of hedge funds are not significantly leveraged, having balance-sheet leverage ratios of less than 2-to-1. Many financial institutions, including some banks and securities firms, are far larger than LTCM and are significantly leveraged. Whether any of these larger financial institutions was or is as highly leveraged as LTCM cannot be established definitively. Leverage is best defined as the ratio of economic risk relative to capital, but defined this way, it is very difficult to measure. The fact that no other large U.S. financial institution saw its capital significantly impaired indicates that none was so vulnerable as LTCM to the extraordinary market conditions that emerged last August. In our market-based economy, the discipline provided by creditors and counterparties is the primary mechanism that regulates firms' leverage. If a firm seeks to achieve greater leverage, its creditors and counterparties will ordinarily respond by increasing the cost or reducing the availability of credit to the firm. The rising cost or reduced availability of funds provides a powerful economic incentive for firms to restrain their risk-taking. In our system, government oversight of leverage is the exception, not the rule. Even where government oversight has been deemed appropriate, as is the case of banks and broker-dealers, it is intended to supplement and reinforce market discipline, not to replace it. However, in the case of LTCM, market discipline seems largely to have broken down. LTCM received very generous credit terms, even though it took an exceptional degree of risk. Furthermore, this breakdown in market discipline reflected weaknesses in risk management practices by LTCM's counterparties that were also evident, albeit to a lesser degree, in their dealings with other highly leveraged firms. If market discipline is to be effective, counterparties of a firm must obtain sufficient information to make reliable assessments of its risk profile, both at the inception of the credit relationship and throughout its duration. Furthermore, they must have in place mechanisms that place limits on the credit risk exposures that become more stringent as the firm's riskiness increases and its creditworthiness declines. In the case of LTCM, however, few, if any, of its counterparties really seem to have understood its risk profile, especially its very large positions in certain illiquid markets. And, many of its counterparties did not effectively limit their risk exposures to LTCM. In part, they simply did not anticipate the extraordinary market conditions last August. But a combination of the aggressive pursuit of earnings in a highly competitive environment and excessive confidence in LTCM's management appears to have led some counterparties to suspend or ignore fundamental risk management principles. The Working Group's recommendations are intended to make market discipline more effective by: (1) improving risk management practices; and (2) increasing the availability of information on the risk profiles of hedge funds and their creditors. The Working Group has not recommended steps, such as direct government regulation of hedge funds, that would risk significantly weakening market discipline by creating or exacerbating moral hazard. Enhancing Risk Management Primary responsibility for addressing the weaknesses in risk management practices that were evident in the LTCM episode rests with the private financial institutions--a relatively small number of U.S. and foreign banks and broker-dealers, most of which were LTCM's counterparties--whose credit and clearing services are critical to the establishment of leveraged trading positions. Addressing the weaknesses is in their self-interest, as their experience with LTCM demonstrated. And, as the world leaders in risk management, these firms have the capabilities as well as the incentives to address the weaknesses. Nonetheless, prudential supervisors and regulators have a responsibility to help to ensure that the processes that banks and securities firms utilize to manage risk are commensurate with the size and complexity of their portfolios and responsive to changes in financial market conditions. Since the LTCM episode, both private financial institutions and prudential supervisors and regulators have taken steps to strengthen risk management practices. Banks and securities firms have demanded more information and tightened their credit terms, especially vis-a-vis highly leveraged institutions. Supervisors and regulators have sought to lock in this progress by issuing guidance on sound practices. As banking supervisors testified in March before two of this Committee's Subcommittees, the Basle Committee on Banking Supervision, the Federal Reserve, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency all have issued such guidance recently. The International Organization of Securities Commissions is well along in developing appropriate guidance for securities firms. That said, further improvements in risk management practices can and should be made. And, as was demonstrated so clearly by the Group of Thirty's 1993 work on risk management, shared private sector initiatives can be extremely effective in fostering progress. One such initiative has already been completed. The International Swaps and Derivatives Association has issued a review of collateral management practices that draws lessons from collateral managers' experiences during the LTCM episode and other recent periods of market volatility. The practitioners found that collateralization proved to be a highly successful tool for mitigating credit risk during such periods. However, echoing concerns expressed by bank supervisors, they warned that collateralization should be regarded as a complement to, not a replacement for, other credit risk safeguards. In particular, they emphasized that it does not obviate careful credit analysis of the counterparty. The review set out recommendations for improving collateral management practices and an action plan for facilitating their implementation. A broader and more ambitious initiative also is well under way. In January, twelve major internationally active banks and securities firms formed the Counterparty Risk Management Policy Group. As the co-chairmen of the Group testified in March before this Committee's Capital Markets Subcommittee, the objective is to develop flexible standards for strengthened risk management practices in providing credit-based services to major counterparties, including, but not limited to, hedge funds. The Group has established three working parties to address issues relating to risk management, reporting, and risk reduction through cooperative initiatives. The Group hopes to complete its work and publish its findings in mid-June. Such private-sector initiatives can fulfill their considerable promise only if their words are translated into actions. Here again, the private market participants should have primary responsibility. But supervisors and regulators undoubtedly will study these reports carefully and, where appropriate, incorporate their findings in supervisory guidance, as they did with the findings of the Group of Thirty's earlier report. Improving Information on Risk Profiles Improving the quality of information on the risk profiles of hedge funds and certain other highly leveraged institutions is particularly challenging because the liquidity of markets permits them to alter their risk profiles significantly within days or even hours. In this instance, too, the Working Group's recommendations call for actions by both the private sector and public authorities. One of the most difficult and important issues to be addressed by the Counterparty Risk Management Policy Group involves the exchange of information between creditors and counterparties. The challenge is to develop meaningful measures of risk that could be exchanged frequently without revealing proprietary information on strategies or positions. The revelation of proprietary information not only would jeopardize market participants' profits but could also significantly impair market liquidity and widen liquidity premiums for the assets traded. The need for timely information on rapidly changing risk profiles means that counterparties cannot expect to rely on public disclosure mechanisms to meet their requirements. Nonetheless, new public disclosure requirements for both hedge funds and public companies could also contribute to the goal of strengthening market discipline. With respect to hedge funds, the Working Group has recommended that more frequent and more meaningful information be made public. Some hedge funds already are required to report certain financial information to the Commodity Futures Trading Commission. However, the information is only reported annually, does not include comprehensive and meaningful measures of risk, and cannot be made available to the public. Quarterly release to the public of enhanced information on a broader group of hedge funds (not limited to those that trade futures) would help inform public opinion about the role of hedge funds in our financial system. Equally important, by making clear that public disclosure is the sole objective of any reporting requirements, any false impression that the regulatory agency operating the reporting system is conducting prudential oversight of hedge funds would be discouraged. Such a false impression can be dangerous because it weakens private market discipline without any hope that government oversight is making up for what is lost. In the case of public companies, including financial institutions, the Working Group recommends that they publicly disclose additional information about their material financial exposures to significantly leveraged institutions. The information to be disclosed would be total exposures (aggregating across all relevant transactions), disaggregated by sector (for example, commercial banks, securities firms, hedge funds, and so on). The goal is to enhance market discipline on creditors of significantly leveraged institutions, which, in turn, would enhance creditor discipline on the leveraged institutions themselves. The precise nature of any new disclosure requirements will be determined by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), taking into account public comments through the normal rule-making process. Both fellow regulators and market participants will need to support and assist the SEC in developing requirements that are both meaningful and cost-effective. Summary To sum up, then, the Working Group has concluded that the central public policy issue raised by the LTCM episode is how to constrain leverage more effectively. In our market-based economy, we have always relied on market discipline as the primary mechanism for constraining leverage. Although market discipline seems to have largely broken down in the case of LTCM, the Working Group believes that the best approach to addressing concerns about excessive leverage is to make market discipline more effective. Primary responsibility for increasing the effectiveness of market discipline necessarily rests with market participants. Nonetheless, prudential supervisors and regulators of the banks and broker-dealers that are critical sources of credit to leveraged institutions should seek to ensure the necessary improvements in risk management practices are implemented. The Working Group believes that further progress in this area can and should be made and, through its constituent agencies, will be monitoring the credit risk management policies of large commercial banks and securities firms and assessing their effectiveness.
For immediate release Chairman Alan Greenspan of the Federal Reserve Board today issued the following statement: I am saddened by the resignation of my friend Bob Rubin. He has been one of the most effective Secretaries of the Treasury in this nation's history. He will be missed, especially by those of us at the Federal Reserve who have been privileged to work with him over these last four and a half years. Fortunately, the President has chosen Larry Summers to succeed him. He is a person of extraordinary talent and judgment, who will continue the important work Bob Rubin initiated. I, and my colleagues, look forward to working with our 71st Secretary of the Treasury.
Remarks by Vice Chair Alice M. Rivlin On sustaining U.S. economic growth Before the "Minnesota Meeting" group, Minneapolis, Minnesota May 13, 1999 Everyone seems to be talking about the spectacular performance of the U.S. economy these days and wondering how long it can stay so good. Will our economy go on performing so splendidly into the next millennium or will the good times come to an end sometime soon? Indeed, the economic journalists' most frequent question these days is some variant of: "How long will it last?" "Is the good news temporary or permanent?" I get this question all the time, as do all members of the Federal Open Market Committee. Hope springs eternal that we may be privy to some secret economic clues available only to readers of entrails inside the temple. Unfortunately, of course, we process the same economic information available to everyone else and face the same uncertainties. I don't know the answer to how long the good times will roll, and I don't know any responsible person who claims to know. Indeed, I think it's a silly question. So I'd like to formulate a more important query, one that I think has more operational significance. The operational question is this: Given what we know--or think we know--about why the economy might be performing so extraordinarily effectively, what can we all do that will likely help to keep the good news flowing? Answering this question will require: (1) sorting out the list of factors that appear to be contributing to the good performance into those we may be able to control or influence and those we can't; (2) doing everything we can to influence the controllable factors so that we maximize the chances that the good performance continues. By "we" I don't just mean the Federal Reserve, although the Fed has a role to play. I mean everyone in this room and people like you in all parts of the country. We all make economic policy decisions at the household, business, community or governmental level, directly and through our actions, and influence as consumers, investors, producers and voters. Sustaining the high performance of the economy depends much more on what people in Minnesota do--along with those in Maine and Louisiana and Oregon--than it does on monetary policy. What do we mean when we say the economy is performing well? The statistics usually cited are the growth rate of gross national product, the unemployment rate and the rate of inflation (for which there exist several different measures). All of these statistics have been coming up roses for some time--simultaneously. The GDP (in real terms, after inflation) has been growing continuously for eight years and this long expansion, instead of petering out, has accelerated in the last couple of years. Real GDP grew about 4.5 percent in the first quarter of this year and has grown about 4 percent a year for the last two years, despite the negative impact of the world financial crisis that began in Asia in early 1997. Millions of new jobs have been created in the last few years; and unemployment, now at 4.3 percent, has been at or below 5 percent for over two years. Not long ago, most economists thought growth this rapid and unemployment this low would inevitably produce inflation. However, inflation has remained remarkably subdued, and, indeed has continued to decline over the last several years. All of this means rising standards of living and greater economic security for most Americans. Moreover, the strength of the economy has been spread broadly across all regions of the country. A few areas with deep-seated economic problems, such as Northern Minnesota, still lag, and parts of agriculture are suffering severely from the downward pressure of weak world demand on commodity prices, but growth in other sectors has taken up much of the slack. Low inflation has reduced expectations of inflation, lowered long-term interest rates, encouraged investment and housing and made planning ahead easier for everyone. Moreover, in the last couple of years, one of the discouraging aspects of this long expansion finally seems to be reversing. Through 1996, the benefits of rising prosperity were flowing to those with skill and education, people already doing relatively well. Those at the low end of the skill and income ladder were falling further behind. Recently, however, very tight labor markets have meant that even unskilled and less educated workers have enjoyed higher real earnings, poverty rates have begun to decline, and even the bottom 20 percent of households have had a significant increase in their standard of living for a change. The high performance of the economy does not just mean more material possessions for most people, although it certainly does mean that. It also means more enjoyment of and support for the creative side of life--art, music, theatre, dance--and more public resources for improving streets, parks and schools, cleaning up pollution and preserving natural beauty. The City of Chicago, for example, is putting $2 billion into renovating its crumbling schools. Perhaps most important, strong growth and tight labor markets have opened opportunities for workers at all levels--opportunities to move up, to get better jobs, to get off welfare, to go back to school with less fear of being unable to find jobs on completion. And it isn't just the United States that benefits from our prosperity--indeed, the vibrant American economy is contributing mightily to the revival of growth in what would otherwise be a weak global economy. Asia is only beginning the process of recovery from the deep recession that followed the financial crisis of 1997, and the hoped-for engine of Asian recovery--the huge Japanese economy--remains stalled. Much of Latin America is in recession as a result of the Brazilian financial crisis and low commodity prices; Russia is struggling and exporting its troubles to its trading partners; even Western Europe, affected by all of the above, is growing far more slowly than we are. When Americans are prosperous, we spend an increasing portion of our rising incomes on imports. Without the income generated by exporting to us, many other countries would be in much worse shape than they actually are. In the long run, the rapid accumulation of obligations to foreigners, which pays for our excess of imports over exports, cannot be sustained. In the meantime, however, we are financing some of our boom-times by borrowing the savings of foreigners, and they are benefiting by exporting to us. A slowdown in the U.S. economy would reduce our trade and current account deficits, but make it harder for the rest of the world to recover. The bottom line is, billions of people, not just us, benefit from the high performance of the U.S. economy, so what can we do to keep it functioning so well? The key conundrum is how we have managed to have such strong growth and associated tight labor markets, with subdued, even declining, inflation. Some of the credit clearly goes to global forces that Americans don't control and which can't be counted on to continue pushing in the same direction forever. The world financial crisis has weakened demand for internationally traded goods, especially commodities, including agricultural products, metals, and oil (although the oil price has come back up recently as producing countries cut supply). In the face of weak demand, world prices of just about everything tradable are low and competition is fierce. At the same time, the U.S. dollar has been strong, especially in relation to currencies of emerging market countries. In part, the strength of the dollar reflects the fact that our economy has been performing so well and has offered international investors profitable opportunities along with a safe haven from political and financial turmoil. The strong dollar has made imports cheap and has helped keep inflation low-to the benefit of U.S. consumers and the distress of some U.S. producers. We can't count on low world commodity prices or a strong dollar continuing far into the future, and both have their downsides for us and for others. Some features of the global economy, however, seem likely to endure. The events of the last two years come on top of a huge expansion of global trade, competition and productive capacity--all of which have given American businesses less control over prices in the face of rising costs and benefited American consumers through low prices. Moreover, although we often think of "global competition" as being associated with internationally traded goods, many of the same forces that have made the global marketplace increasingly competitive--especially faster, cheaper transportation and the revolutionary changes in communications and information management--also operate to make domestic markets broader and more competitive. As buying, selling, and comparing prices at a distance has become easier, producers of all kinds of goods and services have found themselves in a more competitive environment with less independent pricing power than they used to have. The increasing competitiveness of the U.S. economy--and that of the rest of the world--seems likely to continue to reduce inflationary tendencies in the future. Further deregulation would foster this competitiveness, as would further lowering of trade barriers. Conversely, reregulation or a relapse into protectionism would tend to negate the procompetitive and anti-inflationary trend. Fierce national and international competition has its cost in uncertainty, disruption of lives and settled patterns. It demands flexibility and adaptability of businesses, workers and communities. It requires a willingness of workers to learn new skills, to take chances, to move to new jobs and new places. It requires nimbleness, flexibility and risk taking on the part of business. It requires communities to be adaptable, to make efforts (not all of which will be successful) to diversify their economic bases and to attract new jobs and residents when existing ones move on. It requires government to be imaginative and creative (words we don't always associate with government) in designing transition assistance for workers and communities that will provide incentives to change and adapt, rather than incentives to remain stuck in the status quo. Strong growth and tight labor markets reduce the likely cost of taking chances for workers, businesses and communities. But change is hard and not everyone is willing or able to pay the price. One of the determinants of how long the U.S. economy can continue to perform at a high level with low inflation is how well we all learn to adapt to the changes that go with the increased competitiveness of the national and international marketplace that is helping to keep our economy growing and inflation low. An important part of the answer to why the U.S. economy has been able to grow so strongly without inflation accelerating has been the recent resurgence in productivity growth. Productivity grew strongly from the end of World War II into the early 1970s, accounting for the rapid increase in American's real incomes over that period. Then, around the time of the first oil shock in the early 1970s, productivity growth slowed drastically both here and in other industrial countries, remaining weak in the U.S. through the 1980s and first half of the 1990s. Average growth in output per hour in non-farm business was only a little over 1 percent between 1973 and 1995. In the last three years, however, productivity growth has accelerated, reaching an astonishing 4 percent growth in the last two quarters. The growth in productivity has enabled business to pay higher wages without raising prices significantly or eroding profits severely. Is the increase in productivity a temporary cyclical response to strong growth or does it presage an upward shift in the productivity growth trend that will make it easier going forward to continue strong growth, rising real incomes and low inflation? That's another one of those silly questions to which no one can honestly claim to know the answer. Hypotheses abound about why productivity growth might have accelerated in the mid 1990s. Technology clearly has something to do with it. Although the telecommunications and information management revolution did not start in the 1990s, it may have been just at the right point by then to offer firms that are facing strong demand and tight labor markets a way to increase their efficiency. In the past, when unemployment remained low for an extended period, economists expected productivity to suffer because firms were forced to hire less skilled workers with less experience--workers whose productivity was likely to be low. However, recent experience suggests--but certainly does not yet prove--that two factors may have combined to change the expected impact of tight labor markets on productivity. One factor is the availability of new technology, especially computers and telecommunications technology. The other factor is the revolution in management attitudes and practices that has occurred since the 1980s. A whole generation of managers has been trained to think continuously about productivity and quality management. Buzzwords like reengineering and restructuring have not only gotten into the vocabulary of managers, but they have also infiltrated their thought processes and affected their behavior. The response of many firms to shortages of skilled workers and to foreign competition has apparently been to reorganize what they were doing and how they were doing it, substituting efficient new equipment for employees, training workers to use new equipment and techniques, and outsourcing to reduce costs. All of these have combined to increase productivity. If this hypothesis is right--or even partly right--then there are actions that many different kinds of economic actors can take to help keep a good thing going. Workers and potential workers can acquire more skills and more education at all levels. They can take the risk of moving to new and better jobs or starting new businesses. Companies can keep their focus on cutting costs and increasing productivity; they can foster research and innovation; they can offer training and employee incentives to acquire more education and skills. Colleges and universities, community colleges and technical institutes can offer courses at times and in places convenient for workers, for "non-traditional" students as well as traditional ones. They can put less emphasis on standard degrees and more on courses designed to help students acquire not just job skills, but the broader education that helps them to become more adaptable and to acquire the intellectual self confidence that helps them deal with change. Communities, large and small, can make efforts to diversity their economic bases, upgrade and modernize their school systems, and welcome new kinds of workers and companies. Governments can support the basic research from which applications and innovations flow, and offer incentives to education and training and financial aid for students. Financial institutions can offer attractive convenient ways for individuals to save and invest. They can take chances on new ideas, new clienteles, and innovative companies--subject to sound risk management, of course. All levels of government can manage their finances prudently, provide public services efficiently, build up surpluses and rainy day funds and pay down debt. This kind of behavior will result in government adding to the national saving rate and enhancing the chances of future growth, rather than subtracting from national saving by running public deficits. It is especially important to use the current and projected federal budget surplus to reduce the federal debt. The President's budget and social security proposal would have this effect. Finally, the Federal Reserve can continue trying, as we have been doing, to balance the risk of allowing the economy to grow too fast for its own long-run good and begin a growth-threatening acceleration of inflation against the other risk that the economy will slowdown too much in the near term and lose the benefits of healthy labor markets and sustainable growth. In short No one knows how long the good news will last. But there is a whole long list of actions that can be taken by workers, businesses, communities, governments, educational institutions and others that can, if taken together, increase the chances that this remarkable combination growth and low inflation will continue for a while. If we all do them together, we and our children will have a better chance of living in a world where change is normal but most of the changes are for the better.
Remarks by Vice Chair Alice M. Rivlin On economic literacy At the Economic Literacy Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Minneapolis, Minnesota May 13, 1999 I am delighted to have the opportunity to participate in this symposium on economic literacy. Economic literacy happens to be one of my favorite causes. I'm very pleased, both personally and on behalf of the Federal Reserve Board, to associate myself enthusiastically with the efforts of all the participants in the symposium who have come together from different places to think about how to improve the ability of Americans to understand and deal with basic economic issues. There are two senses in which increasing economic literacy contributes greatly to the functioning of our society. First, a free market economy works well only when the participants--producers, consumers, savers, investors--have the information they need to make intelligent decisions. People need to understand what banks do and how to deal with them; how insurance works and how to think about how much they need; why saving is important and what instruments are available for saving; what investing means, how to do it and what the risks are; and the concept of investing in themselves and how to get a good job. Most important, participants in the economy need to know how to think about the economic choices they face and how to get the information they need to make intelligent decisions. Second, democracy works well only when citizens participate, vote and make their views known to public officials. In this respect, we seem to be living with a paradox. On the one hand, the revolution in communications means that citizens have access to far more information on public issues than ever before. Radio, television and the Internet are inundating all of us with news, analysis, opinions and debate on public issues, large and small. Citizens have more education and more ways of communicating their views to public officials than they had in the past. They can write, call, visit or e-mail their members of Congress or their state or local legislative representative. Indeed, members are flooded with constituent views. Citizen opinions are constantly being sought in polls or on talk radio. On the other hand, public issues, especially economic issues, seem to have gotten more complex and harder to understand. Globalization and rapid advances in technology mean that events in remote parts of the world that we do not know much about can affect economic life in the United States and vice versa. Markets in distant places are intimately interrelated; huge amounts of money move around the world in seconds. The interactions and interrelations of markets and economic institutions in different parts of the globe are complex and unpredictable. But even at home, public issues appear to have gotten more difficult for the average person to understand. It may be partly because we solved a lot of the easy problems, and they left harder ones in their wake. Whether or not the government should provide health insurance for people over 65, for example, was a relatively straightforward problem, although emotions ran high on both sides. How to finance and administer the Medicare program, so that it provides adequate coverage at containable cost is a lot more complex and intellectually demanding issue. Adding to the complexity of the issues is the fact that we now have a whole new class of experts, sometimes known as policy wonks, with charts and equations, statistics and data sets, models and printouts. These people--and I freely admit to being one of them--have higher degrees from our best universities. They are supposed to be helping decision-makers and the public understand issues better and make more intelligent decisions. But they often talk in a jargon-filled specialized language of their own and sometimes seem more concerned with impressing each other on talk shows, at legislative hearings or in public forums, than with enlightening the public. Rather than simplifying the decisions, the chatter of the talking heads often seems to make issues seem even more complex and hard to get a handle on than they really are. The combination of overwhelming quantities of information, the increasing complexity of the issues and the tech-speak of the policy wonks constitutes the fundamental challenge to economic education. Without a basic understanding of how the economy works, what the essential terms and concepts are, the average citizen is likely to feel completely left out of any conversation, whether in the media or around the water cooler, about what is happening in the economy and what to do about it. Feeling left out is frustrating and alienating. If talk is unintelligible--if the listener is without keys or clues or a basic framework into which to fit what is being said--then it is natural for the listener to tune out and to feel powerless, ill-used, manipulated and even feel that something sinister or nefarious must be going on from which he is being intentionally excluded. In order to feel included and empowered, a citizen needs to have a basic understanding of how the world works--in this case how the economic world works--that will provide a basis for asking pertinent questions, obtaining more information and eventually figuring out what the issues are all about and what ought to be done. Economic literacy is akin to having a working knowledge of a foreign language. If you are with a group of foreigners and don't speak their language at all, especially if its sounds and intonations are strange and unfamiliar to your ears, you tune out. You feel excluded, perhaps uneasy. If you have a rudimentary working knowledge of the language, you can at least follow the drift of the conversation, ask a few questions and feel that, even if you are not getting the fine points, you are not totally left out and you have a basis for acquiring more knowledge. That, it seems to me, is what economic literacy means--a rudimentary working knowledge of the concepts and language of economic activity and economic policy. I said the language of economic activity and policy, rather than the language of "economics." I make the distinction because the word "economics" suggests the academic discipline taught in colleges and universities. That discipline, I am afraid, has become so abstract, so obsessed with mathematical modeling of an unreal world where economic actors have perfect knowledge and unambiguous profit-seeking motives, that it frequently does not have obvious relevance to what average citizens need to understand about economic activity and economic policy choices. The teaching of economic literacy does not mean teaching a dumbed-down version of a graduate economic theory course. It's harder than that. It means starting from the complex ambiguous real world that we all find ourselves in (whether as producers, consumers, savers, investors or economic policy makers), figuring out the basic concepts that people need to grasp in order to function and feel empowered in that real world, and then helping them learn a rudimentary working knowledge of that language. I have long been impressed with the ability of quite young children to grasp ideas about buying and selling, saving and investing and even basic ideas of how economic policy works. Economic literacy ought to start in kindergarten and continue right through primary and secondary school. I have also long been impressed by the power of role-playing as a teaching tool. I was delighted when I came to the Fed to discover that we sponsor "the Fed Challenge"--a contest for high schools with which many of you are doubtless familiar. Teams of high school students assume the roles of members of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) and debate current monetary policy. The finalists in the contest get to come to Washington and hold their monetary policy debate around the actual Board room table where the real FOMC gathers eight times a year. I have been a judge for this contest twice and enjoyed it enormously. As I told the students, in all honesty, their discussion was every bit as informed and insightful as the real meetings of the FOMC. If we turned monetary policy over to the winners of the Fed Challenge, the real FOMC could retire and the nation's economy would be no worse off. I am also convinced that if the schools do a good job of teaching economic literacy and the businesses, banks, unions, and governmental institutions lend their support and help further the economic literacy of their employees, members, customers and clients, then not only will the economy work better, but economic policy will be better informed and more effective. Even policymakers need help. Years ago when I first went to Capitol Hill to direct the newly established Congressional Budget Office, a group of freshman members of Congress came to me and said, in a sort of embarrassed whisper and out of earshot of more senior members, that they found themselves mystified by the federal budget and all this talk about deficits and debt, appropriations and authorizations, effective tax rates, multipliers and fiscal policy. Was there any way, they whispered, that I could arrange a course that would help them understand what they needed to vote about. I agreed, and recruited a couple of policy economists that I knew to be excellent teachers. We had several sessions and had quite a good time. A few years later, in the '80s, when mounting federal budget deficits were an urgent problem, the Committee for A Responsible Federal Budget launched "A Exercise in Hard Choices," in which groups of people in various parts of the country gathered around tables and actually tried to balance the federal budget by cutting specific programs and raising particular taxes. The participants learned a lot about how hard the choices really are. The exercise shook up a lot of people who had been saying, "Oh, those idiots in Washington, why don't they just balance the budget by cutting out all that government waste." They discovered that there isn't a line-item in the budget called "wasteful programs." One person's wasteful program is another's high priority. We also did the "exercise in hard choices" with a group of Congressmen and Senators, fairly senior ones, as I remember. They also learned a lot, believe it or not. Members who were not on the budget committees had their own areas of expertise depending on their subcommittee jurisdiction, but they had not looked at the whole budget and tried to make the spending and revenue sides balance. They, too, learned how hard it was. This type of experience has brought home to me, not only the learning value of role playing, but the importance of getting students involved in actually making economic choices and not just hearing people talk about them. And then there is the role of the media, which, it seems to me, could do a lot better in furthering the cause of economic literacy and possibly even build their audience in the process. One problem is the presentation of the statistic of the day on, say, the evening news. The audience learns that the Consumer Price Index went up .4 percent or that housing starts went down, but is given no context into which to fit the information. The weather reporters do better. Their audience can watch storms developing, temperatures rising or falling. There's a map that puts the isolated statistics into contexts and allows the audience to see the patterns develop. The economic reporters have no economic map on which to show the audience how the economic patterns are developing. The assumption is that the audience would tune out. I'm not so sure; pocketbook issues rank right up there with the weather in importance to people. Another problem with TV economics is the persistent view that what people want is controversy between two sides (always two, never three) of an issue, and hence that the best way to enlighten the public is to get two talking heads with extreme opposite views to shout at each other. Maybe people like that style--I don't--but I don't think they learn much that helps them or their elected representatives craft more moderate, constructive solutions that might command a consensus. In sum, my view is: Increasing economic literacy is important to the functioning of the economy itself and in making better informed economic policy in our democracy. We don't do a very good job now--on the average. There are lots of good techniques available to increase economic literacy, especially role-playing about economic choices, public and private. The technology would allow more effective daily economic education, especially on TV and over the Internet. You all are going to have plenty to talk about tomorrow. I'm glad this Summit is taking place. Thank you for asking me to participate.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced that it has issued a revised Consumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages brochure. Regulation Z, which implements the Truth in Lending Act, requires creditors to provide the brochure, or a suitable substitute, to consumers when an application form is provided or before the consumer pays a nonrefundable fee. Creditors may use the earlier version of the brochure until existing supplies are exhausted. Copies of the revised brochure are available from Publications Services, Mail Stop 127, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, DC 20551. The first 100 copies are free. The brochure also is available on the Board's public website at
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today its approval of the application of Banco BBA-Creditanstalt S.A., So Paulo, Brazil, to establish a representative office in New York, New York. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Banco BBA-Creditanstalt S.A. So Paulo, Brazil Order Approving Establishment of a Representative Office Banco BBA-Creditanstalt S.A. ("Bank"), So Paulo, Brazil, a foreign bank within the meaning of the International Banking Act ("IBA"), has applied under section 10(a) of the IBA (12 U.S.C. 3107(a)) to establish a representative office in New York, New York. The Foreign Bank Supervision Enhancement Act of 1991, which amended the IBA, provides that a foreign bank must obtain the approval of the Board to establish a representative office in the United States. Notice of the application, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published in a newspaper of general circulation in New York, New York ( New York Post , February 13, 1998). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the application and all comments received. Bank, with assets of approximately $6.8 billion, was incorporated in Brazil in 1988. Bank engages in a full range of commercial and investment banking activities. In addition, through subsidiaries, Bank provides consumer loans and private banking services. Bank operates five banking offices in Brazil, a branch in Nassau, the Bahamas, and a representative office in Buenos Aires, Argentina. Bank recently received approval from the U.K. Financial Services Authority to establish a representative office in London, England. Bank is a subsidiary of BBA Participacoes S.A. ("Participacoes"), So Paulo, Brazil, a holding company, and Bank Austria Aktiengesellschaft ("Bank Austria"), Vienna, Austria. Participacoes owns a registered broker-dealer, BBA Securities Corp., in New York, New York. Bank Austria operates branches in Greenwich, Connecticut, and New York, New York; representative offices in Atlanta, Georgia, Chicago, Illinois, and San Francisco, California; and owns several U.S. subsidiaries that engage in nonbanking activities in accordance with the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act") and Regulation Y. The proposed representative office would solicit new business, conduct research, and act as a liaison between Bank's head office in Brazil and customers in the United States. In acting on an application to establish a representative office, the IBA and Regulation K provide that the Board shall take into account whether the foreign bank engages directly in the business of banking outside the United States and has furnished to the Board the information it needs to assess the application adequately. The Board also shall take into account whether the foreign bank and any foreign bank parent is subject to comprehensive supervision or regulation on a consolidated basis by its home country supervisor (12 U.S.C. 3107(a)(2); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(d)(2)). In addition, the Board may take into account additional standards set forth in the IBA and Regulation K (12 U.S.C. 3105(d)(3)-(4); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)(2)). The Board previously has stated that the standards that apply to the establishment of a branch or agency need not in every case apply to the establishment of a representative office, because representative offices do not engage in a banking business and cannot take deposits or make loans. With respect to home country supervision of Bank, the Board has considered the following information. Bank is subject to the regulatory and supervisory authority of the Central Bank of Brazil ("Central Bank"), which has primary responsibility for the regulation of financial institutions in Brazil. The Central Bank has no objection to Bank's establishment of the proposed representative office. The Board has previously determined that the Central Bank exercises a significant degree of supervision over the activities of two other Brazilian banks, both of which were approved to establish representative offices in the United States. The Board has determined that Bank is supervised by the Central Bank on substantially the same terms and conditions as the other Brazilian banks. Bank Austria is subject to the supervisory authority of the Austrian Federal Ministry of Finance ("Ministry") and the Austrian National Bank. The Board has previously determined that the Austrian supervisors exercise a significant degree of supervision over the activities of Bank Austria in connection with the establishment of a representative office in Chicago, Illinois. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that factors relating to the supervision of Bank and Bank Austria by their respective home country supervisors are consistent with approval of the proposed representative office. The Board also has determined that for the purposes of the IBA and Regulation K, Bank and Bank Austria engage directly in the business of banking outside of the United States. Bank and its parent companies have provided the Board with information necessary to assess the application through submissions that address the relevant issues. The Board also has taken into account the additional standards set forth in section 7 of the IBA and Regulation K (see 12 U.S.C. 3105(d)(3)-(4); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)(2)). As noted above, the Central Bank has no objection to Bank's establishment of the proposed representative office. The Board also has determined that financial and managerial factors are consistent with approval of the proposed representative office. Bank appears to have the experience and capacity to support the proposed representative office and has established controls and procedures for the proposed representative office to ensure compliance with U.S. law. With respect to access to information about Bank's operations, the Board has reviewed the restrictions on disclosure in relevant jurisdictions in which Bank operates and has communicated with relevant government authorities regarding access to information. Bank and its ultimate parents have committed to make available to the Board such information on the operations of Bank and any of its affiliates that the Board deems necessary to determine and enforce compliance with the IBA, the BHC Act, as amended, and other applicable federal law. To the extent that the provision of such information to the Board may be prohibited by law, Bank and its ultimate parents have committed to cooperate with the Board to obtain any necessary consents or waivers that might be required from third parties for disclosure of such information. In addition, subject to certain conditions, the Central Bank and Ministry may share information on Bank's operations with other supervisors, including the Board. In light of these commitments and other facts of record, and subject to the conditions described below, the Board concludes that Bank has provided adequate assurances of access to any necessary information that the Board may request. On the basis of all the facts of record, and subject to the commitments made by Bank and its ultimate parents, and the terms and conditions set forth in this order, the Board has determined that Bank's application to establish a representative office should be, and hereby is, approved. Should any restrictions on access to information on the operations or activities of Bank and its affiliates subsequently interfere with the Board's ability to obtain information to determine and enforce compliance by Bank or its affiliates with applicable federal statutes, the Board may require termination of any of Bank's direct or indirect activities in the United States. Approval of this application also is specifically conditioned on compliance by Bank and its ultimate parents with the commitments made in connection with this application and with the conditions in this order. The commitments and conditions referred to above are conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its decision, and may be enforced in proceedings under 12 U.S.C. 1818 against Bank and its affiliates. By order of the Board of Governors, effective May 17, 1999. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Footnotes Data are as of December 31, 1998. Bank Austria's Greenwich, Connecticut, branch, and its Atlanta, Georgia, and San Francisco, California, representative offices were previously owned by Creditanstalt-Bankverein ("Creditanstalt"). Effective September 24, 1998, Creditanstalt was merged with and into Bank Austria. Before the merger, Bank Austria received approval from the Board, under section 211.24(a)(3) of Regulation K, to continue to operate these offices pending consideration of its application. In assessing this standard, the Board considers, among other factors, the extent to which the home country supervisors: (i) ensure that the bank has adequate procedures for monitoring and controlling its activities worldwide; (ii) obtain information on the condition of the bank and its subsidiaries and offices through regular examination reports, audit reports, or otherwise; (iii) obtain information on the dealings with and relationship between the bank and its affiliates, both foreign and domestic; (iv) receive from the bank financial reports that are consolidated on a worldwide basis, or comparable information that permits analysis of the bank's financial condition on a worldwide consolidated basis; (v) evaluate prudential standards, such as capital adequacy and risk asset exposure, on a worldwide basis. These are indicia of comprehensive consolidated supervision. No single factor is essential and other elements may inform the Board's determination. See 58 Federal Register 6348, 6351 (1993). See also Citizens National Bank , 79 Federal Reserve Bulletin 805 (1993); Agricultural Bank of China , 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin 617 (1997). See Banco Bandeirantes, S.A. , 81 Federal Reserve Bulletin 742 (1995); Unibanco-Uniao de Bancos Brasileiros, S.A. , 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 1148 (1996). S ee Bank Austria, A.G. , 81 Federal Reserve Bulletin 979 (1995). The Board's authority to approve the establishment of the proposed representative office parallels the authority of the State of New York to license offices of a foreign bank. The Board's approval of this application does not supplant the authority of the State of New York and its agent, the New York State Banking Department ("Department"), to license the proposed representative office of Bank in accordance with any terms or conditions that the Department may impose. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Meyer, Ferguson, and Gramlich.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve released the following statement after today's Federal Open Market Committee meeting: While the FOMC did not take action today to alter the stance of monetary policy, the Committee was concerned about the potential for a buildup of inflationary imbalances that could undermine the favorable performance of the economy and therefore adopted a directive that is tilted toward the possibility of a firming in the stance of monetary policy. Trend increases in costs and core prices have generally remained quite subdued. But domestic financial markets have recovered and foreign economic prospects have improved since the easing of monetary policy last fall. Against the background of already-tight domestic labor markets and ongoing strength in demand in excess of productivity gains, the Committee recognizes the need to be alert to developments over coming months that might indicate that financial conditions may no longer be consistent with containing inflation.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the appointment of Louise L. Roseman as Director of the Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payments Systems. Her appointment is effective on June 13, 1999, shortly before the retirement of Clyde Farnsworth, the current Division Director. The Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems oversees the Federal Reserve Banks' provision of financial services to depository institutions, fiscal agency services to the Treasury and other government agencies, and significant support functions, such as information technology, financial and cost accounting, audit, human resources, and facilities management. The Division is also responsible for the development of policies and regulations to foster the efficiency and integrity of the U.S. payments system, and it works with other central banks and international organizations to improve the payments system more broadly. Ms. Roseman joined the Board's staff in 1985. She was appointed an officer in 1987, and in 1994 was promoted to Associate Director. She holds a B.A. from Georgetown University and an M.B.A. from George Washington University.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the proposal of Deutsche Bank AG, Frankfurt am Main, Federal Republic of Germany, to acquire Bankers Trust Corporation, New York, New York ("BT Corp"), and thereby acquire all of the banking and nonbanking subsidiaries of BT Corp. Attached is the relating to this action.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation National Credit Union Administration Office of the Comptroller of the Currency Office of Thrift Supervision For immediate release The federal banking agencies announced today the execution of an Agreement with TransAlliance, L.P., Bellevue, Washington. The Agreement addresses the Year 2000 readiness of TransAlliance's electronic funds transfer services. A copy of the Agreement is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of a consent Order against B.O.T. Corporation, N.V., Curacao, Netherlands Antilles. B.O.T. Corporation, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order in connection with allegations of violations of the Bank Holding Company Act as a result of B.O.T. Corporation's indirect acquisition of a controlling interest in the Lippo Bank, Los Angeles, California, and in connection with a preliminary determination that B.O.T. Corporation exercises a controlling influence over the management or policies of the bank. The Order requires the divestiture of at least 98 percent of the voting shares of the Lippo Bank. The Order also requires B.O.T. Corporation to pay a civil money penalty of $300,000 and any profit from the sale of the bank. The issuance of the Order by the Board does not relate in any manner to the condition or activities of the Lippo Bank. A copy of the Order is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the proposal of BOK Financial Corporation, Tulsa, Oklahoma, to acquire First Bancshares of Muskogee, Inc., its banking subsidiary, First National Bank and Trust Company of Muskogee, and its nonbanking subsidiary, First Muskogee Insurance Corporation, all of Muskogee, Oklahoma. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. BOK Financial Corporation Tulsa, Oklahoma BOKF Merger Corporation Number Seven Tulsa, Oklahoma Order Approving Acquisition of a Bank Holding Company BOK Financial Corporation ("BOK Financial"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), and BOKF Merger Corporation Number Seven ("Merger Corporation") have requested the Board's approval under section 3 of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. 1842) to acquire First Bancshares of Muskogee, Inc. ("First Bancshares"), and its wholly owned subsidiary, First National Bank and Trust Company of Muskogee ("First National"), both of Muskogee, Oklahoma. BOK Financial and Merger Corporation also have requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. 1843(c)(8)) and section 225.24 of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.24) to acquire First of Muskogee Insurance Corporation, Muskogee, Oklahoma ("First Insurance"), and thereby engage in credit-related insurance agency activities pursuant to section 225.28(b)(11)(i) of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(11)(i)). Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (64 Federal Register 1804 (1999)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the proposal and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in sections 3 and 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. BOK Financial, with total consolidated assets of $6.8 billion, operates banks in Oklahoma, Arkansas, New Mexico, and Texas, and engages through nonbanking subsidiaries in permissible leasing and securities-related activities. BOK Financial is the largest depository institution in Oklahoma, controlling deposits of $3.5 billion, representing approximately 10.5 percent of total deposits in insured depository institutions in the state ("state deposits"). First Bancshares is the 23d largest depository organization in Oklahoma, controlling deposits of $218 million, representing less than 1 percent of state deposits. On consummation of the proposal, BOK Financial would remain the largest banking organization in Oklahoma, controlling deposits of $3.7 billion, representing approximately 11.2 percent of state deposits. Competitive Considerations Section 3 of the BHC Act prohibits the Board from approving a proposal that would result in a monopoly in any relevant banking market. That section also prohibits the Board from approving a proposal that may substantially lessen competition in any relevant banking market, unless the anticompetitive effects of the proposal are clearly outweighed in the public interest by the probable effect of the proposal in meeting the convenience and needs of the community to be served. In order to determine the effect of a particular transaction on competition, it is necessary to designate the area of effective competition between the parties, which the courts have held is decided by reference to the relevant "line of commerce" or product market and a geographic market. The Board and the courts have consistently recognized that the appropriate product market for analyzing the competitive effects of bank mergers and acquisitions is the cluster of products (various kinds of credit) and services (such as checking accounts and trust administration) offered by banking institutions. Consistent with this precedent, and on the basis of the facts of record in this case, the Board concludes that the cluster of banking products and services represents the appropriate line of commerce for analyzing the competitive effects of this proposal. Once the relevant line of commerce or product market has been defined, the appropriate geographic market in which competition for the supply and demand of the line of commerce occurs must be defined. In defining the relevant geographic market, the Board consistently has sought to identify the area in which the cluster of products and services is provided by the competing institutions and in which purchasers of the products and services seek to obtain these products and services. The Supreme Court has indicated that this is the area in which the effect of an acquisition will be direct and immediate. In applying these standards to bank acquisition proposals, the Board and the Court consistently have held that the geographic market for the cluster of services is local in nature. The Muskogee Banking Market BOK and First Financial operate in Muskogee, Oklahoma. In determining the geographic market to be applied in this case, the Board notes that the city of Muskogee is significantly larger than any other community in the surrounding area, and provides substantially more employment opportunities, professional and commercial services, and retail outlets than the surrounding communities. Commuting between the surrounding communities and Muskogee appears to be extensive. Divided four-lane highways connect Muskogee with the towns of Tahlequah, Wagoner, and Checotah, and traffic counts indicate that a substantial majority of the daily trips on these roads are between the four communities. Within a 10-mile radius of Muskogee, approximately 2,400 businesses employ almost 28,000 workers, which exceeds the available workforce of 21,500 in that area. A survey of the 17 largest employers in the Muskogee area, which employ 7,267 workers, found that 30 percent of their workers lived outside Muskogee and the nearby community of Ft. Gibson. In addition, the Oklahoma Department of Commerce divides the state of Oklahoma into 23 labor markets. The department includes Muskogee in the Muskogee-Tahlequah labor market, which comprises all of Muskogee County, all of Cherokee County (including Tahlequah), the eastern half of Wagoner County (including Wagoner), the northern half of McIntosh County (including Checotah), and Adair County. Muskogee also offers a broad range of goods and services that are unavailable in the surrounding communities and that attract residents to Muskogee. Muskogee has a 336-bed hospital staffed by more than 200 physicians, a Veterans Adminstration hospital, 160 businesses in the health services industry, and an enclosed mall that features three major national department store anchors and several other national retail chains. Data from the mall's anchor stores indicate that only 40 percent of their sales are derived from Muskogee residents, and that the majority of the their business is from residents of the surrounding communities. A survey conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City ("Reserve Bank") revealed that 55 percent of respondents in Tahlequah traveled to Muskogee at least once a month, including 13 percent who reported that they traveled to Muskogee at least once a week. In Wagoner, 70 percent of respondents indicated that they traveled to Muskogee at least once a month, including 32 percent who traveled to Muskogee at least once a week. Newspaper circulation statistics also indicate that there is extensive economic interaction between Muskogee and Tahlequah. Approximately 22 percent of Tahlequah households receive the daily Muskogee newspaper, which features stories about events in Tahlequah and advertisements by Tahlequah businesses. In addition, both the daily and the weekly newspaper in Tahlequah regularly carry news stories about events in Muskogee and advertisements by Muskogee businesses. All four radio stations in Muskogee advertise in the Tahlequah newspaper and carry advertisements for Tahlequah businesses. The local telephone book for the "Muskogee-Tahlequah Region" combines listings for businesses in those two communities, Wagoner, Checotah, and other small towns in the area. Discussions by the Reserve Bank with local bankers and business and civic leaders also indicated that businesses in Tahlequah regularly seek financial services in Muskogee, and that the distance between the communities is not a significant impediment. Based on Reserve Bank surveys, it further appears that there is little or no difference in prices for banking products and services among Muskogee and the surrounding communities, including Tahlequah. Based on the foregoing and all other facts of record, the Board concludes that the appropriate banking market for considering the competitive effects of this case is the cluster of banking products and services, and that the appropriate geographic market for considering the competitive effects of this proposal is the area that includes Muskogee County, Cherokee County (including Tahlequah), the eastern half of Wagoner County (including Wagoner), and the town of Checotah in McIntosh County, all in Oklahoma (the "Muskogee banking market"). In the Muskogee banking market, BOK Financial is the third largest depository institution, controlling deposits of $148 million, representing approximately 12.8 percent of all deposits held by depository institutions in the market ("market deposits"). First Bancshares is the second largest depository institution in the market, controlling deposits of $217 million, representing approximately 18.9 percent of market deposits. On consummation of the proposal, BOK Financial would become the largest depository institution in the Muskogee banking market, controlling deposits of $365 million, representing approximately 31.7 percent of market deposits. The concentration of market deposits, as measured by the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index ("HHI"), would not exceed the threshold level set in the Department of Justice Merger Guidelines ("DOJ Guidelines"). In reviewing the likely competitive effects of the proposal in the Muskogee banking market, the Board has considered all the facts of record. Twelve commercial banks, including BOK Financial, and two savings associations would remain in the market after consummation of the proposal, which represents a large number of competitors relative to the size of the market. One competing commercial bank would control more than 20 percent of market deposits, and 5 additional competing commercial banks would each control at least five percent of market deposits. The market also appears attractive for additional entry. From 1990 to 1998, household income increased 33 percent in Muskogee County and 39.1 percent in Cherokee County, compared to an average statewide increase of 19.5 percent. Deposits also increased at a higher percentage than the statewide average Total deposits in insured depository institutions increased 20.2 percent in Muskogee County and 14.7 percent in Cherokee County, compared to an average increase of 14.6 percent statewide. Cherokee County's population increased 14.3 percent from 1990 to 1998, compared to an average statewide increase of 2.4 percent. Thus, the market structure and other characteristics of the Muskogee banking market, including the significant number of depository institutions in the market, the market shares and resources of those institutions, and the potential for entry by additional competitors, reduce the likelihood of successful anticompetitive pricing or collusion in the market. As in other cases, the Board sought comments from the Department of Justice, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ("FDIC"), and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency ("OCC") on the competitive effects of the proposal. Neither the FDIC nor the OCC have objected to the proposal. Based on all the facts of record, and for the reasons discussed above, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposal would not result in a monopoly or have a significantly adverse effect on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in the Muskogee banking market or any other relevant banking market. Financial, Managerial, and Other Considerations The BHC Act also requires the Board to consider the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the companies and banks involved in the proposal, the convenience and needs of the community to be served, and certain supervisory factors. The Board has reviewed these factors in light of all the facts of record, including supervisory reports of examination assessing the financial and managerial resources of the organizations. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of BOK Financial, First Bancshares, and their respective subsidiaries are consistent with approval. Considerations related to the convenience and needs of the community and the other supervisory factors the Board must consider under section 3 of the BHC Act also are consistent with approval. Nonbanking Activities BOK Financial also has filed a notice under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act to acquire First Bancshares' nonbanking subsidiary, First Insurance, and thereby engage in credit-related insurance agency activities. The Board has determined by regulation that providing credit-related insurance is closely related to banking for purposes of the BHC Act. BOK Financial has committed to conduct this nonbanking activity in accordance with the limitations set forth in Regulation Y and the Board's orders and interpretations governing this activity. In order to approve a notice under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act, the Board also must determine that the proposed activities are a proper incident to banking, that is, that the proposal "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public . . . that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices." As part of its evaluation of these factors, the Board considers the financial condition and managerial resources of the notificant and its subsidiaries, including the companies to be acquired, and the effect of the proposed transaction on those resources. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that financial and managerial considerations are consistent with approval of the notice. BOK currently does not provide credit-related insurance and, therefore, the proposed acquisition would not result in a loss of competition in any market. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that the proposal would not result in any significantly adverse competitive effects in any relevant market. In addition, as the Board has previously noted, there are public benefits to be derived from permitting capital markets to operate so that bank holding companies can make potentially profitable investments in nonbanking companies and from permitting banking organizations to allocate their resources in the manner they consider to be most efficient when such investments and actions are consistent, as in this case, with the relevant considerations under the BHC Act. The Board also concludes that the conduct of the proposed nonbanking activity within the framework established under Regulation Y is not likely to result in adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conficts of interests, or unsound banking practices, that would outweigh the public benefits of the proposal, such as increased customer convenience and gains in efficiency. Accordingly, based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the balance of public benefits that the Board must consider under the proper incident to banking standard of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act is favorable and consistent with approval of BOK Financial's notice. Conclusion Based on the foregoing, and in light of all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the applications and notice should be, and hereby are, approved. Approval of the applications and notice is specifically conditioned on compliance by BOK Financial with all the commitments made in connection with the proposal and with the conditions stated or referred to in this order. The Board's determination on nonbanking activity also is subject to all the terms and conditions set forth in sections 225.7 and 225.25(c) (12 C.F.R. 225.7 and 25.25(c)), and to the Board's authority to require such modification or termination of the activities of a bank holding company or any of its subsidiaries as the Board finds necessary to ensure compliance with, and to prevent evasion of, the provisions of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders thereunder. For purposes of this order, the commitments and conditions referred to above are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The acquisition of First National shall not be consummated before the thirtieth calendar day after the effective date of this order, and the proposal may not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Reserve Bank, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective May 24, 1999. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Footnotes Merger Corporation has filed an application to become a bank holding company in connection with the proposed transaction. Merger Corporation and First Bancshares would merge, with Merger Corporation as the survivor. BOK Financial proposes to merge First National into BOK Financial's subsidiary bank, Bank of Oklahoma, National Association ("BOK"), on consummation of the proposal, subject to approval by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency under the Bank Merger Act. All asset, deposit, and ranking data are as of June 30, 1998. In this context, depository institutions include commercial banks, savings banks, and savings associations. 12 U.S.C. 1842(c)(1). See Chemical Banking Corporation , 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 239 (1996) ("Chemical"), and the cases and studies cited therein. The Supreme Court has emphasized that it is the cluster of products and services that, as a matter of trade reality, makes banking a distinct line of commerce. See United States v. Philadelphia National Bank , 374 U.S. 321, 357 (1963) (" Philadelphia National "); accord United States v. Connecticut National Bank , 418 U.S. 656 (1974); Phillipsburg National Bank , 399 U.S. 350 (1969) (" Phillipsburg National "). See, e.g., Sunwest Financial Services, Inc. , 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 463 (1987); Pikeville National Corporation , 71 Federal Reserve Bulletin 240 (1985); Wyoming Bancorporation , 68 Federal Reserve Bulletin 313 (1982), aff'd 729 F.2d 687 (10th Cir. 1984). Philadelphia National , 374 U.S. at 357 (1963). In that case, the Court stated that the "area of effective competition in the known line of commerce must be charted by careful selection of the market area in which the seller operates, and to which the purchaser can practicably turn for supplies." Id . at 359 (emphasis in orginal) (quoting Tampa Electric Co. v. Nashville Coal Co. , 365 U.S. 320, 327 (1961)). See Philadelphia National , 374 U.S. at 357; Phillipsburg National ; First Union Corporation , 84 Federal Reserve Bulletin 489 (1998); Chemical ; St. Joseph Valley Bank , 68 Federal Reserve Bulletin 673 (1982) (" St. Joseph "). In determining the geographic scope of local banking markets, the Board considers a number of factors, including the following: population density; worker commuting patterns (as indicated by census data); shopping patterns; the availability and geographic reach of various modes of advertising; the presence of shopping, employment, health care, and other necessities; the availability of transportation systems and routes; branch banking patterns; deposit and loan activity; and other indicia of economic integration and the transmission of competitive forces among depository institutions that affect the pricing and availability of banking products and services. See Crestar Bank , 81 Federal Reserve Bulletin 200, 201 n.5 (1995); Pennbancorp , 69 Federal Reserve Bulletin 548 (1983); St. Joseph . The population of the Muskogee Ranally Metropolitan Area, which closely approximates the city of Muskogee and immediately adjacent communities, is approximately 50,000. The next largest towns in the area are Tahlequah (population 11,965); Wagoner (population 7,242); and Checotah (population 3,290). For example, more than 10,000 vehicles pass daily between Tahlequah and Muskogee on U.S. Highway 62. East of Tahlequah and west of Muskogee, this highway has two lanes and the traffic count drops to 1,500, according to the Oklahoma Department of Transportation. The statistics are from a survey by the Greater Muskogee Development Corporation. The survey indicated that 13.7 percent of the workforce in Tahlequah was employed in Muskogee County. Data from the 1990 United States census indicate that 23 percent of the workforce in the town of Checotah and 19 percent of the workforce in the town of Wagoner were employed in Muskogee County. In response to a survey conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, the Tahlequah office of the Oklahoma Employment Security Commission reported that it placed 10 percent to 15 percent of its applicants in jobs in Muskogee, and employment services in Muskogee indicated that 10 percent to 20 percent of their applicants were from Tahlequah. Tahlequah residents provided approximately 10 percent of the stores' receipts, and sales to residents of Wagoner and Checotah approximated their percentage of the area population. In addition, more than one-third of the households in Wagoner and three-fourths of the households in Checotah receive the Muskogee daily newspaper. An independent newspaper circulation audit firm has determined that the newspaper market for the Muskogee daily newspaper includes all of Muskogee County, western portions of Cherokee County (including Tahlequah), eastern portions of Wagoner County (including Wagoner), and northeastern portions of McIntosh County (including Checotah). The Tehlequah office of Oklahoma Small Business Development Center indicated that it often refers its small business clients in Tahlequah to banks in Muskogee to obtain financing. Market share data are based on calculations in which the deposits of thrift institutions are included at 50 percent. The Board previously has indicated that thrift institutions have become, or have the potential to become, significant competitors of commercial banks. See Midwest Financial Group , 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 386 (1989); National City Corporation , 70 Federal Reserve Bulletin 743 (1984). Thus, the Board has regularly included thrift institutions in the calculation of market shares on a 50-percent weighted basis. See, e.g., First Hawaiian, Inc. , 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 52 (1991). On consummation of the proposal, the HHI would increase 484 points to 1705. Under the DOJ Guidelines (49 Federal Register 26,823 (June 29, 1984)), a market in which the post-merger HHI is between 1000 and 1800 is considered to be moderately concentrated. The Department of Justice has informed the Board that a bank merger or acquisition generally will not be challenged (in the absence of other factors indicating anticompetitive effects) unless the post-merger HHI is at least 1800 and the merger increases the HHI by more than 200 points. The Department of Justice has stated that the higher than normal HHI thresholds for screening bank mergers for anticompetitive effects implicitly recognize the competitive effects of limited-purpose lenders and other nondepository financial entities. In addition, BOK Financial has contracted, after consummation of the proposal, to divest two offices and $2 million of deposits in Muskogee to an in-market commercial bank. After accounting for this divestiture, the HHI would increase 473 points to 1695. The Department of Justice has advised the Board that the proposal is under review. See 12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(11)(i). 12 U.S.C. 1843(c)(8). See, e.g., Banc One Corporation , 84 Federal Reserve Bulletin 553 (1998); First Union Corporation , 84 Federal Reserve Bulletin 489 (1998). Voting for this action: Vice Chair Rivlin and Governors Kelley, Meyer, Ferguson, Gramlich. Absent and not voting: Chairman Greenspan.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the appointment of Richard C. Stevens as Director of the Division of Information Technology. The Board also announced the appointments of Marianne Emerson as Deputy Director of the Division, and Tillena Clark as Assistant Director. The Division of Information Technology provides automation, telecommunication, and statistical data services to the Board of Governors and was previously known as Information Resources Management. The name has been changed to more accurately reflect the division's responsibilities. Mr. Stevens joined the Board's staff in 1973, was appointed as an Assistant Director in the information services area in 1985, and in July 1998 was promoted to Deputy Director of the Division of Information Resources Management. During his career, Mr. Stevens has managed all areas of information technology and has served on interagency and System technology committees. He holds a B.S. degree in business management from LeMoyne College. Ms. Emerson, who was appointed an Assistant Director in the information services area in 1990, is ending a two-year assignment as technical advisor to the Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation. She holds a B.A. degree in biology from Bryn Mawr College and an M.S. degree in computer science from the University of Maryland; in August 1999 she will receive an M.B.A. degree in finance from the University of Maryland. Ms. Clark joined the Board in 1994 as manager of the Management and Administrative Services unit and is currently serving as manager of the division's Year 2000 Program Office. She holds a B.A. degree in economics from the University of Rochester and an M.A. degree in management and finance from The Catholic University of America. Ms. Clark is a CPA and a member of the American Institute of Public Accountants. Prior to joining the Board, Ms. Clark served as a senior manager in a public accounting firm and held positions where she was responsible for the design and development of information systems.