Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan Mortgage markets and economic activity Before a conference on Mortgage Markets and Economic Activity sponsored by America's Community Bankers, Washington, D.C. November 2, 1999
For immediate release
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced a review of its publication activities. As part of this effort, the Board is seeking public comment on how the Board's publications are individually and collectively meeting their information needs and to offer suggestions for improving or possibly eliminating some publications or adding new ones. Comment is requested by December 17, 1999 . The Board's notice is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today published proposed revisions to the official staff commentary that applies and interprets the requirements of Regulation Z, Truth in Lending. Comment is requested by January 10, 2000 . The proposed revisions address short-term cash advances commonly called "payday loans" and include technical revisions. The Board's notice is attached.
Remarks by Governor Edward M. Gramlich Consumer credit in the 21st century Before the 25th Anniversary Conference of the Credit Research Center, Georgetown University's McDonough School of Business, Arlington, Virginia November 4, 1999 I am pleased to speak to the 25th symposium of the Credit Research Center (CRC). Over the past quarter century the CRC has been responsible for much innovative and relevant policy research on consumer credit topics. Center staff have routinely testified before the Congress and state legislatures regarding the impact of various consumer laws. Your topic for today, Consumer Credit in the 21st Century, continues the tradition of timeliness and relevance. Since most of your agenda involves the details of consumer credit regulation and operations, I thought I might take the opportunity to look at the big picture. The United States has always been a country with a relatively low saving rate, both for the household sector and for the nation as a whole. Concerns about low saving have been amplified lately, what with the previously reported consumer saving rate dropping below zero for several quarters now, the high level of personal bankruptcy filings, and the nation's enormous trade deficits, which suggest a deficiency of national saving. Are these concerns justified? Is the consumption-saving picture a soft spot in the so-called Goldilocks economy of the United States? Indeed, in a deep sense is the United States economy saving enough? To anticipate my bottom line, I do find some grounds for concern, though in the spirit of centralbankspeak, the picture is not entirely clear. One reason why the picture is not entirely clear is that it never can be entirely clear. At a theoretical level, a nation's saving rate helps determine its long run path of output per capita. Up to what is known as the "golden rule of capital accumulation," a nation can raise the level of this path by saving more, in effect raising future consumption levels at the expense of present consumption levels. Even theorists have not solved the question of whether this might be a desirable exchange, since it involves comparing the living standards of present generations with the living standards of future generations. But short of this theoretical puzzle, one can ask more pragmatic questions about national saving. Is it as high as it used to be? Is it high enough for the country to benefit from potential innovations? Are there potential imbalances down the road that could be prevented by higher saving? Consumption and Saving Beginning with the time series perspective, for all of a week now we have had new national income accounts (NIA) data to analyze. The NIA revisions have made at least two important changes in the nation's investment-saving accounts. The revisions at long last treat software expenditures as investment, and also at long last, treat public pension surpluses as personal saving, consistent with the treatment of private pension saving. shows gross domestic investment and gross domestic saving, in nominal terms and scaled by nominal GNP, annually from 1959 to the present. Recessions are indicated by shaded areas. The top panel of the chart shows gross saving and investment, and the middle panel eliminates the statistical discrepancy by focusing just on net foreign investment, the part of the gap that represents the foreign saving used to finance domestic investment. For many years net foreign investment was close to zero, indicating that trade deficits were also close to zero and that not much foreign saving was needed to close the investment-saving gap. But beginning in the early 1980s, a large gap opened up, as it did again in the late 1990s. While the average levels of saving and investment are similar in these different periods, the trends are very different. In the 1980s, after an early sharp rise, both investment and saving trended down. In the 1990s, beginning from low levels, both investment and saving trended up. Comparing the late 1980s with the late 1990s, in the earlier period investment was falling and the foreign saving was increasingly financing a consumption boom; now investment is rising and the foreign saving is increasingly financing an investment boom. This point can be amplified when we consider relative prices. The investment numbers shown in the chart are in nominal terms. But computer prices are dropping rapidly, and computers are a much bigger component of investment in the 1990s than the 1980s. In real terms, then, investment is relatively higher now and the real difference between investment in the 1990s as compared to the 1980s is larger than shown in the chart. There is both good and bad news in this picture. The good news is that national saving is now recovering from its lows in the late 1980s and early 1990s, and this should make for positive returns down the road. But the blessings are mixed because the nation is still importing a lot of foreign saving right now, more than 3 percent of GNP. Presumably foreign savers will not want to build up their U.S. assets without limit, which is another way of saying that at some point the foreign saving inflow is likely to taper off. That will require some adjustments in the U.S. economy--some combination of higher exports, higher interest rates, lower investment, and/or lower dollar values. These adjustments need not be painful, though they could be. They could also be partially prevented were the United States to raise national saving. The bottom panel of the chart asks who is doing the saving. The personal saving component of national saving has been drifting down lately, inspiring some of the alarm stories alluded to earlier. But the chart gives some reasons for tempering this concern. First, once pension saving is properly allocated, the personal saving rate is not negative after all. It may not be very high, but it is not negative. Second, the rising amount of other saving, done by both the corporate and the government sector (the latter in the form of budget surpluses), has more than offset this decline in personal saving, as reflected in the rising level of overall national saving. Finally, not shown on the chart, the St. Louis Federal Reserve Bank has recently calculated that if capital gains were treated as income, which is improper from an NIA standpoint but might reflect how households actually look at the matter, even personal saving rates have not dropped. There could also be a problem with the distribution of saving across households. , from the 1995 Survey of Consumer Finances, gives this distribution. The table shows that one-third of the lowest income households have no financial assets at all, that those who do have assets have tiny amounts, and that only 8 percent of these families have self-directed retirement accounts. Median financial assets rise slowly across the income classes, but the pension saving is still low--three-quarters of the next class of families have no self-directed pension assets, and the share of families owning retirement accounts does not get above half until incomes of close to $50,000 per year. And, 16 percent of families with incomes above $100,000 report no self-directed retirement accounts, though on average the families at this level do have substantial amounts of other assets. These figures suggest that many families will be looking at big declines in their standard of living as they approach retirement years. This was an important reason why, wearing a different hat, I recently recommended a small saving supplement to Social Security. Consumer Debt Another potential alarm bell in this area involves consumer debt, the topic of your conference. As shown in the bottom panel of , personal bankruptcy filings per 100,000 persons have risen sharply since the mid-1980s. There could be some deficiencies in the nation's bankruptcy laws to explain part of this rise, a topic I am sure you have discussed extensively, and of course a topic that the Congress has been debating for the past year. Recently this number of bankruptcies has turned down fairly significantly, perhaps reducing the intensity of the congressional debate about bankruptcy reform. Will the level of bankruptcies continue to decline? One should make the usual statistical disclaimers, but there are some grounds for optimism. Various loan delinquency rates should be a leading indicator of future bankruptcies, and all have turned down lately--rates for consumer loans, auto loans, credit cards, and home mortgages are all declining, mortgages for some time now. Household debt service burdens, from the chart that Dean Maki showed you, is reproduced in the top panel of . Debt service burdens rose sharply between 1994 and 1996 but have held steady since then, at levels well below the peak of the early 1980s. Debt service burdens have been held down recently by the rapid rise in incomes and the shift of household debt away from consumer credit toward longer maturity mortgage loans. These debt service burdens are even lower relative to household net worth, since net worth is rising relative to income. The debt statistics enrich the consumption-saving picture, but do not seem to change it fundamentally. Personal bankruptcies have soared in recent years, probably a result of earlier rises in debt service burdens and perhaps a function of U.S. bankruptcy law. But debt service burdens have now leveled off, and loan delinquencies are declining, giving some hope that recent declines in personal bankruptcies will continue. But personal bankruptcies probably will not decline as much as we might like, just as some consumers may not save as much as we might like. This decline in bankruptcies may turn off the alarm bells, but there is still valid concern that at least some U.S. consumers may be undersaving. Conclusion Is the level of U.S. consumer saving too low? In the end, it is difficult to tell. The best single measure for assessing saving adequacy is the overall national saving rate, which is trending upward, largely because of the welcome appearance of budget surpluses at both the federal and state levels. In contrast to the 1980s, this rate of national saving is financing rising levels of capital investment, particularly in real terms. But the rising national saving is still being supplemented by large-scale foreign saving, implying a hefty trade deficit that probably cannot continue and will require some macroeconomic readjustments. As regards personal saving, it is trending down. Presumably the rising stock market explains some of this trend, but explaining a phenomenon is different from applauding it. There does seem to be a personal saving deficiency, especially for households with low incomes but perhaps even for some upper-income households. As the baby boom generation moves inexorably towards retirement, many families may be looking at potentially large declines in their standard of living, declines that might have been averted had the level of personal saving been higher. Household debt statistics reinforce this picture. Most families seem to be doing fine, but a great many are still declaring bankruptcy. As with many macroeconomic issues, it is difficult to generalize. There is some good news and some bad news. Perhaps we should say that while there is not cause for alarm, there are grounds for concern. Table 1 Financial Assets and Retirement Account Participation: By Family Income Family Income ($,thousands) With Financial Assets > 0 (%) Median Financial Assets ($) With Retirement Account (%) 0-10 67 1.2 8 10-25 88 5.4 25 25-50 97 12.1 53 50-100 100 40.7 72 >100 100 214.5 84 All 91 13.0 45 Footnotes: Percentage of families holding a positive amount of financial assets. Median value of holdings for families holding some financial assets. Percentage of families holding an IRA and/or a 401(k) type pension account. 67 1.2 8 88 5.4 25 97 12.1 53 100 40.7 72 100 214.5 84 91 13.0 45
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the applications of J.P. Morgan & Co. Incorporated, New York, New York, and UBS AG, Zurich, Switzerland, to acquire voting shares of TP Group LDC, Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM J.P. Morgan & Co. Incorporated New York, New York UBS AG Zurich, Switzerland Order Approving Notices to Engage in Nonbanking Activities J.P. Morgan & Co. Incorporated ("JPM"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), and UBS AG ("UBS"), a foreign banking organization subject to the BHC Act, have requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1843(c)(8)) and section 225.24 of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.24) to acquire or retain more than 5 percent of the voting interests in TP Group LDC, Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands ("TP Group"), and its majority owned subsidiary, Tradepoint Financial Networks plc, London, United Kingdom ("Tradepoint"), and thereby engage in operating a securities exchange. Notice of the proposals, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (64 Federal Register 46,196, 48,397, and 48,643 (1999)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the notices and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. JPM, with total consolidated assets of $269 billion, is the fifth largest banking organization in the United States. UBS, with total consolidated assets of $583 billion, is the largest banking organization headquartered in Switzerland . UBS operates branches in Los Angeles and San Francisco, California; Stamford, Connecticut; Chicago, Illinois; and New York, New York, and agencies in Miami, Florida; and Houston, Texas. JPM and UBS also engage through subsidiaries in a broad range of nonbanking activities in the United States and worldwide. JPM proposes to control approximately 17 percent of the voting shares of TP Group, and UBS proposes to control approximately 11 percent of the voting shares of TP Group . TP Group owns approximately 54.1 percent of the outstanding voting shares of Tradepoint, which operates the Tradepoint Stock Exchange ("Exchange"), an electronic securities exchange for the secondary trading of equity and equity-related securities listed on the London Stock Exchange. JPM and UBS also have stated that Tradepoint anticipates establishing an office or subsidiary in the United States. In light of these proposed actions, JPM and UBS have requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act to control their interests in TP Group . The Exchange is a screen-based electronic market that provides securities trade matching, execution, and related services to U.S. and foreign market-makers, broker-dealers, and institutional investors that become members of the Exchange . Currently, members may access the Exchange and enter bid and ask quotes through electronic terminals linked to certain financial networks ( e.g. , a Bloomberg terminal) or through a personal computer linked directly to the Exchange. Terminals linked to the Exchange can be located anywhere in the world, though trading currently may occur only during U.K. business hours . Orders entered into the Exchange's system are displayed on separate electronic order books for each security, which displays, in descending order, the best bid and ask quotations for the security. The Exchange automatically and continuously matches equal bid and ask offers for each listed security on a first-come, first-served basis . Tradepoint does not take a principal position in securities, clear or settle the securities transactions executed on the Exchange, or assume any principal risk for securities trades executed on the Exchange. Tradepoint and its shareholders also are under no obligation to guarantee a member's trades. Each member of the Exchange is required to be a member of the London Clearing House, or to appoint a member of the London Clearing House to clear the member's trades on the Exchange. Trades matched by the Exchange are registered at the end of each business day with the London Clearing House in the name of the appropriate clearing member. The London Clearing House then becomes the counterparty to each side of the trade until it is settled. Settlement occurs through the CREST system, which is operated by CRESTCo., a corporation established by the Bank of England for the settlement of uncertificated U.K. equities . Tradepoint is not affiliated with the London Clearing House or CRESTCo. The Exchange is a recognized investment exchange under Section 37(3) of the U.K. Financial Services Act 1986, and is regulated and supervised by the U.K. Financial Services Authority ("FSA") under the securities laws of the United Kingdom. Although Tradepoint makes its services available to customers in the United States, the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") has granted Tradepoint a limited volume exemption from the registration requirements of section 5 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 ("1934 Act") . The SEC's exemptive order permits Tradepoint to operate in the United States without registering as a securities exchange so long as (i) the Exchange's average daily dollar value of trades involving U.S. members does not exceed $40 million, and (ii) the Exchange's worldwide average daily volume does not exceed 10 percent of the average daily trading volume on the London Stock Exchange. The SEC's exemptive order also requires that the Exchange comply with a number of other conditions designed to protect U.S. investors and to ensure fair and orderly markets. Closely Related to Banking Standard Section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act provides that a bank holding company may, with Board approval, engage in any activity that the Board determines to be "so closely related to banking or managing or controlling banks as to be a proper incident thereto." In considering whether an activity is closely related to banking, the Board and the courts look to whether banks generally (1) conduct the proposed activity, (2) provide services that are operationally or functionally so similar to the proposed services as to equip them particularly well to provide the proposed services, or (3) provide services that are so integrally related to the proposed services as to require their provision in a specialized form . The Board has not previously determined by regulation or order that operating a securities exchange is closely related to banking within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. The principal function of a securities exchange is to provide a centralized facility for the execution, clearance, and settlement of securities transactions . Banks and bank holding companies currently are authorized to provide securities brokerage services to their customers and, as part of these services, to execute and clear such transactions on a securities exchange . Bank holding company subsidiaries authorized to act as a dealer in securities ("section 20 subsidiaries") also may provide securities execution, clearance, and settlement services in connection with their dealer operations . In addition, subsidiaries of banks and bank holding companies that act as a broker or dealer frequently become members of securities exchanges and, in the case of mutually owned exchanges such as the New York Stock Exchange ("NYSE"), acquire small (less than 5 percent) ownership interests in the exchange. Through these relationships, banks and bank holding companies have gained extensive experience with and knowledge of the rules and operations of securities exchanges. Banks and bank holding companies also provide services that are functionally and operationally similar to those provided by the Exchange. Subsidiaries of banks and bank holding companies acting as a securities broker may execute cross-trades for their customers and thereby match equal bid and offer orders received from their customers. In addition, section 20 subsidiaries of bank holding companies may act as a specialist or market-maker on a securities exchange, such as the NYSE or NASDAQ . A specialist generally maintains a book of current buy and sell orders received from other brokers and matches equal bid and offer quotes for execution . Market-makers for a security on the NASDAQ securities exchange also publish bid and offer prices at which they stand ready to execute transactions in the relevant security, either for their own account or for the account of customers. In addition, a market-maker receives customer orders and matches them, to the extent possible, against an order received from another customer or against an order for the market-maker's own account. For these reasons, and based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that operating a securities exchange is an activity that is closely related to banking for purposes of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Proper Incident to Banking Standard and Other Considerations In order to approve the proposal, the Board also must determine that the proposed activities are a proper incident to banking, that is, that performance of the proposed activities "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public ï¿½ that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices ." As part of its evaluation of these factors, the Board considers the financial condition and managerial resources of the notificant and its subsidiaries and the effect the transaction would have on those resources . In considering the financial resources of the notificants, the Board has carefully reviewed the capitalization of JPM and UBS and has found the capitalization of each to be consistent with approval. In particular, the Board notes that JPM and its subsidiary bank, Morgan Guaranty Trust Company, New York, New York, are well capitalized and would remain so after consummation of the proposal, and that UBS's capital ratios satisfy applicable risk-based standards established under the Basle Accord, and are considered equivalent to the capital levels that would be required of a U.S. banking organization. The Board also has considered recent financial statements of JPM and UBS, including pro forma financial statements and other available information, and the condition of the U.S. operations of UBS. Furthermore, as noted above, Tradepoint does not take a principal position in any security and does not assume any principal risk for the clearance or settlement of securities transactions executed on the Exchange. In addition, JPM and UBS would not guarantee any securities transactions executed on the Exchange. Based on these and other facts of record, including relevant supervisory information, the Board has determined that financial and managerial considerations are consistent with approval. The Board also has carefully considered the competitive effects of the proposal. There are numerous existing and potential competitors for the proposed services. Accordingly, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposal would have a de minimis effect on competition. In considering the potential for conflicts of interests and other adverse effects, the Board also has carefully reviewed the operational and supervisory framework within which the Exchange operates. As noted above, the Exchange is subject to regulation by the FSA under the securities laws of the United Kingdom, and its U.S. activities are subject to regulation by the SEC under the federal securities laws. U.K. law requires that recognized investment exchanges, such as the Exchange, promote and maintain high standards of integrity and fair dealing . In furtherance of this requirement, the FSA has adopted a code of conduct governing recognized investment exchanges that is designed to ensure that the decisions of an exchange are not improperly influenced by conflicts of interest. Staff of the FSA has advised Board staff that the FSA could take supervisory action against a recognized investment exchange under U.K. law if the exchange sought to deny a person access to the exchange on the basis of an improper conflict of interest. The U.K. Financial Services Act of 1986 also requires that the Exchange have financial resources sufficient to support its activities, and maintain rules and procedures to ensure that trading is conducted in an orderly manner and consistent with the protection of investors . Pursuant to these requirements, Tradepoint has established rules for the Exchange that govern the admission of members, establish standard terms for the execution of securities transactions on the Exchange, and provide sanctions for noncompliance with the Exchange's rules. The FSA has reviewed the Exchange's rules and determined that they are consistent with the requirements of U.K. law and must review any proposed amendments to such rules . Tradepoint's operations in the United States also would remain subject to the antifraud provisions of the federal securities laws . Although the SEC has granted Tradepoint a limited volume exemption from the registration requirements of section 5 of the 1934 Act, the SEC's exemptive order requires that Tradepoint comply with a number of conditions designed to ensure the maintenance of fair and orderly markets in the United States and the protection of U.S. investors. For example, these conditions permit the SEC to monitor the Exchange for compliance with the antifraud and other applicable provisions of the federal securities laws; require the Exchange to adopt and implement procedures to ensure the nondisclosure of confidential, material information held by the Exchange; and allow the SEC to obtain access to the books, records (including copies of membership applications and standards for admission as a member), facilities, and personnel of the Exchange as necessary or appropriate. Based on these and other conditions, the SEC concluded that the limited volume exemption provided the Exchange was consistent with the public interest and the protection of investors . Notificants have stated that consummation of the proposal would increase competition for the execution of equity and equity-related securities listed on the London Stock Exchange and provide added convenience to market-makers, broker-dealers, and institutional investors that seek to execute trades in such securities. The SEC also has stated that the Exchange's services provide U.S. investors with a lower-cost method of investing in foreign securities. In addition, the Board has noted that there are public benefits to be derived from permitting capital markets to operate so that bank holding companies can make potentially profitable investments in nonbanking companies and from permitting banking organizations to allocate their resources in the manner they consider to be most efficient when such investments and actions are consistent, as in this case, with the relevant considerations under the BHC Act . Based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that consummation of the proposal can reasonably be expected to produce public benefits that outweigh any potential adverse effects of the proposal, and therefore that the performance of the proposed activity by JPM and UBS is a proper incident to banking for purposes of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Conclusion Based on the foregoing and all the facts of record, including the commitments made by notificants in connection with the notices, and subject to the terms and conditions set forth in this order, the Board has determined that the notices should be, and hereby are, approved. The Board's determination is subject to all the conditions set forth in the Board's Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.25(c) (12 C.F.R. 225.7 and 225.25(c)), and to the Board's authority to require modification or termination of the activities of a bank holding company or any of its subsidiaries as the Board finds necessary to ensure compliance with, or to prevent evasion of, the provisions and purposes of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders issued thereunder. The Board's decision is specifically conditioned on compliance with all the commitments made in the notices, including the commitments and conditions discussed in this order. The commitments and conditions relied on in reaching this decision shall be deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. By order of the Board of Governors, effective November 8, 1999. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Footnotes Asset data are as of June 30, 1999, and ranking data are as of December 31, 1998. JPM currently owns directly and indirectly an approximately 16 percent nonvoting interest in TP Group and UBS currently owns a 10.79 percent voting interest in TP Group. JPM and UBS acquired these interests in July 1999 in reliance on section 4(c)(13) of the BHC Act and the Board's Regulation K (12 C.F.R. Part 211). On consummation of the proposal, JPM would convert its entire non-voting interest in TP Group into a voting interest in the organization. In connection with this conversion, JPM also would acquire an additional 1 percent of TP Group's shares from a third party. After the share conversion and purchase, JPM would control approximately 17 percent of the voting shares of TP Group. A bank holding company must obtain the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act if a foreign company held by the bank holding company seeks to engage in business in the United States. As of June 30, 1999, the Exchange had approximately 92 members. Unlike many U.S. securities exchanges, the Exchange is not owned by its members but rather by its shareholders, which may or may not be members of the exchange. The Exchange's current trading hours are Monday to Friday, 7:30 A.M. to 5:30 P.M. London time, with a post-trade administration session from 5:30 P.M. to 6:00 P.M. The Exchange also has the capacity to operate periodic auctions. In a periodic auction, bid and ask quotations would be allowed to accumulate and then filled, to the extent possible, at a single price calculated to match the largest possible number of accumulated buy and sell orders. The Exchange does not currently operate periodic auctions but may do so in the future for infrequently traded securities or the securities of smaller capitalization issuers. Cross trades executed on the Exchange are not registered with the London Clearing House and are settled directly by the relevant member through CREST. Cross trades are trades where the buyer and seller are both customers of the same Exchange member. 15 U.S.C. ï¿½ 78e; see Tradepoint Financial Networks plc, Exchange Act Release No. 41,199, 1999 SEC LEXIS 612 (March 22, 1999). See National Courier Association v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System , 516 F.2d 1229, 1237 (D.C. Cir. 1975). The Board may also consider any other basis that may demonstrate that the proposed activity has a reasonable or close connection or relationship to banking or managing or controlling banks. See Board Statement Regarding Regulation Y, 49 Federal Register 806 (1984); Securities Industry Association v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System , 468 U.S. 207, 210-211 n.5 (1984). The operations of the Exchange are more limited than many securities exchanges in that the Exchange does not directly or indirectly clear or settle securities transactions executed on the Exchange. Rather, the Exchange maintains systems to route trades to the London Clearing House for clearance and settlement through CREST. See 12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(7)(i); BankAmerica Corporation , 69 Federal Reserve Bulletin 105 (1983). See also 12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 24(Seventh); OCC Interp. Letter No. 622 (April 9, 1993). See J.P. Morgan & Co., Inc. et al. , 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 192 (1989), aff'd sub nom. Securities Industry Ass'n v. Board of Governors , 900 F.2d 360 (D.C. Cir. 1990); First of America Corporation , 80 Federal Reserve Bulletin 1120 (1994). See, e.g., Fleet Financial Group , 84 Federal Reserve Bulletin 227 (1998); Dresdner Bank AG , 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 850 (1996). See 5 L. Loss & J. Seligman, Securities Regulation 2513-14 (3d ed. 1990); New York Stock Exchange Rule 104. See 12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1843(c)(8). See 12 C.F.R. 225.26. See Financial Services Act of 1986, sch. 4, par. 5. See Financial Services Act of 1986, sch. 4, pars. 1 and 2. The FSA has the authority to conduct on-site inspections of the Exchange if necessary or appropriate. See , e .g. 15 U.S.C. ï¿½ 78j(b). JPM and UBS also have committed that Tradepoint will be considered a subsidiary for purposes of the BHC Act, and as an affiliate of any insured depository institution affiliate of the notificants for purposes of sections 23A and 23B of the Federal Reserve Act. Regulation Y provides that a bank holding company must seek the Board's approval prior to altering in any material respect a nonbanking activity previously approved by the Board. See 12 C.F.R. 225.25(c)(3). As noted above, the Exchange does not currently clear or settle securities transactions executed on the Exchange. Because the clearance and settlement of securities transactions involves risks that are materially different from the risks associated with the execution of securities transactions, notificants must separately seek the Board's approval if the Exchange in the future proposes to clear or settle securities transactions to permit the Board to determine whether the performance of such additional activities by the Exchange would constitute a proper incident to banking under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. This action was taken pursuant to the Board's Rules Regarding Delegation of Authority (12 C.F.R. 265.4(b)(1)) by a committee of Board members. Voting for this action: Vice Chairman Ferguson and Governors Kelley and Gramlich. Absent and not voting: Chairman Greenspan and Governor Meyer.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Office of the Comptroller of the Currency Office of Thrift Supervision Agencies Announce Results of Financial Institution Web Site Privacy Survey WASHINGTON -- The four federal banking agencies today released a report on the results of a survey of Internet privacy policies of banking and thrift institutions. The survey report, titled , examined 314 World Wide Web sites selected randomly, plus those of the 50 largest banks and thrifts with Web sites. Conducted during May and July by the federal agencies that supervise the institutions, the survey examined the collection of consumer information, interactive capabilities, and privacy disclosures at these sites. The purpose of the survey was to provide an indication of the state of the industry with respect to data collection and on-line privacy disclosures. Overall, 48 percent of the 364 Web sites surveyed posted a privacy disclosure--a privacy policy (a comprehensive statement regarding the collection and use of consumer information) or an information practice statement (a statement describing a particular information handling policy or practice, such as data security). Sixty-two percent of Web sites that collected personal information provided a privacy disclosure. Sites that collected personal information were three times as likely to post a privacy policy as sites that did not collect personal information. The survey also found that 96 percent of the nation's 50 largest banks and thrifts that are on-line provided a privacy policy or information practice statement. The agencies began work on the survey in February 1999. The agencies will monitor, as appropriate, the industry's progress in responding to consumer privacy issues and complying with the new legal mandates contained in the financial services reform legislation through regular supervisory activities. This survey supplements previous Web site surveys that did not focus on financial institutions, such as the Federal Trade Commission's "Privacy Online: A Report to Congress" (June 1998), and the Georgetown Internet Privacy Policy Survey, "Privacy Online in 1999: A Report to the Federal Trade Commission" (June 1999). Because the sample population and content of the questionnaire used to conduct the interagency survey differ materially from those in the surveys cited, direct comparisons between the results of the various surveys should not be made. Copies of the survey report are available on the agencies' Web sites.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the proposal by Bayerische Hypo- und Vereinsbank AG, Munich, Germany; Deutsche Bank AG, Frankfurt, Germany; and Stichting Prioriteit ABN AMRO Holding, Stichting Administratiekantoor ABN AMRO Holding, ABN AMRO Holding N.V., and ABN AMRO Bank N.V., all of Amsterdam, The Netherlands; each to retain up to 12.5 percent of the voting interests of Identrus, LLC, New York, New York, and to engage in acting as a certification authority in connection with financial and nonfinancial transactions and other related activities. Attached is the relating to this action.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today approved modifications to the settlement finality for ACH credit transactions processed by the Federal Reserve Banks so that settlement becomes final when posted to depository institutions' accounts. The Board will require prefunding for any ACH credit transactions that settle through a Federal Reserve account that is being monitored in real time to help manage settlement risk. The Reserve Banks will be modifying their software and their ACH operating circular to implement settlement-day finality. To permit time for these changes, settlement-day finality and prefunding will be implemented in early 2001. A specific implementation date will be announced three months in advance of the effective date. The Board's notice is attached.
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan Insurance companies and banks under the new regulatory law Before the Annual Meeting of the American Council of Life Insurance, Washington, D.C. November 15, 1999 Your annual meeting this year focuses on change--a theme echoing last month's meeting of the American Bankers Association and, I suspect, one common to other conferences, conventions, and meetings of financial institutions in this country and abroad. The forces of globalization, technology, and deregulation by the regulators and now by the Congress have drastically modified the competitive landscape of financial institutions and markets. Change will continue to be the one constant. Life insurance companies have been at the forefront of change and competitive response in the postwar period. They created new products as substitutes for traditional insurance policies when households began to demand more sophisticated portfolios of financial assets. The insurance industry pioneered the private placement market, which has served as a laboratory for developing and testing new debt structures, such as securitizations. In the process, your industry facilitated wider access to capital markets for smaller and below-investment-grade borrowers. Insurance companies may be among the oldest financial institutions in our country, but they are surely as modern and as creative as any--a prerequisite to growth, if not survival. The change in the rules of affiliation in the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act will create new opportunities and risks for all financial institutions. It is clear that the consumer will benefit from the wider permissible scope of activities by, and the more equal competition among, financial entities. That is why the Federal Reserve actively supported this legislation for so long. Management now will be given greatly enhanced flexibility to determine the best way to deliver its services to the market place, and the market will judge the correctness of that choice. Nonetheless, even with the wider scope for markets, insurance companies, just as securities firms, must still consider the regulatory implications of affiliation with a bank-- de novo or as either the acquirer or the acquired. Thus, it might be useful if I addressed the issue of how your regulatory position would change under those circumstances. I. Limiting the Safety Net Any change would reflect the bank safety net, which has always been the major concern about financial reforms that would create broad financial organizations that include an insured depository institution. By safety net, I mean the government guarantee of deposits and the access to both central bank credit through the discount window and to settlement on the books of the Federal Reserve through our payment services. All of these reduce the cost of funding the beneficiary bank and tend to insulate the bank's management and shareholders from bearing the full cost of their own mistakes or bad luck. The separation of portfolio risk from the cost of funding that portfolio leads to an inefficient allocation of financial and real assets. In the past, it has also tended to induce a level of risk-taking that is neither consistent with the safety and soundness of the insured entity nor that could be financed on either the same terms or the same scale if it were not for the government guarantee. The first concern about allowing wider affiliations with banks was the potential spread of subsidy benefits to institutions other than depositories. Our purpose was not to continue a special break for banks, but to avoid increasing the moral hazard distortion--and its associated risk. The second concern of designers of the architecture for financial modernization was to avoid the spread of the bank-like regulation that would soon follow extension of the safety net. If market discipline were further blunted by extension of the safety net, the government would be forced to act in place of the market as the evaluator of the new safety net beneficiaries. Nonbank financial firms have, quite understandably, sought to avoid bank-like regulation. Its linkage to the safety net, however, is too often ignored. The spread of bank-like regulation over a wider ambit would bring with it not only constraints on innovation and flexibility, but also less market discipline. Creditors and stakeholders would assume that the regulators were ensuring safe and sound operations and/or that the regulators would bail out the entity if there was a problem. As a result, they would not feel the need to look out for their own interests. In my judgment, extension of bank-like regulation would increase--not decrease--risk in the financial system. The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act is designed to limit extensions of the safety net, and thus to eliminate the need to impose bank-like regulation on nonbank subsidiaries and affiliates of organizations that contain a bank. Indeed, for insurance companies and broker/dealers, the act makes clear that the first level supervisory authority lies with the functional regulators--the state insurance authorities and the SEC, respectively--as it should. As I will discuss momentarily, the Federal Reserve retains the overall responsibility for financial services holding companies with bank subsidiaries. In exercising that responsibility, however, the Board is required by the act to rely, to the fullest extent possible, on public information and reports from, as well as examinations conducted by, the functional regulator. In the course of carrying out our supervisory responsibilities for the bank holding company and its nonbank subsidiaries, these are to be the first and, whenever possible, the sole sources of information about those bank-affiliated entities that are already regulated by others. Only when the Board has reason to believe that there is a material risk to the affiliated depository institution--or to ensure compliance with a law, such as the Bank Holding Company Act--may the Board directly examine a functionally regulated nonbank subsidiary of a bank holding company. Identical restrictions are placed on the other federal banking agencies. It is clear from the letter and the spirit of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act that bank regulators and the holding company supervisor are to give great deference to the functional regulators and to interject themselves only in critical circumstances. And under no circumstances can a functionally regulated entity be forced to assist a depository or any other affiliate over the objections of the functional regulator. The limits placed on the Federal Reserve to examine and obtain reports from regulated subsidiaries are a reasonable response to the fear of excessive regulation. The Board believes that this arrangement will work well, if and as the parties cooperate. We fully expect that will be the case. There will understandably be some tensions as we all move up the learning curve. But the Federal Reserve is committed to working with the functional regulators to make this system a cooperative and effective one. II. Umbrella Supervision It is important to understand, however, that the new act does not change the key, dominant, and major responsibility of both the bank and the holding company regulators: to contribute to the safety and soundness of the insured depository institution. The Congress established this responsibility both because of the role banks play in macroeconomic stability and because of the moral hazards associated with the safety net I described earlier. Just as functional regulators of insurance companies and broker/dealers retain their prime supervisory authority over those entities, bank subsidiaries of holding companies, too, may have a primary regulator other than the Federal Reserve. But the Federal Reserve has a central role as well in prudential oversight for bank subsidiaries of holding companies. The most critical of these is the quantitative constraint on bank loans to, and asset purchases from, affiliates and operating subsidiaries--sections 23A and B of the Federal Reserve Act. These provisions also limit loans by a bank to certain customers of affiliates. Sections 23A and B are the key constraints on both the spreading of the safety net through subsidized funds flowing to affiliates from banks and the risk that insured depositories might become captive lenders to affiliates or their customers. To further limit risk exposures of the bank, the new act also preserves the authority of the Federal Reserve to fashion prudential restrictions on relationships between banks and their affiliates. This authority is intended to allow the Board to impose other limitations on relationships among the bank, its affiliates, and the affiliates' customers, if necessary to protect the depository from arrangements not covered by sections 23A and B. For example, the Federal Reserve had required that Section 20 affiliates of banks (the only corporate securities underwriting vehicles for banking organizations prior to the new legislation) inform their customers that the instruments purchased were not insured deposits. The Federal Reserve also may protect banks by requiring divestiture. If bank or holding company supervisors believe that the activities of any affiliate or subsidiary-- functionally regulated or not--are causing undue risk to an insured depository, they can require that either the bank or the affiliate be divested from the organization. To avoid the risks of double leverage, and to minimize pressure on the cash flow of banks to service parent or affiliate debt, the Federal Reserve also retains the right to impose consolidated capital requirements on organizations that include a bank. We may have to modify our existing regulations to apply this provision in order to make adjustments for capital requirements already imposed by functional regulators on insurance companies, broker/dealers, and similar businesses. In order to protect the bank, umbrella supervision must extend its oversight to the consolidated organization. The need for the Federal Reserve to take a consolidated view of entities with bank affiliates represents the reality that current and future bank holding companies are not passive portfolio investors in their component parts, but rather managers of a consolidated financial enterprise directed from the center--the holding company. Thus, some authority must focus on the entire--the consolidated--entity so that each of the component regulators is aware of risks that may be unfolding elsewhere in the organization that could affect the unit for which it is responsible. This oversight is focused on implications for the bank but provides information that will also be shared with regulators of nonbank affiliates as well. The consolidated focus of the Federal Reserve is increasingly on the risk management and control policies that are virtually always established and maintained at the holding company parent. I cannot over emphasize the critical importance that the Federal Reserve places on evaluating risk management and control policies, including the testing of such controls to ensure their effectiveness. An integrated well-run organization, experience tells us, centrally establishes and administers these programs. As umbrella supervisor, we are also very interested in the interaffiliate transfers and credit concentrations, the total effects of which may be clear only when viewed at the overall level. III. Conclusions Affiliating with a bank will create some additional complexity for insurance companies and broker/dealers--mainly reflecting the implications of the bank safety net but also reflecting the special role banks play in financial markets and macroeconomic stability. However, these complexities can be over-emphasized. The Congress has placed real and effective limits on the Federal Reserve's authority to supervise and regulate functionally regulated entities. Moreover, the Federal Reserve has strong incentives, beyond statutory restrictions, to avoid the extension of bank-like regulation, namely the moral hazard that would be created. In addition, if the bank is of a modest size absolutely, as well as relative to a functionally regulated affiliate that dominates the organization, there is little reason for the tail to wag the dog, as it were, and to apply consolidated supervision in a burdensome way. But all this having been said, if the bank is large and/or a significant part of the organization, both law and good supervisory and stabilization policies require an active umbrella supervisor. That remains the role of the Federal Reserve under the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act. As umbrella supervisor, our major emphasis will be on protecting the bank subsidiary and on the risk management of the consolidated entity, but the information we generate may also be helpful to functional regulators.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of a consent Order against Robert and Adele Barber, both institution-affiliated parties of the First Western Bank, Cooper City, Florida, a state member bank. The individuals, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the Order to resolve allegations that they violated the Change in Bank Control Act in connection with their acquisition of beneficial ownership of the shares of the bank. A copy of the Order is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of a consent Order against Matthew J. Callahan, an institution-affiliated party of the First Western Bank, Cooper City, Florida, a state member bank. The individual, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the Order to resolve allegations that he violated the Change in Bank Control Act in connection with his acquisition of beneficial ownership of the shares of the bank. A copy of the Order is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Heritage Bancorp Company, Inc., Cleveland, Oklahoma; the First Bank of Cleveland, Cleveland, Oklahoma; the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City; and the Oklahoma State Banking Department. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of a consent Order against Bertram Smith, an institution-affiliated party of the First Western Bank, Cooper City, Florida, a state member bank. The individual, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the Order to resolve allegations that he violated the Change in Bank Control Act in connection with his acquisition of beneficial ownership of the shares of the bank. A copy of the Order is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today approved actions by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta and Dallas increasing the discount rate at those banks from 4-3/4 percent to 5 percent effective immediately. The Federal Reserve Board also today approved action by the Board of Directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis increasing the discount rate at that bank from 4-3/4 percent to 5 percent effective Thursday, November 18, 1999.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Consumer Confidence in Banking Y2K Preparation Rises Sharply, Gallup Poll Reports WASHINGTON, D.C. - Current figures indicate nine out of ten U.S. bank customers believe that their banks are ready for the Year 2000 -- or Y2K -- according to a new survey by the Gallup Organization. By comparison, a March survey found that an estimated 76 percent of bank customers were confident that their banks would solve the Y2K problem. Both surveys were sponsored by federal financial institution regulatory agencies. The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) sponsored the current survey, which was delivered to the agencies on November 15, 1999. The results, which are based on about 1,400 completed interviews, are from an ongoing survey of adult Americans who have bank accounts. "The survey underscores growing consumer confidence that banks are prepared for Y2K and that it will be business as usual for bank customers on January 1, 2000 and thereafter," said FDIC Chairman Donna Tanoue. The most recent Gallup report indicates that financial institutions have been informing their customers about their Year 2000 readiness. The percentage of American adult depositors who have received information about Y2K readiness from their financial institutions has significantly increased over the last seven months: an estimated 70 percent now report receiving information from their financial institution, compared with 23 percent in March. Additionally, in March, 52 percent of respondents reported having seen or heard a great deal about the Y2K issue, but that percentage is now up to 68 percent. Only about 5 percent of bank customers currently indicate that they are very concerned about the Y2K issue, down from 11 percent in the March report. The November findings support the notion that a decreased level of concern about the likely impact of the century date change on computers is related to increased information about the Y2K issue. Consumer confidence in their own financial institutions has also increased. Over 90 percent of those surveyed expressed confidence in their own banks, with the proportion of those saying they would definitely or probably take extra cash declining from 62 to 39 percent in the period between the March and October surveys. A majority of those who plan to withdraw extra cash say they will take less than $500. The survey results also indicate that the public is increasingly confident that basic payment systems will work properly during the century date change. Most American adult depositors believe that they will have access to their money; that checks will continue to be processed accurately; and that automatic teller machines, credit card systems, and electronic direct deposits will function normally. "From the beginning of our preparations for Y2K we said that there were two challenges facing us -- the technical challenge and the challenge of public confidence. I believe we've met the technical challenge and these data indicate we've made good progress in ensuring Americans know we are ready for the century rollover, " said Edward W. Kelley, Jr., a member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Over the past three years, FDIC-insured financial institutions have been identifying and overhauling systems to make them Year 2000-ready. At the same time, the regulatory agencies have been closely monitoring their efforts. As of today, the regulators have assigned a "Satisfactory" rating, the highest possible rating, to 99.9 percent of FDIC-insured financial institutions. Attachment (8 KB PDF) WASHINGTON, D.C. - Current figures indicate nine out of ten U.S. bank customers believe that their banks are ready for the Year 2000 -- or Y2K -- according to a new survey by the Gallup Organization. By comparison, a March survey found that an estimated 76 percent of bank customers were confident that their banks would solve the Y2K problem. Both surveys were sponsored by federal financial institution regulatory agencies. The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) sponsored the current survey, which was delivered to the agencies on November 15, 1999. The results, which are based on about 1,400 completed interviews, are from an ongoing survey of adult Americans who have bank accounts. "The survey underscores growing consumer confidence that banks are prepared for Y2K and that it will be business as usual for bank customers on January 1, 2000 and thereafter," said FDIC Chairman Donna Tanoue. The most recent Gallup report indicates that financial institutions have been informing their customers about their Year 2000 readiness. The percentage of American adult depositors who have received information about Y2K readiness from their financial institutions has significantly increased over the last seven months: an estimated 70 percent now report receiving information from their financial institution, compared with 23 percent in March. Additionally, in March, 52 percent of respondents reported having seen or heard a great deal about the Y2K issue, but that percentage is now up to 68 percent. Only about 5 percent of bank customers currently indicate that they are very concerned about the Y2K issue, down from 11 percent in the March report. The November findings support the notion that a decreased level of concern about the likely impact of the century date change on computers is related to increased information about the Y2K issue. Consumer confidence in their own financial institutions has also increased. Over 90 percent of those surveyed expressed confidence in their own banks, with the proportion of those saying they would definitely or probably take extra cash declining from 62 to 39 percent in the period between the March and October surveys. A majority of those who plan to withdraw extra cash say they will take less than $500. The survey results also indicate that the public is increasingly confident that basic payment systems will work properly during the century date change. Most American adult depositors believe that they will have access to their money; that checks will continue to be processed accurately; and that automatic teller machines, credit card systems, and electronic direct deposits will function normally. "From the beginning of our preparations for Y2K we said that there were two challenges facing us -- the technical challenge and the challenge of public confidence. I believe we've met the technical challenge and these data indicate we've made good progress in ensuring Americans know we are ready for the century rollover, " said Edward W. Kelley, Jr., a member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Over the past three years, FDIC-insured financial institutions have been identifying and overhauling systems to make them Year 2000-ready. At the same time, the regulatory agencies have been closely monitoring their efforts. As of today, the regulators have assigned a "Satisfactory" rating, the highest possible rating, to 99.9 percent of FDIC-insured financial institutions. Attachment (8 KB PDF)
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today approved actions by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of New York, Philadelphia, Chicago and Minneapolis increasing the discount rate at those banks from 4-3/4 percent to 5 percent effective immediately.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the proposal of The Sanwa Bank, Limited, Osaka, Japan, to retain up to 32 percent of the voting shares of The Toyo Trust and Banking Company, Limited, Tokyo, Japan, and thereby retain control of Toyo Trust Company of New York, New York, New York. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM The Sanwa Bank, Limited Osaka, Japan Order Approving the Acquisition of a Bank Holding Company The Sanwa Bank, Limited ("Sanwa"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 3 of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1842) to retain up to 32 percent of the voting shares of The Toyo Trust and Banking Company, Limited, Tokyo, Japan ("Toyo"), and thereby retain control of Toyo's wholly owned U.S. subsidiary bank, Toyo Trust Company of New York, New York, New York ("Toyo Bank"). Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (64 Federal Register 25,041 (1999)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the proposal and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 3 of the BHC Act. Sanwa, with total consolidated assets of approximately $418 billion, is the 4th largest banking organization in Japan. In the United States, Sanwa owns Sanwa Bank California, San Francisco, California ("Sanwa Bank"), a state-chartered commercial bank. In addition, Sanwa operates branches in New York, New York, Chicago, Illinois, and San Francisco and Los Angeles, California; and representative offices in Houston, Texas, and New York, New York. Sanwa also engages in a broad range of permissible nonbanking activities in the United States through subsidiaries, including underwriting and dealing in debt and equity securities to a limited extent. Toyo, with total consolidated assets of approximately $66 billion, is the 19th largest banking organization in Japan. Toyo controls Toyo Bank and operates a branch in New York, New York. Interstate Analysis Section 3(d) of the BHC Act allows the Board to approve an application by a bank holding company to acquire control of a bank located in a state other than the home state of the bank holding company if certain conditions are met. For purposes of the BHC Act, the home state of Sanwa is California, and Toyo Bank is located in New York. All the conditions for an interstate acquisition enumerated in section 3(d) are met in this case. In light of all the facts of record, the Board is permitted to approve the proposal under section 3(d) of the BHC Act. Competitive Considerations Sanwa and Toyo compete directly in the New York/New Jersey Metropolitan banking market ("New York banking market"). Sanwa's New York branch controls deposits representing less than 1 percent of the deposits in the market. Toyo, through its New York branch and Toyo Bank, also controls deposits representing less than 1 percent of the deposits in the market. On consummation of the proposal, numerous competitors would remain in the market, and the market would remain unconcentrated. Based on these and all other facts of record, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposal would not result in any significantly adverse effects on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in the New York banking market or any other relevant banking market. Certain Supervisory Considerations Under section 3 of the BHC Act, the Board may not approve an application involving a foreign bank unless the bank is "subject to comprehensive supervision or regulation on a consolidated basis by the appropriate authorities in the bank's home country." The Board previously has determined, in applications under the International Banking Act (12 U.S.C. § 3101 et seq. ) ("IBA") and the BHC Act, that certain Japanese commercial banks were subject to comprehensive consolidated supervision by their home country supervisor. In this case, the Board has determined that Sanwa is supervised on substantially the same terms and conditions as the other Japanese banks. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that Sanwa is subject to comprehensive supervision and regulation on a consolidated basis by its home country supervisor. The BHC Act also requires the Board to determine that the foreign bank has provided adequate assurances that it will make available to the Board such information on its operations and activities and those of its affiliates that the Board deems appropriate to determine and enforce compliance with the BHC Act. The Board has reviewed the restrictions on disclosure in jurisdictions where Sanwa has material operations and has communicated with relevant government authorities concerning access to information. Sanwa has committed that, to the extent not prohibited by applicable law, it will make available to the Board such information on the operations of Sanwa and any of its affiliates that the Board deems necessary to determine and enforce compliance with the BHC Act, the IBA, and other applicable federal law. Sanwa also has committed to cooperate with the Board to obtain any waivers or exemptions that may be necessary in order to enable Sanwa to make any such information available to the Board. In light of these commitments and other facts of record, the Board has concluded that Sanwa has provided adequate assurances of access to any appropriate information the Board may request. For these reasons, and based on all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that the supervisory factors it is required to consider under section 3(c)(3) of the BHC Act are consistent with approval. Financial, Managerial, and Convenience and Needs Considerations The Board also has carefully considered the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of Sanwa, Toyo, and their respective subsidiaries, and the effect the proposal would have on such resources. The Board notes that the proposal is incidental to a corporate restructuring of Japanese banking organizations that is intended to enhance the overall financial strength and future prospects of both organizations. Sanwa's reported capital levels exceed the minimum levels that would be required under the Basle Capital Accord, and its capital levels are considered equivalent to the capital levels that would be required of a U.S. banking organization under similar circumstances. The Board notes, moreover, that the proposal does not involve any expansion of the banking or nonbanking activities of Toyo, and that Sanwa's investment in Toyo has strengthened Toyo's capital position and made additional financial resources available to Toyo Bank. In addition, the Board has reviewed supervisory information from the home country authorities responsible for supervising Sanwa and Toyo concerning the proposal and the condition of the parties, confidential financial information from Sanwa and Toyo, and reports of examination from the appropriate federal and state supervisors of the affected organizations assessing the financial and managerial resources of the organizations. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the organizations involved in the proposal are consistent with approval. Sanwa Bank received an "outstanding" performance rating at its most recent examination under the Community Reinvestment Act (12 U.S.C. § 2901 et seq. ) ("CRA") by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ("FDIC"), as of August 24, 1998. Toyo Bank also received an "outstanding" CRA performance rating from the FDIC at its most recent examination, as of June 8, 1998. In light of all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that considerations relating to the convenience and needs of the communities to be served, including the records of performance of the relevant depository institutions under the CRA, are consistent with approval. Conclusion Based on the foregoing and all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the application should be, and hereby is, approved. The Board's approval is specifically conditioned on compliance by Sanwa with all the commitments made in connection with the application and on the Board receiving access to information on the operations or activities of Sanwa and any of its affiliates that the Board determines to be appropriate to determine and enforce compliance by Sanwa and its affiliates with applicable federal statutes. The commitments and conditions relied on by the Board in reaching its decision are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision, and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. By order of the Board of Governors, effective November 24, 1999. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Footnotes On March 30, 1999, Sanwa acquired newly issued shares of Toyo that, when aggregated with the 4.9 percent of Toyo's voting shares previously held by Sanwa, represented approximately 32 percent of Toyo's voting shares. This investment was part of a plan to increase Toyo's capital, which was approved by the Japanese government. On consummation of the investment, Sanwa placed the newly acquired Toyo voting shares in a voting trust that does not permit Sanwa to vote such shares until U.S. regulators act on Sanwa's proposed acquisition of control of Toyo. Under the terms of the trust agreement, the voting trust terminates if the Board and the New York State Banking Department ("Department") approve Sanwa's retention of its ownership interest in Toyo. The Department approved Sanwa's application to acquire control of Toyo on April 8, 1999. Asset data are as of March 31, 1999, and are based on exchange rates then applicable. Ranking data are as of December 31, 1998. A bank holding company's home state is that state in which the total deposits of all banking subsidiaries of such company were the largest on July 1, 1966, or the date on which the company became a bank holding company, whichever is later. 12 U.S.C. § 1841(o)(4)(C). Sanwa is adequately capitalized and adequately managed, as defined by applicable law. 12 U.S.C. § 1842(d)(1)(A). Toyo Bank has been in existence and operated continuously for at least the period of time required by New York state banking law. See 12 U.S.C. § 1842(d)(1)(B); N.Y. Banking Law § 142-a (1998). On consummation of the proposal, Sanwa and its affiliates would control less than 10 percent of the total amount of deposits of insured depository institutions in the United States. 12 U.S.C. § 1842(d)(2). All other requirements of section 3(d) of the BHC Act would be met on consummation of the proposal. The New York banking market includes New York City; Nassau, Orange, Putnam, Rockland, Suffolk, Sullivan, and Westchester Counties in New York; Bergen, Essex, Hudson, Hunterdon, Middlesex, Monmouth, Morris, Ocean, Passaic, Somerset, Sussex, Union, Warren, and a portion of Mercer Counties in New Jersey; Pike County in Pennsylvania; and portions of Fairfield and Litchfield Counties in Connecticut. Deposit data are as of June 30, 1998. 12 U.S.C. § 1842(c)(3)(B). As provided in Regulation Y, the Board determines whether a foreign bank is subject to consolidated home country supervision under the standards set forth in Regulation K. 12 C.F.R. 225.13(a)(4). Regulation K provides that a foreign bank may be considered subject to consolidated supervision if the Board determines that the bank is supervised or regulated in such a manner that its home country supervisor receives sufficient information on the worldwide operations of the foreign bank, including the relationships of the bank to its affiliates, to assess the foreign bank's overall financial condition and compliance with law and regulation. 12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)(1)(ii). See The Fuji Bank, Limited , 85 Federal Reserve Bulletin 338 (1999); and The Mitsubishi Bank, Limited , 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 436 (1996). Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chairman Ferguson, and Governors Kelley, Meyer, and Gramlich.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today its approval of the application of UBS AG, Basel, Switzerland, to establish a representative office in Washington, D.C. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM UBS AG Basel, Switzerland Order Approving Establishment of a Representative Office UBS AG ("Bank"), Basel, Switzerland, a foreign bank within the meaning of the International Banking Act ("IBA"), has applied under section 10(a) of the IBA (12 U.S.C. § 3107(a)) to establish a representative office in Washington, D.C. The Foreign Bank Supervision Enhancement Act of 1991, which amended the IBA, provides that a foreign bank must obtain the approval of the Board to establish a representative office in the United States. Notice of the application, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published in a newspaper of general circulation in Washington, D.C. ( The Washington Times , August 6, 1999). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the application and all comments received. Bank, with assets of approximately $581.7 billion , was created as a result of the 1998 merger of Swiss Bank Corporation and Union Bank of Switzerland. UBS is the largest banking organization in Switzerland and the fourth largest banking organization in the world. Bank's shares are publicly traded and widely held, with no single shareholder owning more than 5 percent of the shares. Bank engages in a broad range of commercial and investment banking activities, directly and through a number of subsidiaries, both foreign and domestic. In the United States, Bank operates state-licensed branches in Stamford, Connecticut, New York, New York, and Chicago, Illinois; federally-licensed branches in San Francisco and Los Angeles, California; state licensed agencies in Miami, Florida, and Houston, Texas; and a representative office in Houston, Texas. The proposed representative office would act as a liaison between Bank and existing and potential private banking customers in Washington, D.C., and adjacent areas in Virginia and Maryland. The office would market private banking products offered by Bank's New York branch. In acting on an application to establish a representative office, the IBA and Regulation K provide that the Board shall take into account whether the foreign bank engages directly in the business of banking outside the United States and has furnished to the Board the information it needs to assess the application adequately. The Board also shall take into account whether the foreign bank is subject to comprehensive supervision or regulation on a consolidated basis by its home country supervisor (12 U.S.C. § 3107(a)(2); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(d)(2)). In addition, the Board may take into account additional standards set forth in the IBA and Regulation K (12 U.S.C. § 3105(d)(3)-(4); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)(2)). As noted above, Bank engages directly in the business of banking outside the United States. Bank also has provided the Board with information necessary to assess the application through submissions that address the relevant issues. With respect to supervision by home country authorities, the Board previously has determined that Bank was subject to comprehensive home country supervision on a consolidated basis. There have been no material changes in the manner in which Swiss banks are supervised and regulated by their home country supervisors since that time. Accordingly, based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that Bank continues to be subject to comprehensive supervision and regulation on a consolidated basis by its home country supervisor. The Board also has taken into account the additional standards set forth in section 7 of the IBA and Regulation K ( see 12 U.S.C. § 3105(d)(3)-(4); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)(2)). With respect to consent of appropriate home country authorities, the Swiss Banking Commission has no objection to establishment of the proposed representative office. With respect to the financial and managerial resources of Bank, taking into consideration Bank's record of operation in its home country, its overall financial resources, and its standing with its home country supervisor, the Board also has determined that financial and managerial factors are consistent with approval of the proposed representative office. Bank appears to have the experience and capacity to support the proposed representative office and has established controls and procedures for the proposed representative office to ensure compliance with U.S. law. With respect to access to information about Bank's operations, the Board has reviewed the restrictions on disclosure in relevant jurisdictions in which Bank operates and has communicated with relevant government authorities regarding access to information. Bank has committed to make available to the Board such information on the operations of Bank and any of its affiliates that the Board deems necessary to determine and enforce compliance with the IBA, the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956, as amended, and other applicable federal law. To the extent that the provision of such information may be prohibited by law, Bank has committed to cooperate with the Board to obtain any necessary consents or waivers that might be required from third parties for disclosure of such information. In addition, subject to certain conditions, the Swiss Banking Commission may share information on Bank's operations with other supervisors, including the Board. In light of these commitments and other facts of record, and subject to the conditions described below, the Board concludes that Bank has provided adequate assurances of access to any necessary information the Board may request. On the basis of all the facts of record, and subject to the commitments made by Bank and the terms and conditions set forth in this order, the Board has determined that Bank's application to establish the representative office should be, and hereby is, approved. Should any restrictions on access to information on the operations or activities of Bank subsequently interfere with the Board's ability to obtain information to determine and enforce compliance by Bank or its affiliates with applicable federal statutes, the Board may require termination of any of Bank's or its affiliates' direct or indirect activities in the United States, or in the case of an office licensed by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, recommend termination of such office. Approval of this application also is specifically conditioned on compliance by Bank with the commitments made in connection with the application, and with the conditions in this order. The commitments and conditions referred to above are conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its decision, and may be enforced in proceedings under 12 U.S.C. § 1818 against Bank and its affiliates. By order of the Board of Governors, effective November 24, 1999. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Footnotes Data are as of June 30, 1999. In assessing this standard, the Board considers, among other factors, the extent to which the home country supervisors: (i) ensure that the bank has adequate procedures for monitoring and controlling its activities worldwide; (ii) obtain information on the condition of the bank and its subsidiaries and offices through regular examination reports, audit reports, or otherwise; (iii) obtain information on the dealings with and relationship between the bank and its affiliates, both foreign and domestic; (iv) receive from the bank financial reports that are consolidated on a worldwide basis, or comparable information that permits analysis of the bank's financial condition on a worldwide consolidated basis; (v) evaluate prudential standards, such as capital adequacy and risk asset exposure, on a worldwide basis. These are indicia of comprehensive consolidated supervision. No single factor is essential and other elements may inform the Board's determination. See UBS AG , 84 Federal Reserve Bulletin 684 (1998). The Board's authority to approve the establishment of the proposed representative office parallels the continuing authority of the District of Columbia to license or otherwise to permit the establishment of offices of a foreign bank. The Board's approval of this application does not supplant the authority of the District of Columbia and the Office of Banking and Financial Institutions ("Office") to license or otherwise to permit the establishment of the proposed office of Bank in accordance with any terms or conditions that the Office may impose. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chairman Ferguson, and Governors Kelley, Meyer, and Gramlich.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application of Brookline Bancorp, MHC and its subsidiary, Brookline Bancorp, Inc., both of Brookline, Massachusetts, to acquire up to 9.9 percent of the voting shares of Medford Bancorp, Inc. and thereby acquire an interest in Medford's wholly owned subsidiary bank, Medford Savings Bank, both of Medford, Massachusetts. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM Brookline Bancorp, MHC Brookline, Massachusetts Brookline Bancorp, Inc. Brookline, Massachusetts Order Approving Acquisition of Shares of a Bank Holding Company Brookline Bancorp, MHC and its subsidiary, Brookline Bancorp, Inc., both of Brookline, Massachusetts (collectively "Brookline"), bank holding companies within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), have requested the Board's approval under section 3 of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1842) to acquire up to 9.9 percent of the voting shares of Medford Bancorp, Inc. ("Medford") and thereby acquire an interest in Medford's wholly owned subsidiary bank, Medford Savings Bank, both of Medford, Massachusetts. Notice of this proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (64 Federal Register 55,290 (1999)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered this proposal and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 3 of the BHC Act. Brookline is the 33rd largest depository institution in Massachusetts, controlling total deposits of $509.3 million, representing less than 1 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in the state. Medford is the 15th largest depository institution in Massachusetts, controlling $902.6 million in deposits, representing less than 1 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in the state. Brookline has stated that it proposes to acquire the shares of Medford as a passive investment and that Brookline would not control Medford after this investment. In connection with this proposal, the Board received comments from Medford objecting to the proposal on the grounds that the investment would have an adverse effect on the managerial resources and financial condition of Brookline and Medford, and would harm the communities that Medford serves. The Board has considered carefully Medford's comments in light of the factors that the Board must consider under section 3(c) of the BHC Act. . The Board previously has stated that the acquisition of less than a controlling interest in a bank or bank holding company is not a normal acquisition for a bank holding company. However, the requirement in section 3(a)(3) of the BHC Act for Board approval before a bank holding company acquires more than 5 percent of the voting shares of a bank suggests that Congress contemplated the acquisition by bank holding companies of between 5 and 25 percent of the voting shares of banks. On this basis, the Board previously has approved the acquisition by a bank holding company of less than a controlling interest in a bank or bank holding company where the proposal meets the factors set forth in the BHC Act. Medford contends that the proposed investment would constitute a controlling investment in Medford, and would enable Brookline to exercise a coercive influence on Medford's corporate affairs. Brookline has agreed to abide by certain commitments that the Board has relied on in other cases to determine that an investing bank holding company would not be able to exercise a controlling influence over another bank holding company or bank for purposes of the BHC Act. For example, Brookline has committed not to exercise or attempt to exercise a controlling influence over the management or policies of Medford or any of its subsidiaries; not to seek or accept representation on the board of directors of Medford or any of its subsidiaries; and not to have any director, officer, employee, or agent interlocks with Medford. Brookline also has committed not to attempt to influence the dividend policies, loan decisions, or operations of Medford or any of its subsidiaries. Moreover, Brookline, which proposes to acquire less than 10 percent of the voting shares of Medford, may not acquire any additional shares of Medford without prior Board approval under the BHC Act. Medford contends that these commitments by Brookline are insufficient to prevent Brookline from exercising a controlling influence on Medford. The Board notes, however, that it has adequate supervisory authority to monitor Brookline's compliance with its commitments, and expressly retains authority to initiate a control proceeding against Brookline if facts presented later indicate that Brookline or any of its subsidiaries or affiliates, in fact, controls Medford for purposes of the BHC Act. Based on these commitments and all other facts of record, it is the Board's judgment that Brookline would not acquire control of Medford for purposes of the BHC Act through consummation of this proposal. Competitive Considerations In considering an application under section 3 of the BHC Act, the Board is required to evaluate a number of factors, including the competitive effects of the proposal. The Board previously has noted that one company need not acquire control of another company in order to substantially lessen competition between them. The Board has found that noncontrolling interests in directly competing depository institutions may raise serious questions under the BHC Act, and has concluded that the specific facts of each case will determine whether the minority investment in a company would be anticompetitive. Brookline and Medford compete directly in the Boston banking market. If Brookline and Medford are considered as a combined organization, Brookline would be the 12th largest depository institution organization in the Boston banking market, controlling $1.3 billion in deposits, representing less than 1 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in the market. The Herfindahl-Hirschman Index ("HHI") for the Boston banking market would remain unchanged at 1899. Accordingly, based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that consummation of this proposal would not have a significantly adverse effect on competition or on the concentration of resources in any relevant market in which Brookline and Medford compete. Other Factors The Board also is required under section 3(c) of the BHC Act to consider the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the companies and banks concerned. Medford contends that Brookline's investment could distract the attention of Medford's management from the operation of Medford, restrict Medford's ability to effect a merger, and adversely affect Medford's employees and its ability to retain customers. The Board believes that the commitments made by Brookline to maintain its investment as a passive investment and not to exercise a controlling influence over Medford reduce the potential adverse effects of the proposal. Moreover, the Board notes that Brookline currently is well capitalized and would remain well capitalized on consummation of the proposal. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that the financial and managerial resources and the future prospects of Brookline, Medford, and their subsidiaries are consistent with approval of this application, as are the other supervisory factors the Board must consider under section 3 of the BHC Act. In addition, considerations relating to the convenience and needs of the communities to be served, including the record of performance of the institutions involved under the Community Reinvestment Act (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 2901 et seq.), are consistent with approval of the application. Conclusion Based on the foregoing, and on all other facts of record, the Board has determined that this application should be, and hereby is, approved. The Board's approval is specifically conditioned on compliance by Brookline with all commitments made in connection with this application, including the commitments discussed in this order. The commitments and conditions relied on by the Board in reaching this decision are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision, and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The transaction shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day following the effective date of this order, or later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective November 29, 1999. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Footnotes The proposed acquisition would be made by Brookline Securities Corp., a wholly owned subsidiary of Brookline Bancorp, Inc. Asset and deposit data are as of June 30, 1999. In this context, depository institutions include commercial banks, savings banks, and savings associations. The Board may not approve an application that would violate state law. Whitney Nat'l Bank in Jefferson Parish v. Bank of New Orleans & Trust Co., 379 U.S. 411, 419 (1965). Medford contends that Massachusetts law requires Brookline to file an application with the Massachusetts Board of Bank Incorporation ("State Bank Board"). The Massachusetts Commissioner of Banks ("Commissioner") has been provided with notice of the application filed with Board, as required under section 3 of the BHC Act, 12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1842(b)(1), and is reviewing whether Brookline also is required to file an application with the State Bank Board. The Commissioner has not filed any comments with the Board about this proposal. In addition, Massachusetts law appears to require Brookline to file such an application only if Brookline owns or controls 25 percent or more of the voting stock of each of two or more banking institutions. Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 167A, ï¿½ 2(2)(b). At this time, Brookline owns or controls 25 percent or more of the voting stock of only one banking institution. Accordingly, it does not appear at this time that the Board is precluded from approving this proposal. The Board's approval of the application is conditioned on Brookline obtaining any approval that is required by Massachusetts law. See, e.g., First Mariner Bancorp, 84 Federal Reserve Bulletin 956, 957 (1998); Sun Banks, Inc., 71 Federal Reserve Bulletin 243 (1985) ("Sun Banks"); State Street Boston Corp., 67 Federal Reserve Bulletin 862, 863 (1981). See 12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1842(a)(3). See, e.g., GB Bancorporation, 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin 115 (1997) (acquisition of up to 24.9 percent of the voting shares of a bank); Mansura Bancshares, Inc., 79 Federal Reserve Bulletin 37 (1993) (acquisition of 9.7 percent of the voting shares of a bank holding company). See, e.g., National Bancshares Corp. of Texas, 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 565 (1996); First Southern Bancorp, Inc., 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 424 (1996). These commitments are set forth in the Appendix. See, e.g. First State Corp., 76 Federal Reserve Bulletin 376, 379 (1990); Sun Banks at 243. See, e.g. Sun Banks at 244. The Boston banking market is defined as the Boston Ranally Metropolitan Area and the town of Lyndeboro in New Hampshire. Market deposit data are as of June 30, 1998, and reflect acquisitions through October 15, 1999. Market share data are based on calculations that include the deposits of thrift institutions at 50 percent. The Board previously has indicated that thrift institutions have become, or have the potential to become, significant competitors of commercial banks. See, e.g., Midwest Financial Group, 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 386, 387 (1989); National City Corporation, 70 Federal Reserve Bulletin 743, 744 (1984). Thus, the Board regularly has included thrift deposits in the calculation of market share on a 50-percent weighted basis. See, e.g., First Hawaiian, Inc., 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 52, 55 (1991). Under the DOJ Guidelines, 49 Federal Register 26,823 (June 29, 1984), a market in which the post-merger HHI is above 1800 is considered to be highly concentrated. The Department of Justice has informed the Board that a bank merger or acquisition generally will not be challenged (in the absence of other factors indicating anticompetitive effects) unless the post-merger HHI is at least 1800 and the merger increases the HHI by more than 200 points. The Department of Justice has stated that the higher than normal thresholds for an increase in the HHI when screening bank mergers and acquisitions for anticompetitive effects implicitly recognize the competitive effects of limited-purpose and other nondepository financial entities. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chairman Ferguson, and Governors Kelley, Meyer, and Gramlich. APPENDIX As part of this proposal, Brookline Bancorp, MHC ("MHC"), Brookline Bancorp, Inc. ("SHC"), and Brookline Securities Corp. ("Securities Corp") each of Brookline, Massachusetts, commit that they will not, without the prior approval of the Federal Reserve Board, directly or indirectly: (1) exercise or attempt to exercise a controlling influence over the management or policies of Medford Bancorp, Inc. ("Medford") or any of its subsidiaries; (2) seek or accept representation on the board of directors of Medford or any of its subsidiaries; (3) have or seek to have any employee or representative serve as an officer, agent, or employee of Medford or any of its subsidiaries; (4) take any action that would cause Medford or any of its subsidiaries to become a subsidiary of MHC, SHC, Securities Corp, or any of their subsidiaries. (5) acquire or retain shares that would cause the combined interests of MHC, SHC, Securities Corp, and any of their subsidiaries and their officers, directors, and affiliates to equal or exceed 25 percent of the outstanding voting shares of Medford or any of its subsidiaries; (6) propose a director or slate of directors in opposition to a nominee or slate of nominees proposed by the management or the board of directors of Medford or any of its subsidiaries; (7) solicit or participate in soliciting proxies with respect to any matter presented to the shareholders of Medford or any of its subsidiaries; (8) attempt to influence the dividend policies or practices; the investment loan, or credit decisions or policies; the pricing of services; personnel decisions; operations activities (including the location of any offices or branches or their hours of operation, etc.); or any similar activities or decisions of Medford or any of its subsidiaries; (9) dispose or threaten to dispose of shares of Medford or any of its subsidiaries as a condition of specific action or nonaction by Medford or any of its subsidiaries; or (10) enter into any other banking or nonbanking transactions with Medford or any of its subsidiaries, except that MHC or SHC may establish and maintain deposit accounts with Medford's subsidiary depository institution, provided that the aggregate balance of all such deposit accounts does not exceed $500,000 and that the accounts are maintained on substantially the same terms as those prevailing for comparable accounts of persons unaffiliated with Medford or any its subsidiaries.
Remarks by Governor Laurence H. Meyer Before the Stern Graduate School of Business, New York University, New York, New York November 30, 1999 Start with a Paradigm, End with a Story: The Value of Model-Based Forecasting and Policy Analysis My talk this afternoon focuses on model building, forecasting, and policymaking and reflects a perspective shaped both by my earlier experience and by my current responsibilities. Two questions form the themes of my remarks: First, can the recent exceptional performance of the U.S. economy be explained by traditional macroeconometric models? Second, how should monetary policy respond to the greater uncertainty both about forecasts and about the structural relationships that have guided policy in the past? As I wrestle with these questions, let me also remind you that, as always, the views I express are my own. I am not speaking on behalf of either the Board of Governors or the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Start with a Paradigm and End with a Theory Forecasting based on structural models, my preferred approach, is not the only way to go. Diversity in our profession, as in other professions, should be valued, not just tolerated. Atheoretical statistical approaches, such as VARs, provide a cheap alternative that, at least over short intervals, but not including the current quarter, yield forecasts as accurate as those obtained from significantly larger structural models. But let me offer some reasons why I value the traditional model-based approach to forecasting and policy analysis. First, model-based forecasting begins with a paradigm, a vision of how the economy works. I suppose the VAR paradigm is that everything depends on everything else, though, in practice, only a small number of variables can feasibly be included. But clients and FOMC members want to know why, not just what. VARs can cheaply tell us what. Model-based forecasts also provide a vision of why. Second, and closely related, a model-based forecast ends with a story. When I was in the private sector and was asked what I did for a living I often responded that I was a storyteller. My experience as a commercial forecaster taught me that clients did not want to be buried in computer output. They demanded a coherent story that tied the forecast together. A model-based forecast has the ability to essentially explain itself. Third, between the paradigm and the story, macroeconometric models both rely on theory and reflect the regularities found in the historical data. Models predict the impact of new shocks through "tried and true" regularities. Fourth, model-based forecasting allows a forecaster to learn from past mistakes and indeed use past mistakes to improve future forecasts. This is clearly one of the keys to good forecasting. It is important to try to identify why you were wrong and to establish what part or parts of the model were responsible for the greatest errors. Responding to mistakes certainly can be aided by statistical analysis, but there is often room for judgment--often reflecting qualitative information that is difficult to incorporate into the formal model. Fifth, atheoretical statistical approaches, as typically used, yield unconditional forecasts. Most commercial and government forecasters very much want a conditional forecast. Part of the explanation is the value of contingency analysis, bracketing a baseline forecast with more optimistic and more pessimistic forecasts and assessing the implications of major risks to the forecast. Despite my appreciation of structural models, I do not believe in mechanical model-based forecasting--estimating the model and letting it make the forecast without intervention of the forecaster. When Laurence H. Meyer & Associates won forecasting awards and I was asked my formula for success, I reported my recipe: one part science, one part judgment, and one part luck. The science was the model. Art refers to the role of judgment. And luck--well, that speaks for itself. The Paradigm Let me turn now to the paradigm. In macroeconomics, I suppose, saying "the" paradigm seems wholly out of place. So I mean the paradigm that is widely associated with traditional macroeconometric models, though there are, of course, some meaningful differences even within this class. I view the traditional model paradigm as an updated and eclectic version of the neoclassical synthesis. It is defined by three key principles. First, the models are Keynesian in their short-run properties. Specifically, they allow for sticky prices, and as a result output is demand-determined in the short run. Second, the models are classical in their long-run properties. Specifically output is supply-determined in the long run, inflation is principally a monetary phenomenon, real interest rates are determined by forces of productivity and thrift, and nominal interest rates vary with inflation. Third, the price-wage dynamics in the model, most often captured in the Phillips curve, provide the equilibrating mechanism that guides the transition from short run to long run. This sector essentially pins down just how sticky prices are and how long it takes for price flexibility to push the economy to a long-run equilibrium. This paradigm is eclectic and inclusive. It leaves room for the best of the macroeconomic insights of Keynes, classical economists, supply siders, monetarists, and real-business-cycle proponents. The neoclassical synthesis suggests separating the economy's experience into short-run cycles and long-run growth. In early expressions of this framework, the long-run or trend growth rate was generally viewed as relatively stable, so that short-run movements in output could easily be interpreted as movements in demand relative to long-run supply. However, the experience of the 1990s, reinforcing the lessons of the 1970s, suggests that the earlier view of demand-induced variation around a smooth long-term trend is overly simplistic. As a result, today we better appreciate the role of both short- and longer-run supply-side developments. In addition, a narrow definition of supply shocks that covers only relative price shocks--such as the oil price jumps in the 1970s--fails to do justice to the range of supply-side developments that have so affected output and inflation dynamics, particularly in the 1970s and 1990s. In each episode, powerful supply-side shocks included significant changes in our estimates of both the non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment (NAIRU) and the productivity trend. And we are not likely to be satisfied again with a vision that begins from a presumed stable trend in output growth. Responding to Structural Change That is a nice lead-in to the next subject I want to introduce: the importance for both forecasters and policymakers of responding to evidence of structural change. Part of the explanation for the recent exceptional performance appears to be structural changes that have enhanced the performance potential of the economy. Specifically, there are signs of both a decline in the NAIRU and an increase in trend growth. These changes suggest that the economy can maintain stable inflation at a lower unemployment rate and, if not already beyond the point of full employment, can grow faster without a threat of overheating than had been the case for the previous two decades or more. The potential for structural change is a difficult problem for macroeconometric models, built on a base of a relatively long time series and therefore giving relatively little weight to the most recent observations in parameter estimation. Two errors can be made with respect to structural change. First, the model builder could fail to account in a timely way for actual structural change and therefore make poor forecasts. Second, the forecaster could quickly translate errors in the model into structural change when in fact no such change has occurred. The latter adjustment might nevertheless mop up the errors for a few quarters but would ultimately undermine the accuracy of forecasts going forward. But just how sure do we need to be before we integrate into our forecasts and into our policymaking new estimates of key parameters? We are taught classical econometric techniques for testing for structural change, and these set a high hurdle for recognizing structural breaks. But does it make sense for a forecaster or a policymaker to insist on having a 90 percent to 95 percent degree of confidence that a structural change has occurred before he or she reflects such a change in a forecast or policy decision? In testing for structural change, we also tend to emphasize regime changes where parameters change from one stable value to another. This seems particularly restrictive for some parameters--specifically the NAIRU and trend growth--that can be and should be expected to evolve over time. At the Fed, reflecting no doubt the demands of having to make policy in a world of incomplete information and the continuing questions about the estimates of the NAIRU and trend productivity, the staff has been continuously updating its estimates of both parameters. These revised estimates have been instrumental in conditioning the staff forecasts of both inflation and real economic activity and have clearly played an important role in the policy deliberations and actions. One technique that increasingly has been applied--inside and outside the Fed--is time-varying parameter estimation. Instead of beginning with a prior of a constant coefficient over a long period, the point of departure is the presumption that parameters change over time. The technique views errors from a particular equation as embodying both random noise and indications of structural change. It then allows for a continuous updating of key parameters to capture the evolving change in structure. I find this approach especially appealing for the estimation of parameters such as the NAIRU and trend growth. In both cases, there are grounds for expecting the parameter to evolve over time, but limited ability to model the sources of this evolution. We therefore try to extract the parameter from estimation of some structural equation, such as a Phillips curve in the case of the NAIRU or an equation for the demand for labor in the case of productivity. In doing so, it is constructive to use an estimation technique flexible enough to admit the possibility of gradual change in these parameters. New Parameters or a "New Economy"? A particularly important issue today is whether the evidence of structural change points to a change in paradigm--to a so-called new economy--or whether it can be adequately expressed as a change in the parameters within the traditional paradigm. This distinction goes to the very heart of the issue facing forecasters and policymakers today. I appreciate that the traditional paradigm provides less direction in forecasting and policy analysis when it admits time-varying parameters for the NAIRU and trend productivity growth. But if the data suggest evolution in these parameters over time, both forecasters and policymakers have to be alert to the importance of continually updating their estimates of these parameters and do the best they can within this more challenging environment. It is true, however, that the optimal strategy for monetary policy might be affected by the higher degree of uncertainty surrounding key parameters in the model. I will return to this theme later. But, from a modeling or even analytical perspective, what framework is offered to replace the traditional paradigm? I am not a proponent of the new economy school. I admit that I do not fully understand what new paradigm is being offered as the heir apparent to the old paradigm. In the extreme, it appears to hold that there are no limits--no level of capacity that, if exceeded, induces higher inflation and no trend rate of growth that, if consistently exceeded, implies an increase in production relative to capacity leading, over time, to excess demand and higher inflation. I have to admit the absence of such limits makes absolutely no sense to me. At any rate, I still believe that the traditional neoclassical synthesis is the best and most resilient framework for understanding macroeconomic developments. So my approach is to stick with the paradigm and to change the parameters. Many who are viewed as new economy proponents can perhaps be understood, within this paradigm, as believing in one or more of the following: the NAIRU is lower than the 5 percent to 5 ï¿½ percent estimate that I now use, trend productivity growth is higher than the 2 ï¿½ percent rate I now feel comfortable with, and productivity growth is still rising. In addition, new economy proponents may be interpreted as favoring a policy that probes for the limits of how low the NAIRU and how high trend growth might be. In light of uncertainties about these parameters, this policy would encourage a less pre-emptive and more reactive approach to the threat of higher inflation. But if we are all operating within a well-defined paradigm, we can more effectively marshal the evidence from the data to support our individual judgments. Implications of the Paradigm for Inflation and Growth Today, the challenge of explaining recent economic performance leads me to focus my attention on the implications of the paradigm sketched above for economic growth and inflation. The growth framework embodied in this paradigm is generally the neoclassical growth model in which long-run growth is tied down by exogenous trends in population and multi-factor productivity. Capital deepening--that is, increases in capital relative to labor--can also have an influence on the growth of labor productivity. A change in the trend rate of growth, in this framework, would therefore reflect some combination of exogenous changes in population, multi-factor productivity trends, and endogenous capital deepening. In the current episode, the increase in the estimate of trend labor productivity from the 1.1 percent rate widely assumed coming into this expansion to what I expect has become the consensus estimate of 2 ï¿½ percent today has three components. First, methodological changes--specifically revisions to measures of the price level and the recent accounting change to include software as a capital expenditure--have raised the measured trend rate of increase in labor productivity over a longer period. Together these revisions in methodology have contributed about 0.4 percentage point to the increase in the trend growth rate relative to the earlier 1.1 percent estimate. The second component is capital deepening, reflecting the high rate of net investment in this expansion and the resulting increase in the ratio of capital services to labor. The third component is a possible increase in the trend rate of growth in multi-factor productivity. Having asserted the primacy of monetary forces in determining inflation in the long run, some may wonder at my well-known commitment to the Phillips curve. You shouldn't! The Phillips curve, as I hope is well known, does not pin down the long-run inflation rate. In the vertical long-run Phillips curve specification, at least, any stable inflation rate is compatible with equilibrium in the labor and product markets. Instead, the Phillips curve specifies short-run inflation dynamics--how and why inflation moves from one path to another--and highlights the critical role of excess demand as a proximate source of rising inflation. We learned in the 1970s that excess demand is not always the driving force behind movements in inflation. Sometimes excess demand dominates near-term movements in inflation, and sometimes supply shocks overwhelm the effects of overall supply/demand balance in the labor and product markets. As a result, the paradigm now always incorporates supply shocks as a second proximate source of changes in inflation. I find it useful to distinguish two types of supply shocks: first, relative price shocks, such as increases in the price of oil or food, unrelated to the balance between supply and demand in the overall economy; and second, the effect of an unexpected increase in the productivity trend. We are more used to incorporating the former than the latter, but recent experience has, I believe, been a mixture of both. Modeling the Effect of a Productivity Shock One of the most fascinating and complex shocks to evaluate is a shift in the underlying productivity trend. It is difficult to determine when such a shift takes place, both because productivity has such a powerful cyclical component and because productivity has a fairly large noise component. In addition, when a shift does take place, sometimes its force diminishes over time. In other cases, we have very little basis for predicting its sustainability. Another complication is that some adjustments to the productivity trend reflect methodological changes--for example, improvements in the estimates of price indexes. These affect the estimate of productivity over a long period but do not translate into an acceleration in productivity growth in the current episode. Finally, there are a wide variety of repercussions from an increase in the productivity trend. Higher trend productivity, of course, means a higher average growth rate for real GDP. But it has profound effects on demand as well as supply. This is certainly one of the most important lessons of the current episode. A first inclination might be to assume that higher trend productivity translates into a more rapid advance in supply relative to demand, tilting the balance between supply and demand in the economy. In fact, a higher productivity trend also appears to produce perhaps as powerful a stimulus to demand. Several channels are at work here. First, the technological shock that underpins higher productivity typically carries with it enhanced profit opportunities, spurring investment. Second, the same profit opportunities and associated optimism can be expected to drive equity prices higher, both reducing the financing cost of new investment and spurring consumer spending via the wealth effect. Third, expectations of higher permanent income may contribute to higher consumer spending. On balance, in the short run, demand may increase as much as supply, or even more so. The point is that we cannot assume the higher trend productivity eliminates concern about overheating. Nevertheless, even if higher productivity has an equal impact on demand as on supply, it will still tend to damp inflationary pressures in the short run. This is again one of the most powerful lessons of the current episode. Let me explain in some detail how an unexpected increase in productivity growth operates as a temporary favorable supply shock in the traditional paradigm. I begin from a wage-price specification of the Phillips curve--that is, from an equation that explains the rate of growth of nominal compensation in terms of inflation and the gap between the unemployment rate and the NAIRU. Such a specification also should include trend growth in labor productivity as an explanatory variable. Such a specification is necessary to ensure that, in the long run, when unemployment on average equals the NAIRU, nominal compensation increases at a rate equal to the sum of inflation and the trend rate of increase in labor productivity. An increase in the productivity growth trend will have a temporary disinflationary effect if the specification of the wage-price sector incorporates an asymmetric response of wages and prices to the change in the productivity growth trend. Specifically, nominal compensation is assumed to respond more slowly than prices to a change in the trend rate of labor productivity. Of course, both wages and prices respond with a lag to an increase in the productivity trend because it takes time to sort out whether higher productivity is cyclical, just normal quarterly variability or a shift in the underlying trend. But the more sluggish adjustment of nominal wages relative to prices reflects longer nominal contracts for wages than prices; possible information asymmetries (faster learning about the change in trend by businesses than by workers); and perhaps the role of slowly changing wage norms governing wage bargaining. As a result, there is initially almost no effect on nominal compensation from a change in the trend rate of productivity growth. With nearly unchanged compensation and higher productivity, firms find their costs lower and their profits higher than expected. Competition then results in price declines, eroding the profits and resulting in lower inflation than would otherwise have occurred. The lower inflation in turn moderates nominal compensation gains; that is, the same real increases now require smaller nominal gains. The result is a virtuous cycle of lower inflation, lower nominal compensation, and lower inflation. However, productivity shocks--like relative price supply shocks--result only in temporary departures of inflation from the underlying rate justified by longer-run influences such as money growth and shorter-run cyclical influences such as utilization rates. Once the influence of productivity growth in the wage change equation converges to its effect in the price equation, the asymmetry that drives the disinflationary effect of an unexpected increase in the productivity trend dissipates, assuming that productivity growth stabilizes. Evolution of the Traditional Model I now want to discuss four developments of special importance in the evolution of macroeconometric model building, building on the models in place by the late 1960s: the modeling of inflation dynamics, the incorporation of international linkages, the role of policy reaction functions, and the modeling of expectations. The underlying core of the life-cycle model of consumption, neoclassical models of investment and labor demand, and inventory-theoretic money demand remain intact. The most important change was the transition from a Phillips curve that allowed a long-run trade-off between inflation and unemployment to the vertical, natural-rate specification. This was well entrenched by the mid-1970s and was accompanied by a more consistent treatment of inflation in the models, including more careful differentiation of nominal and real interest rates. In addition, by the mid 1970s the models moved to explicitly incorporate supply shocks, at least the relative-price type of shocks. The second development of special importance is the change in the international sector owing to the increased openness of the U.S. economy as well as the effect of the change in the exchange rate regime. Today, imports are a more important part of the short-run dynamics of the model, including a significant role as a stabilizer of shocks to domestic demand. But this openness also has subjected the U.S. economy to shocks from abroad and forced forecasters to pay increasing attention to international linkages and incorporate more details about them. The recent episode of troubles among Asian emerging economies was outside the boundaries of coverage in some models, and adjustment factoring of import and export equations was required to compensate. The experience suggests the importance of sufficiently broad measures of foreign economic activity and exchange rates in models, increasing the span of the world that forecasters have to consider in their forecasts for the United States. The shift to a flexible exchange rate regime and the increased mobility of capital also has sharpened the responsiveness of real exchange rates to real interest rate differentials across countries. Combined with the increased importance of imports and exports, the heightened responsiveness of real exchange rates has increased the importance of the exchange rate channel in the transmission of monetary policy. In the Board staff's model, that channel now accounts for about a third of the responsiveness of aggregate demand to changes in interest rates over a one- to three-year period. Nevertheless, the overall interest sensitivity of aggregate demand appears to be nearly unchanged, at least until the last couple of years, because the increased role of exchange rates has been offset largely by the decreased interest sensitivity of housing due to the elimination of Regulation Q and innovations in financing home purchases. In the past few years, however, the sensitivity of the economy to interest rates may have increased as a result of a more powerful interest-induced wealth effect. This development reflects the increase in the wealth-income ratio produced by the extraordinary rise in equity prices over the last several years. Finally, international developments clearly are helping to restrain U.S. inflation. No doubt the appreciation of the dollar from the spring of 1995 through mid-1998 has played a powerful role. So has the lack of conformity in the business cycles in Europe and Japan relative to the United States, an especially important factor because increased trade flows make capacity more of a global concept in some industries. I expect that our inflation performance would have been less exceptional if the cycles in Europe and Japan had precisely matched our own and if the dollar had remained stable over the past three years. A third evolution in structural models is the use of reaction functions to characterize monetary policy. At Laurence H. Meyer & Associates, we offered our clients a choice of monetary policy regime. They could treat a short-term interest rate, a measure of the money supply, or nonborrowed reserves as an exogenous variable (determined by discretionary policy) or switch on a policy reaction function (explicitly treating monetary policy actions as endogenous responses to economic developments). All the options have their uses, but in a period when there is serious doubt about the stability of money demand, policy reaction functions provide an alternative approach to anchoring the determination of short-term interest rates. Ironically, policy reaction functions appear to be used more in models at the Federal Reserve, where monetary policy is made, than in the private sector, where monetary policy must be forecast. Many forecasters prefer to rely on their interpretation of what various FOMC members say, or what one especially significant member of the FOMC says or does not say (and I am definitely not talking about myself), in setting the funds rate in the initial quarter. But after the first quarter or two, a policy reaction function provides a systematic way to relate monetary policy to the evolution of the forecast. A policy rule is also consistent with my answer when someone asks me, usually in jest, how the federal funds rate will change over the next several meetings. They are initially surprised that I would even answer such a question. But I do answer, and honestly. The answer is: It depends. Specifically, it depends on how utilization rates, growth, and inflation change over time and, at times, on changes in the forecast of these variables going forward. The last major change in modeling is the ongoing attempt to better incorporate the role of expectations and to more richly model the formation of expectations. Most traditional macro models continue to model expectations though distributed lags, an approach that captures in a rough way both adjustment costs and expectations formation. A backward-looking adaptive expectation framework remains the conventional practice, at least in large-scale commercial macro-econometric models. This is an area in which the recently introduced FRB-US model, the successor to the MPS model at the Board, has made significant innovations. The thrust of the new work is to separate macro-dynamics into adjustment-cost and expectation-formation components, with adjustment costs imposing a degree of inertia and expectations introducing a forward-looking element into the dynamics. The net result is a structure that integrates rational expectations into a sticky-price model. The model retains the neoclassical synthesis of the MPS model--short-run output dynamics based on sticky prices and long-run classical properties associated with price flexibility--and therefore produces multiplier results, in both the short and longer runs, that are very similar to those produced by the MPS model. The result is that the model produces, for the most part, what may be the better of two worlds--a modern form and traditional results. But the better-articulated role of expectations in the new model also allows a richer analysis of the response to those policy actions which might have immediate effects on expectations of key variables such as inflation and interest rates. Can the Traditional Paradigm Explain Recent Experience? When I talk about the challenge for monetary policy in the current environment, I often see a look of surprise on the faces in the audience. What challenge? The economy is performing exceptionally. The only challenge, I am often told, is to not screw it up. But to meet this daunting challenge we must confront two others: The first is to understand the source of the exceptional performance. The second is to position monetary policy in light of the answer to the first challenge. From the perspective of the traditional models, the current expansion carries two surprises: the strength of domestic demand, explainable in part by the unexpectedly sharp increase in equity prices, and even more impressive, the decline in inflation (this year confined to core measures) despite steadily rising labor utilization rates, to a level well below virtually anyone's estimate of the NAIRU. Many, though perhaps not all, the explanations for this exceptional performance fit well enough within the framework of traditional models through some combination of normal model error, exogenous shocks, and changes in parameters, the latter reflecting structural changes in the economy. A significant part of the surprise in domestic demand reflects the unexpectedly sharp run-up in equity prices. The stock market boom has significantly lowered the private saving rate and boosted consumer spending, contributed to the buoyancy of the housing market, and encouraged a more robust pace of business fixed investment by reducing the real cost of capital. Virtually all traditional models, I expect, have underpredicted the dramatic rise in stock prices. Interestingly, the revisions to estimated trend productivity growth (implying a higher sustainable rate of increase in earnings) have greatly reduced the over-valuation implicit in such models, at least through 1998. Still, here again we face the task of interpreting large and persistent errors in a structural equation. Does this pattern of errors suggest a persistent over-valuation in equity prices or is it an indication of a structural break? Specifically, are there grounds for believing that there has been a significant decline in the equity premium, justifying a higher equilibrium price-earnings ratio? Whether the higher equity prices are being driven by structural change (and therefore might be sustainable) or are driven by forces more subject to reversal, they may have a similar effect on aggregate demand and encourage a similar response by monetary policy. That is the point I want to emphasize. I will not (not only because I cannot) resolve the question of whether or not higher equity prices are fully justified by fundamentals. I have offered two stories to explain the economy's recent exceptional performance--specifically, the combination of robust growth and rising utilization rates and stable to declining inflation. The first I have called "temporary bliss." This story focuses on a coincidence of reinforcing relative price shocks that have restrained inflation and allowed the economy to move beyond sustainable limits for a while without inflationary consequences. The decline in energy prices over 1997 and 1998, the appreciation of the dollar from the spring of 1995 through mid-1998, and the sharp slowing in cost increases for health insurance are the major players in this story. I have called the second story "permanent bliss." It focuses on structural changes--specifically the decline in the NAIRU and the increase in trend productivity growth--that have enhanced the performance of the economy. When I first offered these explanations, I noted that neither one alone appeared to do justice to recent experience but that the weights attached to each were still important in designing the appropriate monetary policy response. I will return to this theme below. Since I first offered these alternative stories, it has become clearer to me that the increase in trend productivity growth has been the star of this episode. It also has become clearer to me that an unexpected improvement in the productivity trend is a development that fits into both the temporary- and permanent-bliss stories. If it persists, the higher trend productivity will have a profound effect on rising living standards. But a critical question--both for the forecast and for monetary policy--is what are the consequences of a permanent increase in productivity for inflation. Here I draw upon the model of inflation dynamics presented earlier. First, trend productivity has nothing to do with the rate of inflation in the long run. Inflation is a monetary phenomenon and will be pinned down--for better or worse--by the decisions made about monetary policy. Second, an unexpected increase in the productivity trend is, as I emphasized earlier, a very powerful favorable supply shock. The result is a significant and, though temporary, somewhat persistent disinflationary force on the economy. I don't see how we could possibly explain the recent episode without starting from this proposition. And as I noted earlier, this perspective is perfectly consistent with a carefully specified but traditional macro model--new parameters in the old paradigm. But the key message is that old rules still apply to the new limits. Overheating still eventually results if the growth of demand exceeds the growth of supply for long enough, driving the unemployment rate below the NAIRU. Excess demand in labor markets still ultimately puts upward pressure on nominal compensation. So where are we in this process? That depends on whether the updrift in trend productivity growth is ongoing or over. That is, to some degree, unknowable today, although we have some tangible evidence about future productivity (via capital deepening) from the current pace of net investment and the forecast for investment going forward. And it also depends on how low the NAIRU is today and whether it is still changing. But it is quite clear that the other source of supply shocks--the relative price shocks--have all dissipated or reversed, raising the risk of higher inflation going forward. In addition, it would take a rather large additional increment to productivity growth to prevent the diminishing effect from this source from causing some uptick in inflation. Implications for Monetary Policy So what does all this imply for the conduct of monetary policy? First, policymakers have to sort out the degree to which the story is temporary bliss versus permanent bliss. The answer has a critical bearing on the nature of the challenge facing monetary policy. Second, policymakers have to adjust their strategy to take into account the greater uncertainty about key parameters and the greater difficulty in forecasting in this environment. If the favorable inflation outcome of recent years results importantly from the temporary-bliss story, favorable supply shocks have allowed the economy to move beyond the point of sustainable capacity for a while without inflationary consequences. If this is correct, as the favorable supply shocks dissipate or reverse, it will not be possible to remain at prevailing utilization rates without inflationary consequences. Two choices will ultimately present themselves under this scenario. Either the economy will move to a path of higher inflation or policy will encourage a transition to a more sustainable--though less exceptional--state before the upturn in inflation takes hold or at least before it yields a significant rise in the inflation rate. If the permanent-bliss story is the greater reason for the favorable inflation outcome, then the role of monetary policy is dramatically different. In this case, policy should accommodate the new, enhanced performance characteristics of the economy and not constrain it on the basis of out-dated measures of capacity and speed limits. We can perhaps best interpret the new-economy argument as an acceptance of the permanent-bliss interpretation of recent experience and, as a result, offering more support than the temporary-bliss argument offers for an accommodating monetary policy. However, even here, monetary policy would have to be alert both to the effect of a higher productivity trend on demand as well as supply and to the implication of the model that an increase in trend productivity raises the economy's real equilibrium interest rate. Therefore, even under the permanent-bliss story, policymakers have to be alert in the short run to the possibility of overheating and, at over a longer run, to aligning the real federal funds rate with its higher equilibrium value. It seems inescapable that this episode has been characterized by both a variety of shocks and by important changes in key parameters. As a result, there is an unusual degree of uncertainty about the structure of the economy and the forecast going forward. Every year, for example, we forecast slowing growth and rising inflation. Then we spend the coming year trying to explain why we have achieved faster-than-expected growth and lower-than-expected inflation. The cumulative effect of this exercise is that it seems less attractive to base current policy on forecasts. The implication is that policy inevitably becomes more reactive as it becomes less pre-emptive. Some very interesting work at the Board has focused on the implications of uncertainty about the measurement of the output gap (the gap between actual and potential output). This uncertainty is, to an important degree, the result of the uncertainty about the estimate of the NAIRU, given that the NAIRU is critical in pinning down the level of potential output. But uncertainty about the rate of growth in potential output also has been an important factor in the mismeasurement of the output gap. Historically, estimates of the NAIRU, the output gap, and trend growth have been revised substantially over time, implying that policymakers often have made decisions based on an assessment of the output gap that later was judged to be seriously incorrect. How should policymakers respond to this problem? First, we should recognize, as I have emphasized earlier, that the NAIRU and trend growth can change, and have changed, over time, and we should be sensitive to the importance of updating our estimates of these parameters in response to incoming data on inflation, unemployment, and other variables. As I noted earlier, this is very much what we have been doing at the Fed. Second, to the extent that a greater uncertainty remains about the measurement of the output gap, it may be prudent to attenuate the aggressiveness with which real interest rates are adjusted in response to movements in the output gap. That does not mean that movements in the output gap should be ignored. In addition, such an attenuated response, in my view, makes sense only in a region around your best estimate of potential output (or the NAIRU). Once the unemployment rate falls far enough below your best estimate of the NAIRU, for example, it would be prudent to return to a more normal responsiveness of interest rates to further declines in the unemployment rate. In my judgment, we are already in a range in which such a normal response to further declines in the unemployment rate is warranted. Given the initial conditions of robust growth and high utilization rates, at least with respect to the labor market, and given the clear evidence that the previously favorable price shocks are dissipating or reversing, we cannot, in my view, afford to withdraw entirely from a forward-looking policy that is built on our best estimates of the structure of the economy and inflation dynamics. While one could interpret recent policy tightenings as a reversal of earlier easings, the fact is that any policy action has to be justified on the basis of how it contributes going forward to achieving the broad macro objectives assigned to monetary policy. Therefore, for my part, I view the last policy action as an example of still pre-emptive monetary policy, designed to mitigate the risk of higher inflation going forward, especially in light of the threat that robust growth would push already high utilization rates even higher. I continue to believe that the fundamental challenge for monetary policy is to facilitate a transition from the current exceptional but unsustainable state to a more sustainable, though still excellent, state. The transition might well occur while we remain spectators of an economy that slows spontaneously and as a result of recent policy actions. Or it could involve our more active participation. It depends!