Remarks by Vice Chair Alice M. Rivlin Dilemmas facing United States policymakers At La Conférence de Montréal, Montreal, Canada June 1, 1999 I am delighted to have the opportunity to address this distinguished group of Canadian, hemispheric and world leaders. We meet at a crucial moment in economic history--a hopeful, but difficult and uncertain moment--in this historic and incredibly diverse city of Montreal. I'd like to share some thoughts with you today about the dilemmas facing United States policymakers, especially monetary policymakers, as they try to figure out what to do--or not do--in the context of a rapidly evolving domestic, hemispheric and global economy. So much has happened on the world economics scene in the last two years that it is hard to believe that all these major economic events have actually been crowded into such a short period. In just two years, we have had the financial crisis that started in Thailand and spread across Asia, leaving in its wake deep recession in economies that seemed to be among the most vigorous in the world. We have had the Russian default and the associated chaos in markets far across the globe that proved to be interrelated in more complex ways than anyone had suspected. We have had the Brazilian currency devaluation and its aftershocks, followed by recession in much of Latin America. We have seen the three major industrial areas of the world moving on very different tracks: surprising weakness in Japan; surprising strength in the United States; and Europe in the middle, growing only moderately and preoccupied with its big economic event--transition to monetary union. That's an amazing amount of action-packed economic history for two years and it has generated a lot of debate about: Why the crisis happened and what might have been done to prevent it. Why the contagion was so rapid and how it could have been better contained. What might be done now by the international community to reduce the frequency, amplitude and spread of financial crisis in the future. It has been hard to have a thorough and well-informed debate on these questions because events were moving so rapidly. In the middle of a storm, it's hard enough to keep the ship afloat and moving in the right direction, let alone have a serious discussion about how to redesign it so it will handle better on the next voyage. There is a sense now that the storm is ending, or at least that the winds are calmer for a while. The countries that were hit first--Thailand and Korea--are showing signs of economic recovery, and those hit more recently--Brazil and Mexico--have not been quite as badly battered by the storm as some had feared. Economic historians will be analyzing these two years for a long time. What we don't know yet is whether the basic story, written a decade or so hence, will be an explanation of success or an expose of failure. We can hope, indeed I believe it likely, that the basic story will be positive and that it will be a story of how the world economy was badly shaken in 1997 and 1998 but came out stronger in the end. If this is right, then: It will be said that the ship pitched and rolled but self-correcting mechanisms worked to steady it in the end. It will be said that the IMF and other international organizations took some risks and made a few mistakes, but proved essential to keeping the economic ship from foundering. It will be said that serious international debates in venues like this one led to modifications in the design of the ship and its handling that made international economic sailing smoother and less crisis-prone in the future. Alternatively, although it now seems much less likely, the future story of what happened in these two years might still be a story of efforts that ultimately failed. It might be said that self-connecting mechanisms and international policies seemed to be working for a while--in June of 1999, for example, most observers thought the worst was over. But unfortunately, a new and unforeseen series of events roiled the markets, shook the confidence of investors, and started another typhoon that swept across the global seas and swamped the self-correcting market forces and the well-intentioned efforts of policymakers, both domestic and international. The negative scenario doesn't seem likely at present, but it is too soon to say for sure that it won't happen. Two puzzling chapters of this still unwritten story are likely to get particular attention from future historians, although we don't yet know how those chapters will end or how they will relate to the rest of the world story: One is the chapter about why Japan's economy faltered so badly for so long. The other is the chapter about why the United States economy proved so strong for so long. I won't pretend to have any special insight on Japan. The Japanese economy's long stall has multiple causes, and there are no obvious policy answers to turning it around. It is not yet clear whether the bottom has been reached and recovery is beginning, and if so how soon and how strongly growth will resume. What is clear is that Japan's economic health matters a lot, not just to the rest of Asia but to the whole world. A strong recovery in Japan in the near term would contribute mightily to the probability that future historians will be telling the tale of how the events of 1997-98 had a positive outcome and ultimately led to a stronger world economy. The U.S. chapter is just as puzzling, but fortunately the puzzle is positive. It is far from clear why the U.S. economy has been performing so extraordinarily well in so many dimensions or how long it will last. What is clear is that it matters. If policymakers in the U.S. can figure out how to keep the strong performance of the U.S. economy going--and if our luck holds--the probability of there being positive outcomes of the financial crisis of 1997-98 for future historians to write about will be much enhanced. That's a major challenge for the Federal Reserve as well as other U.S. policymakers. The U.S. has enjoyed an eight-year period of continuous growth in the 1990s. The surprising aspect of this upswing has not been its length so much as the fact that real growth has accelerated in the past two years to around 4 percent, while unemployment rates have now been below 5 percent for two years and below 4.5 percent for over a year. Such rapid growth and such tight labor markets used to be thought almost certain to generate inflation and create imbalances in the economy. Yet, inflation has remained quiescent--actually falling on most measures over the period. The most recent Consumer Price Index (CPI) shows some worrisome signs, but there is as yet no clear indication of resurgent inflation. The sustained coexistence of strong growth, tight labor markets and low inflation raises the question of whether the U.S. is benefiting from a serendipitous combination of temporary forces that could easily reverse or whether some more fundamental change has occurred that will enable the U.S. economy to sustain higher growth rates in the future with less risk of accelerating inflation. Unquestionably, some of the factors keeping U.S. inflation low have been byproducts of the global economic situation. Low prices of commodities resulting from weak demand around the world--reversed in part by the recent recovery of oil prices. Fierce global competition in just about all tradable goods and services putting downward pressure on everybody's ability to set prices. The strong U.S. dollar, itself partly a response to productive opportunities for investment in the U.S. and perceived risk in other parts of the world, has made imports cheap for U.S. consumers. Some of these factors are likely to reverse as the world economy recovers. Some domestic anti-inflationary forces may be temporary as well, notably the reduction in the rate of growth in employer costs for health care that reflected the shift of the U.S. health care delivery system to "managed care." But there are also reasons to believe that the U.S. economy is more productive, more competitive and less inflation-prone than it used to be and therefore that it can grow somewhat faster--at least for a while--than seemed possible a couple of years ago. Productivity growth has accelerated in the last three years. Output per hour in non-farm business, which grew at an anemic average rate of one percent per year in the period 1973-95, picked up in 1996-98, reaching an astonishing (and doubtless unsustainable) four percent at the annual rate in the last two quarters. It is by no means clear why this is happening or how long it will last. Technology clearly has something to do with it. Although the telecommunications and information management revolution started well before the 1990s, it may have been just at the right point by then to offer firms that are facing a combination of strong demand, tight labor markets and vigorous competition a way to increase their efficiency. In the past, when unemployment remained low for an extended period, economists expected productivity to suffer because firms were forced to hire less skilled workers with less experience--workers whose productivity was likely to be low. However, recent experience suggests--but certainly does not yet prove--that two factors may have combined to change the expected impact of tight labor markets on productivity. One factor is the availability of new technology, especially computers and telecommunications technology. The other factor is the revolution in management attitudes and practices that has occurred since the 1980s. A whole generation of managers has been trained to think continuously about productivity and quality management. Buzzwords like reengineering and restructuring have not only gotten into the vocabulary of managers, but they have also infiltrated their thought processes and affected their behavior. The response of U.S. firms to shortages of skilled workers, and to increased competition at home and abroad, has apparently been to reorganize what they were doing and how they were doing it, substituting efficient new equipment for employees, training workers to use new equipment and techniques, and outsourcing to reduce costs. All of these actions have combined to increase productivity. If these conjectures are right, or even partly right, then with well designed policies and continued good luck, the United States might be able to continue growing at a healthy rate without accelerating inflation for some time. It is not clear what growth rate is sustainable, but it might well be around 3 percent instead of about 2 percent as seemed more feasible a few years ago. A one percent upward shift in U.S. potential growth would clearly be good news, not only for us, but for sustained economic recovery in the hemisphere and the rest of the world as well. The policy package most favorable to sustained U.S. growth is far more comprehensive than anything the Federal Reserve can contribute. It must involve: Improving education and training--in schools and on the job--to make possible continued improvement in worker productivity; Support of research and development to keep the technological revolution rolling; Continued openness of the economy and avoidance of relapses into protectionism; and Running fiscal surpluses at both the state and federal levels so that government is contributing to national saving and counteracting low saving rates in the private sector. The role of the Federal Reserve must be--as it has been for some time--to keep weighing the risk that the economy will overheat. The risk is that inflation will begin to accelerate as increasingly tight labor markets finally set off an upward wage spiral that cannot be offset by productivity increases and some of the temporary factors that have held inflation in the U.S. down in the last couple of years begin to reverse. That risk has to be weighed against the risk that the U.S. economy, under the impact of weak growth in the rest of the world, or some reversal of confidence by consumers or investors, will grow too slowly, endangering both U.S. prosperity and world economic recovery. The balance of risks has shifted back and forth over the last couple of years and may, of course, shift again. A year ago, concern focused on possible overheating in the U.S. economy despite the negative effects of the Asian crisis on U.S. growth. The Russian default, the consequent world market turmoil and the Brazilian devaluation clearly shifted the risks in the other direction. The possibility seemed strong that spreading contagion in the markets and deepening recession in Latin America, possibly even doubling back to weaken Asia further, would lead to a serious slowdown in the U.S. Three interest rate cuts in rapid succession expressed the Fed's concern over this risk. But now, as the world's confidence returns and the U.S. economy (and its stock market) appears still surprisingly strong, the balance of risks appears to be shifting again. The Federal Reserve's Open Market Committee at its last meeting signaled its return to concern about overheating and possible future inflationary pressure. Members of the Federal Open Market Committee are frequently asked what relative weights they place on domestic and international questions in setting monetary policy. This question is not really a meaningful one for a very large economy in an intensely interrelated world. Trying to set policy so that the U.S. economy grows at its highest sustainable rate is an endeavor that satisfies both domestic and international objectives. The hard thing is to figure our how to do it. If we can do it, we will be contributing to the chance that future historians will be able to say that the events of 1997-99 had a positive outcome and led to a stronger, less turbulent world economy. The United States by itself, however, can only make a modest contribution to the chances of positive outcomes for the world economy. These chances depend more heavily on effective international cooperation to: strengthen financial systems around the world so that they are more resilient to shocks; making markets work better so that both borrowers and lenders are better informed and more able to assess risks; and strengthening international financial institutions so that they are better able to foresee impending crises, provide early warning and apply preventive medicine and act swiftly to reduce contagion when something goes wrong. These are the harder problems to which the international community must apply its energies if the turmoil of the last two years is to have positive and lasting consequences for the future.
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan Trade and technology Before the Alliance for the Commonwealth, Conference on International Business, Boston, Massachusetts June 2, 1999 I am pleased to join the Alliance for the Commonwealth today for its annual Conference on International Business. I should also like to thank my good friends John LaWare, Chairman of the Alliance, and Cathy Minehan, President of the Boston Federal Reserve Bank, who encouraged me to participate in this daylong educational symposium. There are few better examples of the benefits of trade and investment than here in Boston where the roots of international trade go back to our nation's origins. Massachusetts, and New England in general, are today, as in the past, actively engaged in the global trade environment and are currently home to many of the firms that are the recipients or the sources of cross-border direct investment. The evidence is overwhelmingly persuasive that the massive increase in world competition--a consequence of broadening trade flows--has fostered markedly higher standards of living for almost all countries who have participated in cross-border trade. I include most especially the United States. And yet, as I have indicated in recent speeches and intend to outline shortly, there are reasons to be concerned that the benefits of increasingly open trade may not be allowed to be as readily forthcoming in the future as they have been in the past half century. Although many forces have been at play, the post World War II surge in trade has clearly owed, in large part, to significant advances in technological innovation. Since the dawn of the industrial revolution, there has been an inexorable drive to leverage physical brawn and material resources into ever greater value added or output. New insights into the laws of nature brought steam and later electric power. The development of a production quality level that facilitated interchangeable parts brought assembly line production. And the development of railroads facilitated the evolution of mass markets. Almost all of the leverage of the physical to higher value added has reflected the substitution of ideas--new insights--for material bulk and brute human effort. The resulting more effective organization of material has, of course, inevitably meant that less of it was needed per unit of output. The insights of metallurgy and architectural and engineering design, for example, enabled the construction of buildings that use far less physical material per unit of space than say, a half century ago. The insights that led to central heating, as well as synthetic fiber, facilitated reduced clothing weight, while the development of the jet engine brought far greater annual passenger miles per unit of aircraft size. But doubtless it has been the advent in recent decades of the synergies of the microprocessor, lasers, and fiber optics that has fostered a distinct quickening in the displacement of physical weight of output with concepts. The ability to miniaturize transistor electronic circuits has displaced huge tonnages of copper and enhanced the speed of calculation that the miniaturization of circuitry facilitated. As high tech became an increasing part of our national product, the relative physical dimensions of our value added fell dramatically. The per capita physical weight of our gross domestic product is evidently only scarcely higher today than it was fifty or one hundred years ago. By far the largest contributor to growth of our price-adjusted GDP, or value added, has been ideas--insights that leveraged physical reality. The consequent downsizing of output, of course, meant that products were easier, and hence less costly, to move, and most especially across national borders. It is thus not surprising that the price-adjusted level of international trade, as I indicated earlier, has expanded at a far faster pace than gains in real domestic demand. Imports of goods and services as a percent of gross domestic products worldwide, on average, have risen from approximately 14 percent twenty-five years ago to 24 percent today. The growth in physical weight of such trade, as with the national product generally, has been far less. For example, United States data on both exports and imports indicates that the price-adjusted value of our trade per pound has risen by approximately 4 percent per year on average over those same three decades. But technology has augmented international trade for reasons beyond the downsizing of material output. New telecommunications technologies made it very difficult for the autarchic societies of the former Soviet Union to sustain their isolation in the face of the growing relative affluence of the West. News could no longer be bottled up. Even in the West, the stultification of protectionism became increasingly evident as new consumer products entered the world markets en masse. The political pressures to deregulate moribund industries and open up borders to trade soon became irresistible. The international trading system that evolved has enhanced competition and fostered the continuous scrapping of old technologies to make way for the new. Standards of living rise because the depreciation and other cash flows of industries employing older, increasingly obsolescent, technologies are marshaled to finance the newly produced capital assets that almost always embody the cutting edge technologies. This is the process by which wealth is created incremental step by incremental step. It presupposes a continuous churning of an economy in which the new displaces the old. But there is also little doubt that this transition to the new high-tech economy, of which rising trade is a part, is proving difficult for a large segment of our workforce that interfaces with our rapidly changing capital stock day-by-day. Moreover, while major advances in standards of living are evident among virtually all nations that have opened their borders to increased competition, the adjustment trauma has also distressed those who once thrived in companies that were then at the cutting edge of technology, but which have since become increasingly less competitive in both domestic and foreign markets. Economists will say that workers should move from the steel districts of western Pennsylvania to a vibrant Silicon Valley. And eventually they, or more likely, their children, will. But the adjustment process is wrenching to an existing workforce made redundant largely through no fault of their own. It may be argued that all workers should have the foresight to recognize long-term job opportunity shifts and move in advance of obsolescence. This regrettably is a skill not in great abundance--among business managers or the economists who counsel them, as well as among workers. Yet the protectionist propensity to thwart the process of the competitive flow of capital, from failing technologies to the more productive, is unwise and surely self-defeating. History tells us that not only is it unwise to try to hold back innovations, it is also not possible over the longer run. Generation after generation has experienced episodes in which the technologically obsolescent endeavored to undermine progress, often appealing to the very real short-term costs of adjusting to a changing economic environment. From the Luddites to the Smoots and the Hawleys, competitive forces were under attack. In the end they did not prevail and long-term advances in standards of living resumed. Nonetheless, the campaign to expand free trade is never won. Legislation to further lower trade barriers, for example, is becoming increasingly more difficult to pass in our Congress. It is a continuing battle. Further, while tariffs in industrial countries have come down sharply over the past half century, other barriers have become more prevalent. Administrative protection in the form of antidumping suits and countervailing duties is a case in point. While these forms of protection have often been imposed under the label of promoting "fair trade," oftentimes they are just simple guises for inhibiting competition. Typically, antidumping duties are levied when foreign average prices are below average cost of production. But that also describes a practice that often emerges as a wholly appropriate response to a softening in demand. It is the rare case that prices fall below marginal cost, which would be a more relevant standard. Antidumping initiatives should be reserved, in the view of many economists, for those cases where anticompetitive behavior is involved. Contrary to popular notions about antidumping suits, under U.S. and WTO law, it is not required to show evidence of predatory behavior, or intention to monopolize, or of any other intentional efforts to drive competitors out of business. In the end it is clear that all economic progress rests on competition. It would be a great tragedy were we to stop the wheels of progress because of an incapacity to assist the victims of progress. Our efforts should be directed at job skills enhancement and retraining--a process in which the private market is already engaged. Thwarting competition, by placing barriers to imports, will prevent the needed transitions of the productive capital stock of the United States and other nations that enable it to continuously concentrate on producing those goods and services most desired by consumers. Protectionism will also slow the inevitable transition of the workforce to more productive endeavors. To be sure, an added few years may enable some workers to reach retirement with dignity, but it will also keep frozen in place younger workers whose better job opportunities decline with time. I regret that trade policy has been inextricably linked with job creation. We try to promote free trade on the mistaken ground that it will create jobs. The reason should be that it enhances standards of living through the effects of competition on productivity. It is difficult to find credible evidence that trade has impacted the level of total employment in this country over the long run. Indeed, we are currently experiencing the widest trade deficit in history with a level of unemployment close to record lows. Certainly, the distribution of jobs by industry is affected by international trade, but it is also affected by domestic trade. It is the relative balance of supply and demand in a competitive market economy that determines the mix of employment. When exports fall or imports rise, domestic demand and relative prices have invariably adjusted in the long run to leave total employment relatively unaffected. As economists like to say, all imports are eventually paid for with exports. I also regret that, despite the remarkable success over a near half century of GATT, the General Agreement on Trade and Tariffs, and its successor, the World Trade Organization, in reducing trade barriers, our trade laws and negotiating practices are essentially adversarial. They presume that a trade concession extracted from us by our trading partners is to their advantage at our expense, and must be countered. Few economists see the world that way. And I am rash enough to suggest that we economists are correct, at least in this regard: trade is not a zero sum game. If trade barriers are lowered by both parties, each clearly benefits. But if one lowers barriers and the other does not, the country that lowered barriers unilaterally would still be better off having done so. Raising barriers to achieve protectionist equality with reluctant trading partners would be neither to our benefit, nor to theirs. The best of all possible worlds for competition is for both parties to lower trade barriers. The worst is for both to keep them up. For these reasons, I am concerned about the recent evident weakening of support for free trade in this country. Should we endeavor to freeze competitive progress in place, we will almost certainly slow economic growth overall, and impart substantial harm to those workers who would otherwise seek more effective longer-term job opportunities. Protecting markets from new technologies has never succeeded. Adjustments to newer technologies have been delayed, but only at significant cost. Even should our trading partners not retaliate in the face of increased American trade barriers, an unlikely event, we do ourselves great harm by lessening the vigor of American competitiveness. The United States has been in the forefront of the postwar opening up of international markets, much to our, and the rest of the world's, benefit. It would be a great tragedy were that process reversed. I do not believe that will be allowed to happen. There is too much at stake for us and our trading partners.
For immediate release Alice M. Rivlin today submitted her resignation as Vice Chair and as a member of the Board of Governors, effective July 16, 1999. Vice Chair Rivlin, who has been a member of the Board since June 24, 1996, submitted her letter of resignation to President Clinton today. In view of her impending departure from the Board, Vice Chair Rivlin will not attend the June 29-30 meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee. Before becoming a member of the Board, Vice Chair Rivlin served as Director of the White House Office of Management and Budget and was Hirst Professor of Public Policy at George Mason University. Dr. Rivlin also was the founding Director of the Congressional Budget Office. She will be joining the Brookings Institution. Attached is a copy of her .
For immediate release Federal Reserve Board Chairman Alan Greenspan today issued the following statement: I am extraordinarily grateful to Alice Rivlin for her many contributions to the Federal Reserve and very much regret her departure. Dr. Rivlin used her skills and experience to make this institution stronger. Her wisdom influenced all of our deliberations. As Administrative Governor, she revised the Federal Reserve Board's budgeting process, introducing a biennial budget and directing more resources toward long-term planning. She chaired the Committee on the Federal Reserve in the Payments Mechanism (now called the Rivlin Committee) to help define the Federal Reserve's future role in the payments system, and inspired a new focus on the role of the central bank in fostering electronic payments. In the exercise of her many international responsibilities as Vice Chair, her steady common sense served us well during a particularly difficult period. I speak for the entire Board in saying that we will miss her, and wish her success in her next endeavors.
For immediate release The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision has issued a consultative paper on a new capital adequacy framework for large internationally active banking organizations. The proposed new framework would revise the Committee's current capital adequacy framework, which was issued in 1988 and is commonly referred to as the Basel Capital Accord. Comments to the Basel Committee on the consultative paper are requested by March 31, 2000 . The proposed new capital framework consists of: a strong, risk-sensitive regulatory capital standard; an active supervisory program; and improved bank disclosures that allow the marketplace to evaluate an institution's risk posture and to reward or discipline it appropriately. Development of a more comprehensive and sensitive treatment of credit risk is the objective of the proposed minimum capital standard. Three approaches are outlined in the consultative paper: a modified version of the existing approach and, going forward, the use of banks' internal ratings and portfolio credit risk models. Revisions proposed to the existing approach include incorporating external ratings to varying degrees into the capital treatment of claims on sovereigns, public sector entities, banks and highly-rated corporates. An approach to addressing asset securitization also is proposed. Additionally, the Committee is soliciting industry comment on the capital treatment of certain credit risk mitigation techniques and ways to expand coverage of the Accord to incorporate interest rate and operational risk. The Committee is further proposing to expand the scope of the Basel Accord, which currently applies to internationally active banks. Under this proposal, the Accord also would be applied on a consolidated basis to holding companies that are parents of internationally active banking groups. In this regard, the Federal Reserve notes that the Committee's consultative paper does not make any proposals regarding the definition of capital. The Committee was established by the central bank Governors of the Group of Ten countries in 1975 and operates under the auspices of the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) in Basel, Switzerland. It consists of senior supervisory authorities representing the world's largest banking systems and works to strengthen bank supervisory and regulatory practices worldwide. The complete can be obtained from the BIS Internet site.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of a Cease and Desist Order against Banco Atlántico, S.A., Barcelona, Spain, and its New York Agency. The Order was issued jointly with the Acting Superintendent of Banks of the State of New York. A copy of the Order is attached.
Remarks by Governor Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. Before the East Hanover (N.J.) Area Chamber of Commerce, East Hanover, New Jersey June 10, 1999 The Making of Monetary Policy Thank you for inviting me to share lunch and a few thoughts with you today. I believe that it is important for the actions of this country's central bank to be as transparent as possible, and, therefore, I am happy to address this audience on the topic of the what the Federal Reserve actually does and how it does it. I will also try to give an assessment of the national and international issues affecting Federal Reserve policy. I hope that you will conclude from this discussion that, though the process of setting monetary policy is complex, it is nonetheless in many important ways accessible to the average citizen. I also hope that you will agree that there are really very few secrets; we attempt to be as open as is responsible, which is appropriate in a democracy. History of the Federal Reserve System and the FOMC The Federal Reserve was created by an act of Congress on December 23, 1913. The Federal Reserve System consists of a seven-member Board of Governors (an independent agency of the federal government with headquarters in Washington, D.C.), plus a nationwide network of twelve Federal Reserve Banks and twenty-five branches. Congress established the Federal Reserve Banks as the operating arms of the nation's central banking system, and they have both public and private elements. Neither the Board nor the Reserve Banks receive appropriations from Congress. Therefore, they do not operate with tax revenues, but rather pay expenses out of earnings. Earnings of the Federal Reserve Banks are derived primarily from interest received on their holdings of U.S. government securities and the fees they charge to depository institutions for providing services. All of the net earnings of the Banks, after expenses, contributions to surplus and payment of other assessments, are aggregated and paid over to the U.S. Treasury. In 1998, for example, the Federal Reserve paid approximately $26.5 billion to the U.S. Treasury. The Federal Open Market Committee, or FOMC, is the most important monetary policy-making body of the Federal Reserve System. The FOMC makes the key decisions regarding the conduct of open market operations -- (purchases and sales of U.S. government securities) -- which affect the cost and availability of money and credit in the U.S. economy. The voting members of the Committee are the members of the Board of Governors and five Reserve Bank presidents. The president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York serves on a permanent basis; the presidents of the other Reserve Banks serve one-year terms on a rotating basis, beginning January 1 of each year. All the Reserve Bank presidents participate fully in the various discussions, regardless of whether they currently have a vote in the policy decision. By law, the FOMC must meet at least four times each year in Washington, D.C. Since 1980, eight regularly scheduled meetings have been held each year. If circumstances require consultation or consideration of an action between regularly scheduled meetings, members may be called upon to participate in a special meeting or a telephone conference. So what happens at these meetings? The order and structure of these meetings may change over time, but they have been pretty much fixed during my term on the Board. Before each regularly scheduled meeting of the FOMC, System staff members prepare written reports on past and prospective economic and financial developments, which are sent to Committee participants. At the meeting itself, staff members present oral reports on the current and prospective business situation, conditions in financial markets and international economic and financial developments. After these reports, each Committee participant, voting and nonvoting, expresses his or her views on the current state of the economy and prospects for the future. After a short coffee break, we have a staff presentation on the alternatives we face in setting monetary policy. At that point, the Chairman gives his view of the economy and makes a suggestion for the appropriate direction of policy. Each Committee member then responds to the Chairman's suggestion, in the process setting out a preferred choice for policy. After this second "go-around," we take a formal vote on the target federal funds rate for the period until the next meeting. At this point, the focus is on the voting members, who, as I noted, include all of the Governors and five of the twelve Presidents. Generally, an announcement of a change in interest rates, if any, is made at about 2:15 in the afternoon. A full set of meeting minutes is made available after the subsequent meeting. Let me shift now from the mechanics of the process to the broader conceptual issues that confront the conduct of monetary policy and some of the issues surrounding the outlook for the U.S. economy. Of course, the views I shall be expressing are my own and are not necessarily shared by the FOMC or the Board of Governors. The Goals of Monetary Policy Federal law establishes the goals of monetary policy. The Federal Reserve and the FOMC are "to promote effectively the goals of maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates." Many analysts believe that achieving price stability should be the primary goal of a central bank because a stable level of prices appears to be the condition most conducive to maximum sustained output and employment, and to moderate long-term interest rates. This presumably is because in times of price stability the prices of goods, materials and services are undistorted by inflation and thus can serve as clearer signals and guides for the efficient allocation of resources. Also, a background of stable prices is thought to encourage capital formation because it reduces the distortion created by a tax system that is only partly indexed for inflation. Some would argue that the remarkable period of growth that we are experiencing is due in no small measure to the low rate of inflation that has prevailed for some time. The problem with the rather neat formulation that I have just given is that it does not include an element of time. In the long run, I have no doubt that price stability underpins efforts to achieve maximum output and employment. But, in the short run, some tensions can arise between efforts to reduce inflation and efforts to maximize employment and output. For example, the economy may at times be faced with adverse developments affecting supply, such as a bad agricultural harvest or a disruption in the supply of oil, which put upward pressure on prices and downward pressure on output and employment. In these circumstances, makers of monetary policy must decide the extent to which we should focus on defusing price pressures or on cushioning the loss of output and employment in the short run, while still keeping an eye on our long-term objectives. At other times, policymakers may be concerned that expectations of inflation will get built into decisions about wages and prices and, become a self-fulfilling prophecy. Countering this threat of inflation with a more restrictive monetary policy could risk small losses of output and employment in the short run but might make it possible to avoid larger losses later should expectations of higher inflation become embedded in the economy. The press tries to categorize FOMC members as "hawks" and "doves." These labels are an effort to simplify, in fact oversimplify, the complex choices that each member of the FOMC must make in deciding how to trade off the risk that action, or inaction, on our part will lead to inflation heating up to unacceptable levels, against the risk of having inadequate creation of jobs. But I believe that all members of the Committee recognize that, over the longer haul, the major contribution the Federal Reserve can make to higher standards of living is to promote price stability. It is generally thought that monetary policy takes many months to have most of its effect on the growth of output and employment, while, of course, it has an immediate impact on financial markets. Because of the long time-frame in which the effects on the real economy are realized, I believe that it is important for policy to look ahead as it aims at promoting stable prices and a sustainable GDP growth path, along which the economy is at full potential. Given that we need to be forward-looking, or "preemptive," as it is often put, one potentially important element in making monetary policy is the forecast or likely outlook for economic growth, unemployment and the price level for the next year or two. Fortunately, as we make monetary policy we have the advantage of several forecasts. The staff of the Board of Governors, private-sector economists, and the staffs of the Federal Reserve Banks make forecasts. Some individual Governors and Reserve Bank Presidents also have considerable experience and expertise in forecasting. To be useful for monetary policy, forecasts of the future health of the economy need to be reasonably reliable. Good forecasts rest on the identification of empirical regularities that can be confidently relied upon to provide guidance. Regrettably, some previously reliable empirical relations have not proven so of late. As one example, the failure of price inflation to pick up, as labor markets have become tighter is not consistent with the simple correlations that were so apparent in earlier cycles. Moreover, factors outside of economists' models have provided some surprises, such as the Asian economic and financial turmoil and the gyration of oil prices. If forecast relationships are less certain, it becomes more challenging to be "preemptive." In these circumstances, I believe, it is appropriate to put greater weight on incoming data to determine whether the stance of monetary policy should be changed. Some of the variables relevant in this regard are: 1) the rate of change in wages or prices or early signs of emerging inflation, 2) the level of the unemployment rate and the pace of job creation, 3) the rate and composition of GDP growth (inventories, trade flows, consumption, investment, residential and commercial construction, and so forth), and 4) international developments. Economists refer to these variables as being from the "real" side of the economy. Another set of variables to be considered in making monetary policy are financial variables, such as the money supply, interest rates, exchange rates, credit flows, and conditions in bank lending and in the debt and equity markets. The last two years, 1997 and 1998, gave an interesting case study of the interplay between these different variables and the degree of forward-looking behavior in the making of monetary policy. From March of 1997 through much of 1998, pleasant surprises in the performance of inflation and the general absence of early signs of inflation, and uncertainty about the relationship of changes in inflation to the level of resource utilization, kept the FOMC from tightening. We did not tighten despite the economy being beyond most estimates of its potential and despite many forecasts of rising inflation. Put another way, the FOMC could have "preemptively" tightened monetary policy, based on forecasts, but recognizing the uncertainties about empirical relationships chose not to do so. Indeed, monetary policy was eased in the fall of 1998. You may recall, there was considerable concern last autumn regarding the performance of the debt markets, especially the markets for corporate bonds and commercial paper. These concerns were centered around a seizing up in those markets that raised significantly the cost of funds to some borrowers and prevented some others from entering the market at all. Given the situation, we were reasonably confidant that constraints on the ability of corporations to borrow would eventually have a negative effect on their willingness to invest in productive capacity and, therefore, on their ability to provide goods and services and to create jobs. A related concern was that weakened foreign economies, associated with the financial turmoil, might have adverse consequences on future domestic activity. Under those circumstances, the FOMC thought it appropriate to ease policy to offset a likely significant impact on future domestic spending and growth. Finally, no discussion of monetary policy and financial markets would be complete without reference to the equity markets. I believe that the Fed cannot target specific levels in equity markets. However, equity markets have spillover effects into the real economy, and hence, send important signals to policymakers. As you know, economists often speak of the "wealth effect," and econometric modeling indicates that consumers tend to raise the level of their spending somewhere around 2 percent to 5 percent of incremental stock market wealth, after two or three years. As a consequence, equity valuations can have a noticeable effect on consumption and on macroeconomic performance. Additionally, equity markets are a source of investment capital, and valuations in the stock market are one determinant of the cost of capital for businesses. Therefore, equity prices have an influence on business fixed investment, along with household consumption. Finally, equity markets are of interest to policymakers because we have a responsibility for macro-stability. We have seen in other economies that bubbles and busts in financial markets can create unsettled conditions that impair real economic activity. Therefore, while it would be incorrect to say that policymakers target the equity markets or that market concerns "tie the hands" of the Fed, the markets are an important consideration in macroeconomic analysis. These are just some of the factors that go into making monetary policy. The interesting part of the job is that the relative importance of these factors--forecasts, current macroeconomic conditions, financial market conditions and others--are often in flux. For those who seek to monitor our actions, the good news is that, through a reading of FOMC announcements and minutes, speeches by Governors and Presidents, and interviews, an observer can get a pretty good handle on which variables are uppermost in each policymaker's mind at any given time. Often, however, many factors are relevant, and we cannot indicate precisely the relative weights that a group as diverse as the FOMC may be applying to them in making policy. After all, the economy is influenced by all of the factors I have outlined, and the FOMC's emphasis on specific factors varies over time as economic conditions change. Outlook for 1999 With this general statement of the factors that go into setting monetary policy, let me turn to the outlook for 1999. Economic data for the final quarter of 1998 and the first quarter of this year were stronger than many had expected. Real GDP grew more than 4 percent in 1998, on a fourth-quarter-to-fourth-quarter basis, and maintained that rapid growth into the first quarter of this year. The consensus, as represented by the most recent Blue Chip Economic Indicators, is that growth will be more moderate over the remainder of 1999, but that it will still total nearly 3-1/4 percent or so for the year. This is a more upbeat view of the prospects for activity than prevailed just a few months ago. One reason is that the international economic landscape looks, if not perfect, at least a bit calmer than it did. The ability of Brazil, with the financial assistance of the international community, to weather its exchange rate crisis as well as it has to date, no doubt, has done much to allay some of the fears that were present in late 1998 and early 1999. So, too, have the signs that a number of East Asian economies have been able to commence the process of recovery, after their tremendous difficulties. Finally, it is simply the case that many economists have come to the realization that they underestimated the underlying strength of domestic demand here in the United States-and the profitability of American businesses in that environment. The strength in corporate profits in the first quarter not only impressed economists, but it also impressed investors, who drove stock prices up earlier this year. That rise, through the effects I noted earlier, should continue to support domestic demand in the months ahead. The flip side of that coin is that the pressures on resources in the United States are greater than it was anticipated they would be. This is especially true in the labor market, where many firms continue to report that the short supply of labor is a major problem. But, again underscoring an earlier point, this tightness of the labor market has not manifested itself in ongoing escalation of wage inflation. Indeed, if anything, the trend of increase in wages and overall compensation per hour has turned more favorable on average in recent quarters. A number of factors seem to have been at work here, but I'll mention just two. First, we earlier had seen a disproportionate contribution to the aggregate pay acceleration from the finance, insurance, and real estate industry, and there has been some ebbing recently in those sectors-evidently reflecting a response to a peaking in some areas of activity, such as mortgage refinancing. Second, and more fundamentally, it is quite possible that we are seeing a pass-through of the more modest rates of price inflation we have enjoyed in the past couple of years into decisions about nominal wage increases. Put simply, wages have not had to increase as rapidly as in prior years just to cover a rising cost-of-living. This is, of course, a very healthy development-one that we hope will be sustained going forward, because it is central to the achievement of ongoing price stability. We must recognize that there have been a number of factors behind the favorable price performance we have been experiencing. In part, it is due to an increase in productivity, as businesses have invested in high-tech equipment and adjusted the procedures of the workplace to get the greatest benefit from those investments. This allows workers to become more productive and receive higher pay, which businesses need not translate into higher prices in order to remain profitable. However, the recent good news also reflects, in part, "special factors" that we cannot assume will be repeated indefinitely. I might say that we would not even want them to be repeated in some cases-the Asian economic crisis, for example. Moreover, we have already seen some reversal of some of these factors, most notably the sharp rebound in world oil prices and a surge in health insurance costs. Under the circumstances, we must be concerned that, with the economy operating at such a high level of labor utilization and growth robust, we might be in some jeopardy of setting the stage for a an upturn in inflation. In our announcement after our May 18 meeting, the Federal Open Market Committee made it clear that we are watching things very closely and stand prepared to act promptly if the evidence begins to mount that inflationary pressures could be building. Conclusion The Federal Reserve has an important role to play in our economy. However, our role in the economy should be kept in perspective. We control just a very few of the levers that drive the economy. We observe developments in the economy and in financial markets and try to adjust monetary policy to the signals that we receive so that our nation's economic welfare is not threatened by inflation or by growth that persistently falls below the economy's potential. However, it is the decisions and actions that you take as consumers and business managers that ultimately determine the health of the U.S. economy. Despite difficult periods, 1998 turned out to be a very good year because of a mix of private action and economic policy. I hope that 1999 will continue to be as good to us all.
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan Commencement address Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts June 10, 1999 President Rudenstine, President Wilson, Harvard alumni, fellow recipients of degrees, your parents and friends: It is a distinct pleasure to join you in celebrating this milestone in American higher education, the 348th Harvard commencement. We are here to honor the achievements and the promise of the members of the graduating class of 1999. To them, let me say: You are being bequeathed the tools for achieving a material existence that neither my generation nor any that preceded it could have even remotely imagined as we began our life's work. What you must shape for yourselves are those values that will enable you to thrive in a world that is becoming increasingly competitive and frenetic. To the parents and friends of the graduating class, let me say: I had planned to offer you some useful investment advice but, in the end, was dissuaded. My staff informed me that those of you who in recent years have been paying Harvard tuition or have contributed to the endowment fund, must by now have little left to invest. But clearly you have already made the best investment there is: education. The creative abilities of this graduating class and their contemporaries will determine the future state of our cultural, legal, and economic institutions. The ideas these graduates create, and employ, will influence the degree of American prosperity in the twenty-first century. The quintessential manifestations of America's industrial might earlier this century--large steel mills, auto assembly plants, petrochemical complexes, and skyscrapers--have been replaced by a gross domestic product that has been downsized as ideas have replaced physical bulk and effort as creators of value. Today, economic value is best symbolized by exceedingly complex, miniaturized integrated circuits and the ideas--the software--that utilize them. Most of what we currently perceive as value and wealth is intellectual and impalpable. The American economy, clearly more than most, is in the grip of what the eminent Harvard professor, Joseph Schumpeter, many years ago called "creative destruction," the continuous process by which emerging technologies push out the old. Standards of living rise when incomes created by the productive facilities employing older, increasingly obsolescent, technologies are marshaled to finance the newly produced capital assets that embody cutting-edge technologies. This is the process by which wealth is created, incremental step by incremental step. It presupposes a continuous churning of an economy as the new displaces the old. Although this process of productive obsolescence has ancient roots, it appears to have taken on a quickened pace in recent years and changed its character. The remarkable, and partly fortuitous, coming together of the technologies that make up what we label IT--information technologies--has begun to alter, fundamentally, the manner in which we do business and create economic value, often in ways that were not readily foreseeable even a decade ago. Before the advent of what has become a veritable avalanche of information technology innovation, most twentieth-century business decisionmaking had been hampered by dated and incomplete information about customer preferences in markets and flows of materials through a company's production systems. Relevant information was hours, days, or even weeks old. Accordingly, business managers had to double up on materials and people to protect against the inevitable misjudgments that were part and parcel of production planning. Ample inventory levels were needed to ensure output schedules, and backup teams of people and machines were required to maintain quality control and respond to unanticipated developments. Of course, large remnants of imprecision still persist, but the remarkable surge in the availability of real-time information in recent years has sharply reduced the degree of uncertainty confronting business management. This has enabled businesses to remove large swaths of now unnecessary inventory, and dispense with much programmed worker and capital redundancies. As a consequence, growth in output per work hour has accelerated, elevating the standards of living of the average American worker. Intermediate production and distribution processes, so essential when information and quality control were poor, are being bypassed and eventually eliminated. The proliferation of Internet web sites is promising to alter significantly the way large parts of our distribution system are managed. Moreover, technological innovations have spread far beyond the factory floor and retail and wholesale distribution channels. Biotech, for example, is revolutionizing medicine and agriculture, with far reaching consequences for the quality of life not only in the United States but around the world. The explosion in the variety of products of many different designs and qualities has opened up the potential for the satisfaction of consumer needs not evident even a decade or two ago. The accompanying expansion of incomes and wealth has been truly impressive, though regrettably the gains have not been as widely spread across households as I would like. How is this remarkable economic machine to be maintained, and how can we better ensure that its benefits reach the greatest number of people? Certainly, we must foster an environment in which continued advances in technology are encouraged and welcomed. If the graduates of 1999 are going to be able to build on the accomplishments of their forebears, many of them must push forward to expand our knowledge in science and engineering, and our universities must ready themselves to meet the technical needs of our students yet to come. But scientific proficiency will not be enough. Skill alone may not be sufficient to move the frontier of technology far enough to meet the many challenges that our nation and educational system will confront in the decades ahead. And technological advances alone will not buttress the democratic institutions, supported by a rule of law, which are so essential to our dynamic and vigorous American economy. Each is merely a tool, which, without the enrichment of human wisdom, is of modest value. A crucial challenge of education is to transform skills and intelligence into wisdom--into a process of thinking capable of forming truly new insights. An agile young mind has the facility to solve a complex set of equations. But that mind must be broadened if it is to make effective use of that solution to meet human needs. There is little doubt of the relationship between our ability to think creatively and our productiveness as individual members of society. The roots and nature of how the human mind innovates, however, have always been subject to controversy. Yet, even without indisputable evidence, there has been a remarkable and pervasive assumption that the ability to think abstractly is fostered through exposure to philosophy, literature, music, art, and languages. A liberal education was presumed in years past to produce a greater understanding of all aspects of living--an essential ingredient for broadening one's world view. I believe it still does. Viewing a great painting or listening to a profoundly moving piano concerto produces a sense of intellectual joy that is satisfying in and of itself. But, arguably, it also enhances and reinforces the conceptual processes so essential to innovation. Specifically, the broadening of one's world view that is acquired through a liberal education almost surely contributes to an understanding of the interrelationships of different fields of endeavor. Important new knowledge is very often the result of such interdisciplinary observation. The broader the context that an inquiring mind brings to a problem, the greater will be the potential for creative insights that, in the end, contribute to a more productive economy. But learning and knowledge--and even wisdom--are not enough. National well-being, including material prosperity, rests to a substantial extent on the personal qualities of the people who inhabit a nation. At the risk of sounding a bit uncool, I say to the graduating class of 1999 that your success in life, and the success of our country, is going to depend on the integrity and other qualities of character that you and your contemporaries will continue to develop and demonstrate over the years ahead. A generation from now, as you watch your children graduate, you will want to be able to say that whatever success you achieved was the result of honest and productive work, and that you dealt with people the way you would want them to deal with you. Civilization, our civilization, rests on that premise. It presupposes the productive interaction of people engaged in the division of labor, driven--I cannot resist the jargon--by economic comparative advantage. This implies mutual exchange to mutual advantage among free people. Coercive societies and coercive relationships among people rarely enhance the state of what we call civilization. I presume that I could offer all kinds of advice to today's graduates from my half-century in private business and government. I could urge you all to work hard, save, and prosper. And I do. But transcending all else is being principled in how you go about doing those things. It is decidedly not true that "nice guys finish last," as that highly original American baseball philosopher, Leo Durocher, was once alleged to have said. I do not deny that many appear to have succeeded in a material way by cutting corners and manipulating associates, both in their professional and in their personal lives. But material success is possible in this world and far more satisfying when it comes without exploiting others. The true measure of a career is to be able to be content, even proud, that you succeeded through your own endeavors without leaving a trail of casualties in your wake. I cannot speak for others whose psyches I may not be able to comprehend, but, in my working life, I have found no greater satisfaction than achieving success through honest dealings and strict adherence to the view that for you to gain, those you deal with should gain as well. Human relations--be they personal or professional--should not be zero sum games. And beyond the personal sense of satisfaction, having a reputation for fair dealing is a profoundly practical virtue. We call it "good will" in business and add it to our balance sheets. Trust is at the root of any economic system based on mutually beneficial exchange. In virtually all transactions, we rely on the word of those with whom we do business. Were this not the case, exchange of goods and services could not take place on any reasonable scale. Our commercial codes and contract law presume that only a tiny fraction of contracts, at most, need be adjudicated. If a significant number of businesspeople violated the trust upon which our interactions are based, our court system and our economy would be swamped into immobility. It is not by chance that in nineteenth century America, many bankers could effectively issue uncollateralized currency because they were able to develop a reputation that their word was their bond. For these institutions to succeed and prosper, people had to trust their promise of redemption in specie. Now, as then, a contractor with a reputation for shoddy work will not prosper long. In today's world, where ideas are increasingly displacing the physical in the production of economic value, competition for reputation becomes a significant driving force, propelling our economy forward. Manufactured goods often can be evaluated before the completion of a transaction. Service providers, on the other hand, usually can offer only their reputations. The extraordinarily complex machine that we call the economy of the United States is, in the end, made up of human beings struggling to improve their lives. The individual values of those Americans will continue to influence the structure of the institutions that support market transactions, as they have throughout our history. Without mutual trust, and market participants abiding by a rule of law, no economy can prosper. Our system works fundamentally on individual fair dealing. We need only look around today's world to realize how rare and valuable this is. While we have achieved much in this regard, more remains to be done. Considerable progress, for example, has been evident in recent decades in the reduction of racial and other forms of discrimination. But this job is still far from completion. A free market capitalist system cannot operate fully effectively unless all participants in the economy are given opportunities to achieve their best. If we succeed in opening up opportunities to everyone, our national affluence will almost surely become more widespread. Of even greater import is that all Americans believe that they are part of a system they perceive as fair and worthy of support. * * * Our forefathers bestowed upon us a system of government, and a culture of enterprise, that has propelled the United States to the greatest prosperity the world has ever experienced. Today's graduates from Harvard and other schools are being passed the standard to carry forward our traditions. I know you will improve upon this inheritance in ways that we have yet to imagine. I offer you all my congratulations and wish you success in your chosen careers. You honor me by listening to the musings of an old, idealistic, central banker.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Community Capital Corporation, Greenwood, South Carolina, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond. The Written Agreement includes provisions addressing Year 2000 readiness. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application of Ideal Bancshares, Inc., West Fargo, North Dakota, to acquire all the voting shares of First State Bank of Goodrich, Goodrich, North Dakota. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Ideal Bancshares, Inc. West Fargo, North Dakota Order Approving Formation of a Bank Holding Company Ideal Bancshares, Inc. ("Applicant") has requested the Board's approval under section 3(a)(1) of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act") (12 U.S.C. § 1842(a)(1)) to become a bank holding company by acquiring all the voting shares of First State Bank of Goodrich, Goodrich, North Dakota ("Bank"). Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (64 Federal Register 13,799 (1999)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the proposal and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 3 of the BHC Act. Applicant is a newly organized corporation formed for the purpose of acquiring control of Bank. Bank currently has its main office in Goodrich, North Dakota, and maintains a paying and receiving facility in Hurdsfield, North Dakota. Bank is the 94th largest depository institution in North Dakota and controls deposits of $15.6 million, representing less than 1 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in the state. As noted above, Applicant is a de novo corporation and does not control another depository institution. Accordingly, based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposal would not have a significantly adverse effect on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in any relevant banking market, and that competitive considerations are consistent with approval. Financial, Managerial, and Supervisory Considerations The BHC Act requires the Board to consider the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the companies and banks involved in the proposal and certain supervisory factors. The Board has reviewed these factors in light of all the facts of record, including supervisory reports of examination and other confidential supervisory information assessing the financial and managerial resources of Bank. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of Applicant and Bank are consistent with approval, as are the other supervisory factors the Board must consider under section 3 of the BHC Act. Convenience and Needs Considerations The Board also has carefully considered the effect of the proposal on the convenience and needs of the communities to be served in light of all the facts of record, including comments received from several individuals ("Comenters") concerning the potential effect of this transaction on the availability of banking services in Hurdsfield, North Dakota. As part of this review, the Board has carefully considered Bank's record of performance under the Community Reinvestment Act (12 U.S.C. § 2901 et seq. ) ("CRA"). An institution's most recent CRA performance evaluation is a particularly important consideration in the applications process because it represents a detailed on-site evaluation of the institution's overall record of performance under the CRA by its appropriate federal supervisor. Bank received a "satisfactory" rating from its appropriate federal supervisor, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, at Bank's most recent examination for CRA performance, as of April 1999 ("1999 Examination"). Examiners at the 1999 Examination found that Bank's lending record evidenced a strong commitment to lending in Bank's community assessment area. Examiners noted that Bank's assessment area, which includes Hurdsfield, consisted entirely of moderate-income geographies and was heavily dependent on agriculture. Examiners reviewed 31 agricultural loans, totaling approximately $1.4 million that were made by Bank in 1998 and 1999, and noted that 80 percent of these loans were extended to farm operations with annual gross revenues of less than $250,000. Examiners further concluded that the geographic distribution of Bank's loans in its assessment area was reasonable, and did not find any substantive violations of fair lending laws and regulations. Commenters expressed concern that Applicant might close Bank's paying and receiving facility in Hurdsfield and that such closure would negatively affect the local community. Applicant has stated that it presently intends to retain the Hurdsfield facility following consummation of the proposal. Based on all the facts of record, including the 1999 Examination, the public comments received, and the information provided by Applicant to address these comments, the Board concludes that convenience and needs considerations, including the CRA performance record of Bank, are consistent with approval of the proposal. Conclusion Based on the foregoing, and in light of all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the application should be, and hereby is, approved. The Board's approval is specifically conditioned on compliance by Applicant with all the commitments made in connection with the application. For the purpose of this action, the commitments relied on by the Board in reaching its decision are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The acquisition of Bank shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day after the effective date of this order, or later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended to good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective June 14, 1999. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Footnotes Applicant has applied to the North Dakota Department of Banking and Financial Institutions ("Banking Department") to acquire control of Bank. Bank also has applied to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ("FDIC"), under section 18(d) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. § 1828(d)), and to the Banking Department to relocate the head office of Bank from Goodrich to West Fargo, North Dakota, and to convert Bank's current head office in Goodrich to a branch. The Banking Department and FDIC recently approved the applications filed by Applicant and Bank. In this context, depository institutions include commercial banks, savings banks, and savings associations. Asset and ranking data are as of June 30, 1998. The Interagency Questions and Answers Regarding Community Reinvestment provide that a CRA examination is an important and often controlling factor in the consideration of an institution's CRA record and that reports of these examinations will be given great weight in the applications process. See 64 Federal Register 23,618, 23,641 (1999). The Board notes, moreover, that federal banking law provides a specific mechanism for addressing branch closings. Federal law requires an insured depository institution to provide notice to the public and to the appropriate federal regulatory agency before closing a branch. See 12 U.S.C. § 1831r-1, as implemented by the Joint Policy Statement Regarding Branch Closings, 58 Federal Register 49,083 (1993) ("Policy Statement"). Since Bank's Hurdsfield paying and receiving facility receives deposits, the facility is considered a "branch" for purposes of the Policy Statement. Section 1831r-1 does not authorize federal supervisors to prevent the closing of a branch. Voting for this action: Vice Chair Rivlin and Governors Kelley, Ferguson, and Gramlich. Absent and not voting: Chairman Greenspan and Governor Meyer.
Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan High-tech industry in the U.S. economy Before the Joint Economic Committee, U.S. Congress June 14, 1999 Something special has happened to the American economy in recent years. An economy that twenty years ago seemed to have seen its better days, is displaying a remarkable run of economic growth that appears to have its roots in ongoing advances in technology. I have hypothesized on a number of occasions that the synergies that have developed, especially among the microprocessor, the laser, fiber-optics, and satellite technologies, have dramatically raised the potential rates of return on all types of equipment that embody or utilize these newer technologies. But beyond that, innovations in information technology--so-called IT--have begun to alter the manner in which we do business and create value, often in ways that were not readily foreseeable even five years ago. As this century comes to an end, the defining characteristic of the current wave of technology is the role of information. Prior to this IT revolution most of twentieth century business decisionmaking had been hampered by limited information. Owing to the paucity of timely knowledge of customers' needs and of the location of inventories and materials flows throughout complex production systems, businesses required substantial programmed redundancies to function effectively. Doubling up on materials and people was essential as backup to the inevitable misjudgments of the real-time state of play in a company. Decisions were made from information that was hours, days, or even weeks old. Accordingly, production planning required costly inventory safety stocks and backup teams of people to maintain quality control and to respond to the unanticipated and the misjudged. Large remnants of information void, of course, still persist, and forecasts of future events on which all business decisions ultimately depend are still unavoidably uncertain. But the recent years' remarkable surge in the availability of real-time information has enabled business management to remove large swaths of inventory safety stocks and worker redundancies, and has armed firms with detailed data to fine-tune product specifications to most individual customer needs. Moreover, information access in real-time--resulting, for example, from such processes as checkout counter bar code scanning and satellite location of trucks--has fostered marked reductions in delivery lead-times on all sorts of goods, from books to capital equipment. This, in turn, has reduced the relative size of the overall capital structure required to turn out our goods and services. Intermediate production and distribution processes, so essential when information and quality control were poor, are being bypassed and eventually eliminated. The increasing ubiquitousness of Internet web sites is promising to significantly alter the way large parts of our distribution system are managed. The process of innovation goes beyond the factory floor or distribution channels. Design times have fallen dramatically as computer modeling has eliminated the need, for example, of the large staff of architectural specification drafters previously required for building projects. Medical diagnoses are more thorough, accurate, and far faster, with access to heretofore unavailable information. Treatment is accordingly hastened, and hours of procedures eliminated. In addition, the dramatic advances in biotechnology are significantly increasing a broad range of productivity-expanding efforts in areas from agriculture to medicine. Economists endeavor to describe the influence of technological change on activity by matching economic output against measurable economic inputs: quality adjusted labor and all forms of capital. They attribute the fact that economic growth has persistently outpaced the contributions to growth from labor and capital inputs to such things as technological innovation and increased efficiencies of organizations that are made possible through newer technologies. For example, since 1995 output per labor workhour in the nonfarm business sector--our standard measure of productivity--has grown at an annual rate of about 2 percent. Approximately one-third of that expansion appears to be attributable to output growth in excess of the combined growth of inputs. Of course, it often takes time before a specific innovation manifests itself as an increase in measured productivity. Although some new technologies can be implemented quickly and have an immediate payoff, others may take years or even decades before achieving their full influence on productivity as new capital is put in place that can take advantage of these creations and their spillovers. Hence, the productivity growth seen in recent years likely represents the benefits of the ongoing diffusion and implementation of a succession of technological advances; likewise, the innovative breakthroughs of today will continue to bear fruit in the future. The evident acceleration of the process of "creative destruction," which has accompanied these expanding innovations and which has been reflected in the shifting of capital from failing technologies into those technologies at the cutting edge, has been remarkable. Owing to advancing information capabilities and the resulting emergence of more accurate price signals and less costly price discovery, market participants have been able to detect and to respond to finely calibrated nuances in consumer demand. The process of capital reallocation has been assisted through a significant unbundling of risks made possible by the development of innovative financial products, not previously available. Every new innovation has suggested further possibilities to profitably meet increasingly sophisticated consumer demands. Many ventures fail. But the few that prosper enhance consumer choice. The newer technologies, as I indicated earlier, have facilitated a dramatic foreshortening of the lead-times on the delivery of capital equipment over the past decade. When lead times for capital equipment are long, firms must undertake capital spending that is adequate to deal with the plausible range of business needs likely to occur after these goods are delivered and installed. In essence, those capital investments must be sufficient to provide insurance against uncertain future demands. As lead times have declined, a consequence of newer technologies, firms' forecasts of future requirements have become somewhat less clouded, and the desired amount of lead-time insurance in the form of a reserve stock of capital has been reduced. In addition to shortening lead-times, technology has increased the flexibility of capital goods and production processes to meet changes in the demand for product characteristics and the composition of output. This flexibility allows firms to deal more effectively with evolving market conditions with less physical capital than had been necessary in the past. Taken together, reductions in the amount of spare capital and increases in capital flexibility result in a saving of resources that, in the aggregate, is reflected in higher levels of productivity. The newer technologies and foreshortened lead-times have, thus, apparently made capital investment distinctly more profitable, enabling firms to substitute capital for labor and other inputs far more productively than they could have a decade or two ago. Capital, as economists like to say, has deepened significantly since 1995. The surge in investment not only has restrained costs, it has also increased industrial capacity faster than the rise in factory output. The resulting slack in product markets has put greater competitive pressure on businesses to hold down prices. Technology is also damping upward price pressures through its effect on international trade, where technological developments and a move to a less constrained world trading order have progressively broken down barriers to cross-border trade. All else equal, the enhanced competition in tradeable goods enables excess capacity previously bottled up in one country to augment worldwide supply and exert restraint on prices in all countries' markets. Because neither business firms nor their competitors can currently count any longer on a general inflationary tendency to validate decisions to raise their own prices, each company feels compelled to concentrate on efforts to hold down costs. The availability of new technology to each company and its rivals affords both the opportunity and the competitive necessity of taking steps to boost productivity. This contrasts with our experiences through the 1970s and 1980s, when firms apparently found it easier and more profitable to seek relief from rising nominal labor costs through price increases than through cost-reducing capital investments. The rate of growth of productivity cannot increase indefinitely. While there appears to be considerable expectation in the business community, and possibly Wall Street, that the productivity acceleration has not yet peaked, experience advises caution. As I have noted in previous testimony, history is strewn with projections of technology that have fallen wide of the mark. With the innumerable potential permutations and combinations of various synergies, forecasting technology has been a daunting exercise. There is little reason to believe that we are going to be any better at this in the future than in the past. Hence, despite the remarkable progress witnessed to date, we have to be quite modest about our ability to project the future of technology and its implications for productivity growth and for the broader economy. A key question that we need to answer in order to appropriately evaluate the connection between technological innovations and productivity growth is why have not the same available technologies allowed productivity in Europe and Japan to catch up to U.S. levels. While productivity in some foreign industrial countries appears to have accelerated in recent years, a significant gap between U.S. productivity and that abroad persists. One hypothesis is that a necessary condition for information technology to increase output per hour is a willingness to discharge or retrain workers that the newer technologies have rendered redundant. Countries with less flexible labor markets than the United States enjoys may have been inhibited in this regard. Another hypothesis is that regulations, systems of corporate governance, trade restrictions, and government subsidies have prevented competition from being sufficiently keen to induce firms in Europe and Japan to take full advantage of the efficiencies offered by the latest advances in information technology and other innovations. Further investigation will be necessary to evaluate the importance of these possible influences. But at this stage, one lesson seems reasonably clear. As we contemplate the appropriate public policies for an economy experiencing rapid technology advancement, we should strive to maintain the flexibility of our labor and capital markets that has spurred the continuous replacement of capital facilities embodying older technologies with facilities reflecting the newest innovations. Further reducing regulatory impediments to competition, will, of course, add to this process. The newer technologies have widened the potential for economic well-being. Governments should seek to foster that potential.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today its approval of the application of Piraeus Bank S.A., Athens, Greece, to acquire Marathon Banking Corporation and Marathon National Bank of New York, both in Astoria, New York. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Piraeus Bank S.A. Athens, Greece Order Approving the Acquisition of a Bank Holding Company Piraeus Bank S.A. ("Piraeus"), a foreign bank, has applied under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act (the "BHC Act") (12 U.S.C. § 1842) to become a bank holding company within the meaning of the BHC Act by acquiring 56 percent of the voting shares in Marathon Banking Corporation ("MBC"), and thereby acquiring Marathon National Bank of New York ("Bank"), both in Astoria, New York. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (63 Federal Register 37,116 (1998)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the application and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 3 of the BHC Act. Piraeus, with consolidated assets equivalent to approximately $4.6 billion, is a commercial bank organized under the laws of Greece. Piraeus engages in the business of banking in Greece through branches and subsidiary banks. Piraeus also engages through subsidiaries in several nonbanking activities in Greece. Piraeus does not currently have any banking or nonbanking operations in the United States. Bank is the 100th largest commercial banking organization in New York, controlling deposits of $89 million, representing less than 1 percent of all deposits in commercial banking organizations in the state. Comprehensive Consolidated Supervision and Access to Information In order to approve an application by a foreign bank to acquire a U.S. bank or bank holding company, the BHC Act and Regulation Y require the Board to determine that the foreign bank is subject to comprehensive supervision or regulation on a consolidated basis by its home country supervisors. The Board also must determine that the foreign bank has provided adequate assurances that it will make available to the Board such information on its operations and activities and those of its affiliates that the Board deems appropriate to determine and enforce compliance with applicable law. The Board considers a foreign bank to be subject to comprehensive supervision or regulation on a consolidated basis if the Board determines that its home country supervisor receives sufficient information on the foreign bank's worldwide operations, including the bank's relationship to any affiliate, to assess the bank's overall financial condition and compliance with law and regulation. Supervision of Greek credit institutions, such as Piraeus, is the responsibility of the Supervision Department of the Bank of Greece. The Bank of Greece conducts general on-site examinations of Piraeus that cover areas such as asset quality, compliance, and internal controls. During these examinations, the examiners commonly review the bank's internal audit reports. In addition, the Bank of Greece conducts more frequent targeted examinations that focus on specific areas, such as foreign exchange, reconciliation of accounts, and anti-money laundering procedures. Piraeus also is required to have an audit conducted annually by qualified external auditors. The external auditors focus on Piraeus's internal controls, and their comments and findings are provided to the Bank of Greece as part of the bank's required assessment of its internal controls. Piraeus is required to submit a number of financial reports to the Bank of Greece, including semiannual reports concerning, among other things, profit and loss, capital adequacy, liquidity, asset quality, large exposures, currency positions, loans and guarantees to affiliates and insiders, investments in other financial and nonfinancial institutions, and 10-percent shareholders. Piraeus also must submit semiannual bank-only and consolidated financial statements. In addition, Piraeus is required to publish annual audited financial statements, including balance sheets and income statements. Piraeus also must submit daily reports on its foreign exchange transactions and foreign currency positions. The Bank of Greece also has promulgated regulations for credit institutions on loans to one borrower, a limit on aggregate "large exposures" (amounts equal to 10 percent of regulatory capital), and reserves. In addition, the Bank of Greece has imposed capital-based limits on the amounts that a credit institution may invest in nonfinancial companies. With respect to affiliate transactions, the Bank of Greece requires credit institutions, such as Piraeus, to report the value of each credit exposure to a subsidiary or affiliate that exceeds 10 percent of the credit institution's regulatory capital. The Bank of Greece also requires a credit institution to report on a semiannual basis loans and guarantees by the credit institution to its affiliates or between the credit institution's affiliates. In addition, a credit institution's exposure to a subsidiary or affiliate may not exceed 30 percent of the credit institution's regulatory capital. It is anticipated that the exposure limit will be reduced to 20 percent in 1999. The Bank of Greece has statutory authority to terminate the operating license of a credit institution for, among other things, maintaining insufficient capital, impeding supervision by any means, or violating legal provisions, decisions, or regulations set out by the banking supervisory authorities. In addition, the Bank of Greece also may restrict the business activities of a credit institution for violations of law and for liquidity or solvency problems. The Bank of Greece also may impose fines and other sanctions on credit institutions and their legal representatives and managers for violations of banking statutes and regulations. Piraeus also is subject to supervision by other Greek government entities. Piraeus's insurance agent subsidiaries are subject to the supervision of the Ministry of Development, the Greek insurance supervisory authority. In addition, Piraeus and certain of its subsidiaries are monitored by the Capital Markets Commission because their stock is listed on the Athens Stock Exchange. The prior approval of the Monopolies and Mergers Commission also is required for a merger or acquisition involving a Greek bank. There is a high degree of cooperation between the Bank of Greece and the other supervisory authorities. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that Piraeus is subject to comprehensive supervision on a consolidated basis by its home country supervisor. The BHC Act also requires the Board to determine that the foreign bank has provided adequate assurances that it will make available to the Board such information on its operations and activities and those of its affiliates that the Board deems appropriate to determine and enforce compliance with the BHC Act and the International Banking Act ("IBA") (12 U.S.C. § 3101 et seq. ). The Board has reviewed restrictions on disclosure in jurisdictions where Piraeus has material operations and has communicated with relevant banking authorities concerning access to information. Piraeus has committed that, to the extent not prohibited by law, it will make available to the Board such information on the operations of Piraeus and any of its affiliates that the Board deems necessary to determine and enforce compliance with the BHC Act, the IBA, and other applicable federal law. Piraeus also has committed to cooperate with the Board to obtain any waivers or exemptions that may be necessary to enable Piraeus to make any such information available to the Board. In light of these commitments and other facts of record, the Board has concluded that Piraeus has provided adequate assurances of access to any appropriate information that the Board may request. For these reasons, and based on all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that the supervisory factors it is required to consider under section 3(c) of the BHC Act are consistent with approval. Financial, Managerial, Competitive, and Convenience and Needs Considerations The Board also has carefully considered the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the banks and companies involved, the convenience and needs of the communities to be served, and certain supervisory factors. Piraeus's capital levels exceed the levels required under Greek capital guidelines and under the Basle Capital Accord, and are considered equivalent to the capital levels that would be required of a U.S. banking organization under similar circumstances. The Board also has reviewed supervisory information concerning Piraeus's condition and the proposal from Piraeus's home country authority, confidential financial information from Piraeus, and supervisory information concerning MBC and Bank assessing the financial and managerial resources of the organizations. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the organizations are consistent with approval, as are the other supervisory factors that the Board must consider under section 3 of the BHC Act. In addition, based on all the facts of record, including the fact that Piraeus does not currently have any banking operations in the United States, the Board has concluded that consummation of the proposal would not have a significantly adverse effect on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in any relevant banking market, and that competitive considerations are consistent with approval. Considerations related to the convenience and needs of the communities to be served, including the performance record of Bank under the Community Reinvestment Act (12 U.S.C. § 2901 et seq. ), also are consistent with approval of the proposal. Conclusion Based on the foregoing and all other facts of record, the Board has determined that the application should be, and hereby is, approved. Should any restrictions on access to information on the operations or activities of Piraeus and any of its affiliates subsequently interfere with the Board's ability to determine the safety and soundness of Piraeus's U.S. operations or the compliance by Piraeus or its affiliates with applicable federal statutes, the Board may require termination of any of Piraeus's direct or indirect activities in the United States. The Board's approval of the proposal is expressly conditioned on Piraeus's compliance with all the commitments made in connection with the application. The commitments and conditions relied on by the Board in reaching this decision are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The proposal may not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day after the effective date of the order, or later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective June 14, 1999. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Footnotes Asset data are as of December 31, 1998. Piraeus controls Macedonia Thrace Bank, Thessaloniki, Greece, Piraeus Prime Bank, Piraeus, Greece, and Xios Bank, Athens, Greece. Piraeus also controls Tirana Bank S.A., Tirana, Albania. State deposit and ranking data are as of June 30, 1998. See 12 U.S.C. § 1842(C)(3)(b); 12 C.F.R. 225.13(b)(5). See 12 U.S.C. § 1842(c)(3)(A); 12 C.F.R. 225.13(b)(4). In assessing this standard, the Board considers, among other factors, the extent to which the home country supervisor: (i) Ensures that the foreign bank has adequate procedures for monitoring and controlling its activities worldwide; (ii) Obtains information on the condition of the foreign bank and its subsidiaries and offices outside the home country through regular reports of examination, audit reports, or otherwise; (iii) Obtains information on the dealings and relationships between the foreign bank and its affiliates, both foreign and domestic; (iv) Receives from the foreign bank financial reports that are consolidated on a worldwide basis, or comparable information that permits analysis of the foreign bank's financial condition on a worldwide, consolidated basis; (v) Evaluates prudential standards, such as capital adequacy and risk asset exposure, on a worldwide basis. These are indicia of comprehensive, consolidated supervision. No single factor is essential, and other elements may inform the Board's determination. 12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)(1). The prior approval of the Bank of Greece is required for a credit institution to invest in other companies in amounts that exceed the lower of GRD 700 million or 2 percent of capital. Bank was rated "satisfactory" in its most recent CRA performance evaluation conducted by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, as of April 27, 1998. Voting for this action: Vice Chair Rivlin and Governors Kelley, Ferguson, and Gramlich. Absent and not voting: Chairman Greenspan and Governor Meyer.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced that it is seeking nominations for seven appointments to its Consumer Advisory Council. The Council, which consists of 30 members, advises the Board on the exercise of its responsibilities under the Consumer Credit Protection Act and on other matters on which the Board seeks advice. The group meets in Washington, D.C., three times a year. The seven new members will be appointed to serve three-year terms beginning in January 2000. Nominations should include the following information about nominees: past and present positions held; knowledge, interests or experience related to community reinvestment, consumer credit, or other consumer financial services; and complete address with telephone and fax numbers. Letters of nominations must be received by August 16, 1999 and should be mailed (not sent by facsimile) to Sandra F. Braunstein, Assistant Director, Division of Consumer and Community Affairs, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, D.C. 20551. |
Testimony of Governor Laurence H. Meyer Loan-loss reserves Before the Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit, Committee on Banking and Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives June 16, 1999 Madame Chairwoman, Mr. Vento, and Members of the Subcommittee, I welcome this opportunity to discuss the Federal Reserve's views on recent developments relating to the allowance for loan losses. As a supervisor of banking organizations, the primary focus of the Federal Reserve is on promoting a safe and sound financial system. Conservative allowance levels contribute to safety and soundness by ensuring that insured depository institutions maintain strong balance sheets and capital levels that reflect the collectibility of the loan portfolio. Accordingly, the Federal Reserve and the other banking agencies have long encouraged institutions to maintain strong loan loss allowances. As a reminder of the importance of conservative allowance levels, we need look only to recent experiences in certain foreign countries and to the problems in the banking and thrift industries in the last decade. In its role as a securities regulator, the SEC focuses primarily on the transparency of financial statements and reported earnings to investors. The Federal Reserve also recognizes the importance of transparent financial statements and has been working to enhance transparency domestically and abroad. Improved transparency can enhance market discipline and thus reinforce supervisory efforts to promote sound risk management and contribute to a safe and sound financial system. Indeed, banking organizations have long been expected to follow generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) in their published financial statements and in regulatory financial statements filed with the banking agencies--an approach supported by Congress in the FDIC Improvement Act of 1991. Background and Efforts To Work Together with the Other Federal Banking Agencies and the SEC In the fall of 1998, the SEC announced an initiative to address earnings manipulation by registrants in a number of industries. Following the announcement of this initiative, the SEC raised concerns regarding the loan loss reserve practices of some banking organizations, requiring one banking organization to reduce its reserves by $100 million. The federal banking agencies were concerned about these actions from a safety and soundness standpoint. The agencies' involvement led to the issuance of a November 1998 interagency statement, which set forth a framework for the banking agencies and SEC to begin working together on loan loss allowance issues. Subsequent to the issuance of the November statement, further questions arose regarding bank loan loss reserves, including concerns about the possibility that the SEC would take further actions against some banks that were perceived as having excessive reserve levels. In addition, around this time, the SEC issued letters to a number of banking organizations regarding their loan loss allowance disclosure practices. Taken together, these developments generated additional uncertainty in the banking industry and may have created a perception that loan loss allowances would have to be reduced. In order to address any misunderstandings, the federal banking agencies and the SEC issued another joint letter on March 10, 1999 reiterating the agencies' agreement to work together and announcing a number of joint efforts. The joint letter announced new initiatives of the agencies and the accounting profession to develop enhanced guidance on loan loss allowances over a one to two year period. In addition, the agencies stated that they would support and encourage the processes of the accounting standards setters as they seek to clarify key loan loss allowance accounting issues. Most importantly, the letter indicated that the agencies will meet together periodically to discuss important matters that affect bank transparency and will focus on enhancing allowance practices going forward. The spirit of the March 10 joint letter was to put into place a process for resolving issues related to loan loss allowances going forward, and permit the agencies to work together in this process to resolve allowance matters and avoid significant changes in methodology that would encourage a decline in allowances before this process had run its course. The Federal Reserve Board has been pleased to host a number of the meetings announced in the March 10 letter between the banking agencies and the SEC to discuss important loan loss reserve issues, and the other agencies have been active in supporting these discussions as well. The banking agencies and the SEC formed a new Joint Working Group, comprised of senior accounting policy representatives of each of the agencies, to review sound practices used by institutions for documenting and supporting their loan loss allowances. The agencies intend to issue parallel guidance in this important area in the next year. The Joint Working Group is also developing enhanced disclosures related to the allowance for loan losses and the credit quality of institutions' portfolios. This effort is intended to improve the transparency of loan loss allowance amounts and improve market discipline. A key aspect of these efforts will be obtaining input from the banking industry and the accounting profession on allowance issues. The federal banking agencies and the SEC are also participating as observers in the work of the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA) to improve guidance with respect to loan loss allowances. The AICPA, through its Allowance for Loan Losses Task Force, is aiming to develop guidance over the next two years that improves the application of current accounting guidance regarding the allowance. Important areas that the Task Force intends to address include: 1) how to distinguish between inherent losses, which are included in the allowance under existing GAAP pronouncements, from future losses, 2) guidance clarifying certain provisions of FASB Statement No. 114, including which loans should have an allowance measured under that statement, 3) measurement issues in estimating the allowance, including the use of loss factors and credit risk models, and 4) disclosure and documentation issues with respect to the allowance. I might note that the March 10 joint agency letter was widely supported by the banking industry. Specifically, financial institutions and their auditors applauded the fact that the banking agencies and the SEC were committing to work together, and that the agencies' focus would be on enhancing allowance practices going forward. In April 1999, after a limited comment process that the banking agencies participated in, the FASB issued clarifying guidance, through an article in its "Viewpoints" publication, to banking organizations and other creditors on certain issues that arise in establishing loan loss allowances in accordance with GAAP. In particular, the article addresses the application of FASB Statements No. 5 and 114 to a loan portfolio and how these standards interrelate. The article also provides a general overview of existing accounting principles that pertain to the allowance. In response to questions received from accounting firms and creditors, the SEC announced on May 20 that registrants should follow the FASB guidance in developing their loan loss allowance estimates. Furthermore, registrants that would be materially affected by the FASB issuance were provided transition guidance by the SEC that should be implemented in the second quarter of 1999. At the same time, the SEC indicated that it had no view, one way or the other, with respect to the need for transition by institutions. This announcement was made at a public meeting of the FASB's Emerging Issues Task Force--an important group that issues accounting guidance on how GAAP should be applied. We understand that, as they became aware of the planned announcement, many banks and auditors were confused as to its meaning, in view of the joint initiatives discussed by the agencies in the March 10 interagency letter and the expectation that those initiatives would result in guidance being developed in the next two years. Moreover, some banks felt that the implied message of this announcement was that banks should reduce their allowance levels in the second quarter. The Federal Reserve was concerned that this uncertainty might result in an overreaction by the banking industry that could have reduced loan loss allowance levels in the second quarter, contrary to our safety and soundness objectives. Recent Guidance on Loan Loss Reserves Given the possibility of an overreaction, the Federal Reserve issued a supervisory letter (SR 99-13) on May 21 interpreting these developments in the broader context of the initiatives announced on March 10. We worked closely with the other federal banking agencies and the SEC in developing this guidance. The guidance provides information on certain understandings among the Federal Reserve, SEC, and FASB staffs on important allowance accounting matters that had not yet been published. For example, the policy letter clarified that: The allowance involves a high degree of management judgment and results in a range of estimated losses. Institutions should continue to maintain conservative allowance levels within a reasonable range of estimated credit losses, and banks can reserve at the high end of the range if it is management's best estimate. In this regard, it is acceptable for allowance estimates to reflect a margin for imprecision that can be appropriately supported. Banks may have unallocated allowances, provided they reflect an estimate of inherent credit losses determined in accordance with GAAP. While the FASB article addresses certain technical issues, it is not intended to be complete. Guidance on more important issues affecting allowance practices is under development and will be published within two years by the agencies and the accounting profession. Moreover, our letter explains certain concepts mentioned in the FASB article in a way that is intended to help institutions to better understand how their reserve estimates can be enhanced, and in certain cases, increased. This guidance provided helpful background information to assist institutions and their auditors in understanding the SEC announcement and FASB article in the broader context of other accounting initiatives underway. It also highlighted emerging points of agreement between the SEC and the Federal Reserve on allowance accounting matters. In this regard, the letter encouraged the banking industry to maintain conservative reserving practices consistent with management's best estimates. Furthermore, the guidance is intended to convey our understanding that the agreement reached on March 10 maintains existing acceptable allowance practices during the period in which we are working to resolve allowance policy issues with the SEC and the accounting profession and develop enhanced guidance. Given the clarifying guidance in the supervisory letter and the work underway on important issues, we expect that changes in allowance levels, if any, as a result of the FASB guidance will be substantially limited. Banking organizations supervised by the Federal Reserve are expected to comply with the supervisory letter when establishing their allowances for credit losses in regulatory financial reports filed by banks and bank holding companies with the Federal Reserve. The guidance included in the letter is consistent with GAAP. In this regard, the SEC staff has indicated that it very much supports the fundamental concepts in our letter, and the FASB and the SEC have included this Federal Reserve letter with the official GAAP guidance on loan loss allowances. Accordingly, based on assurances from the SEC staff, bank holding companies can follow this balanced guidance when reporting allowances in their published financial statements filed with the SEC. This should help reduce bankers' uncertainty and provide a calming message that reduces the possibility of an overreaction by the banking industry and its auditors to the SEC announcement and FASB article. Looking Forward Looking forward, we believe that it is very important that the agencies strengthen their commitment to the letter and spirit of the March 10 joint agreement, including the process for resolving issues related to allowance practices and the need to let this process run its course before significant changes, if any, are made to allowance levels. Likewise, it is important for the banking agencies to work together in issuing guidance to banking organizations. It is also important that SEC actions at all levels remain consistent with the March 10 agreement. We intend to continue to work together with the SEC and the other federal banking agencies in order to improve guidance on the allowance for loan losses. Given the important missions of the banking agencies and the SEC, any guidance must ensure that allowances are calculated in a conservative manner and that financial statements and reported earnings are transparent. We believe that it is imperative that the banking agencies and the SEC develop this guidance in a collaborative manner and reach agreement about how the guidance is to be applied in practice. A collaborative approach is particularly important at both the principal and staff levels because it will contribute to stability in banking industry practices. In contrast, when communication breaks down regarding policy goals and implementing measures, either within an agency or between the agencies, misunderstandings can abound. For example, the industry may become confused if it is perceived that any participant in an interagency discussion is communicating with banks and auditors in a manner that is not consistent with the spirit of the March 10 joint letter. We also believe it is very important that any new guidance developed by the SEC and banking agencies be well understood by field staff, including agency staff members that have responsibility for assessing whether the allowance estimates of individual institutions are appropriate. Recent discussions between the principals and senior staff of the SEC and the Federal Reserve Board and the other banking agencies have been seeking to continue and enhance this collegial approach going forward. In this regard, I was pleased that Chairman Levitt stated in a recent speech and in his letter to me dated May 24, "Some have interpreted our efforts on bank reserves to suggest that the SEC thinks reserves are too high and should be lowered. That couldn't be further from the truth . . . I want to emphasize--it is not our policy that institutions artificially lower reserves or ever have inadequate reserves." Under existing GAAP pronouncements, the allowance for loan losses includes probable losses that are inherent in the loan portfolio, but not future losses. As we look to the future of accounting standards for loan loss allowances, we believe that an expected loss approach, taking a more prospective notion for the allowance, may enhance the quality of reserve estimates when compared with the inherent loss approach now promulgated in GAAP. This is more consistent with evolving credit risk management techniques used by financial institutions. Going forward, the Federal Reserve will work with the other banking agencies and the accounting standards-setters to explore the appropriate basis for establishing loan loss allowances, including consideration of the expected loss approach, in a manner consistent with important safety and soundness and transparency objectives. Conclusion The adequacy of the allowance for loan losses is a critical issue both for the safety and soundness of banks and the transparency of financial statements. Given the differing missions and perspectives of bank and securities regulators, the Federal Reserve and the other banking agencies have agreed to work closely with the SEC to provide clear and consistent guidance on this important issue. We continue to look forward to working together. We hope these efforts will lead to enhanced policies and practices for loan loss allowances under GAAP that will be consistent with the objectives of both safety and soundness and transparency of financial information. Thank you for your interest in this important matter. for your additional information are answers to the specific questions on loan loss allowance policies that were directed to us by the Subcommittee. Footnote Remarks of Arthur Levitt, SEC Chairman, to the Committee for Economic Development, New York, N.Y., May 19, 1999.
Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan Monetary policy and the economic outlook Before the Joint Economic Committee, U.S. Congress June 17, 1999 As emphasized by the important hearings this committee has held in the past few days, an impressive proliferation of new technologies is inducing major shifts in the underlying structure of the American economy. These fundamental changes appear to be far from complete. The way America does business, including the interaction among the various economic players in our economy, is in the midst of a significant transformation, though the pace of change is unclear. As a consequence, many of the empirical regularities depicting the complex of economic relationships on which policymakers rely have been markedly altered. The Federal Reserve has thus been pressed to continuously update our understanding of how the newer forces are developing in order for us to address appropriately our underlying monetary policy objective: maximum sustainable economic growth. The failure of economic models based on history to anticipate the acceleration in productivity contributed to the recent persistent underprediction of economic growth and overprediction of inflation. Guiding policy by those models doubtless would have unduly inhibited what has been a remarkable run of economic prosperity. And yet, while we have been adjusting the implicit models of the underlying economic forces on which we base our decisions, certain verities remain. Importantly, the evidence has become increasingly persuasive that relatively stable prices--neither persistently rising nor falling--are more predictable hence result in a lower risk premium for investment. Because the nation's level of investment, to a large extent, determines our prosperity over time, stability in the general level of prices for goods and services is clearly a necessary condition for maximum sustainable growth. However, product price stability does not guarantee either the maintenance of financial market stability or maximum sustainable growth. As recent experience attests, a prolonged period of price stability does help to foster economic prosperity. But, as we have also observed over recent years, as have others in times past, such a benign economic environment can induce investors to take on more risk and drive asset prices to unsustainable levels. This can occur when investors implicitly project rising prosperity further into the future than can reasonably be supported. By 1997, for example, measures of risk had fallen to historic lows as businesspeople, having experienced years of continuous good times, assumed, not unreasonably, that the most likely forecast was more of the same. The Asian crisis, and especially the Russian devaluation and debt moratorium of August 1998, brought the inevitable rude awakening. In the ensuing weeks, financial markets in the United States virtually seized-up, risk premiums soared, and for a period sellers of even investment grade bonds had difficulty finding buyers. The Federal Reserve responded with a three step reduction in the federal funds rate totaling 75 basis points. Market strains receded--whether as a consequence of our actions or of other forces--and yield spreads have since fallen but not all the way back to their unduly thin levels of last summer. The American economy has retained its momentum and emerging economies in Asia and Latin America are clearly on firmer footing, though in some cases their turnarounds appear fragile. The recovery of financial markets, viewed in isolation, would have suggested that at least part of the emergency injection of liquidity, and the associated 75 basis point decline in the funds rate, ceased to be necessary. But, with wage growth and price inflation declining by a number of measures earlier this year, and productivity evidently still accelerating--thereby keeping inflation in check--we chose to maintain the lower level of the funds rate. While this stellar noninflationary economic expansion still appears remarkably stress free on the surface, there are developing imbalances that give us pause and raise the question: Do these imbalances place our economic expansion at risk? For the period immediately ahead, inflationary pressures still seem well contained. To be sure, oil prices have nearly doubled and some other commodity prices have firmed, but large productivity gains have held unit cost increases to negligible levels. Pricing power is still generally reported to be virtually nonexistent. Moreover, the re-emergence of rising profit margins, after severe problems last fall, indicates cost pressures on prices remain small. Nonetheless, the persistence of certain imbalances pose a risk to the longer-run outlook. Strong demand for labor has continued to reduce the pool of available workers. Data showing the percent of the relevant population who are not at work, but would like a job, are around the low for this series, which started in 1970. Despite its extraordinary acceleration, labor productivity has not grown fast enough to accommodate the increased demand for labor induced by the exceptional strength in demand for goods and services. Overall economic growth during the past three years has averaged four percent annually, of which roughly two percentage points reflected increased productivity and about one point the growth in our working age population. The remainder was drawn from the ever decreasing pool of available job seekers without work. That last development represents an unsustainable trend that has been produced by an inclination of households and firms to increase their spending on goods and services beyond the gains in their income from production. That propensity to spend, in turn, has been spurred by the rise in equity and home prices, which our analysis suggests can account for at least one percentage point of GDP growth over the past three years. Even if this period of rapid expansion of capital gains comes to an end shortly, there remains a substantial amount in the pipeline to support outsized increases in consumption for many months into the future. Of course, a dramatic contraction in equity market prices would greatly reduce this backlog of extra spending. To be sure, labor market tightness has not, as yet, put the current expansion at risk. Despite the ever shrinking pool of available labor, recent readings on year-over-year increases in labor compensation have held steady or, by some measures, even eased. This seems to have resulted in part from falling inflation, which has implied that relatively modest nominal wage gains have provided healthy increases in purchasing power. Also, a residual fear of job skill obsolescence, which has induced a preference for job security over wage gains, probably is still holding down wage levels. But should labor markets continue to tighten, significant increases in wages, in excess of productivity growth, will inevitably emerge, absent the unlikely repeal of the law of supply and demand. Because monetary policy operates with a significant lag, we have to make judgments, not only about the current degree of balance in the economy, but about how the economy is likely to fare a year or more in the future under the current policy stance. The return of financial markets to greater stability and our growing concerns about emerging imbalances led the Federal Open Market Committee to adopt a policy position at our May meeting that contemplated a possible need for an upward adjustment of the federal funds rate in the months ahead. The issue is what policy setting has the capacity to sustain our remarkable economic expansion, now in its ninth year. This is the question the FOMC will be addressing at its meeting at the end of the month. One of the important issues for the FOMC as it has made such judgments in recent years has been the weight to place on asset prices. As I have already noted, history suggests that owing to the growing optimism that may develop with extended periods of economic expansion, asset price values can climb to unsustainable levels even if product prices are relatively stable. The 1990s have witnessed one of the great bull stock markets in American history. Whether that means an unstable bubble has developed in its wake is difficult to assess. A large number of analysts have judged the level of equity prices to be excessive, even taking into account the rise in "fair value" resulting from the acceleration of productivity and the associated long-term corporate earnings outlook. But bubbles generally are perceptible only after the fact. To spot a bubble in advance requires a judgment that hundreds of thousands of informed investors have it all wrong. Betting against markets is usually precarious at best. While bubbles that burst are scarcely benign, the consequences need not be catastrophic for the economy. The bursting of the Japanese bubble a decade ago did not lead immediately to sharp contractions in output or a significant rise in unemployment. Arguably, it was the subsequent failure to address the damage to the financial system in a timely manner that caused Japan's current economic problems. Likewise, while the stock market crash of 1929 was destabilizing, most analysts attribute the Great Depression to ensuing failures of policy. And certainly the crash of October 1987 left little lasting imprint on the American economy. This all leads to the conclusion that monetary policy is best primarily focused on stability of the general level of prices of goods and services as the most credible means to achieve sustainable economic growth. Should volatile asset prices cause problems, policy is probably best positioned to address the consequences when the economy is working from a base of stable product prices. For monetary policy to foster maximum sustainable economic growth, it is useful to preempt forces of imbalance before they threaten economic stability. But this may not always be possible--the future at times can be too opaque to penetrate. When we can be preemptive we should be, because modest preemptive actions can obviate the need of more drastic actions at a later date that could destabilize the economy. The economic expansion has generated many benefits. It has been a major factor in rebalancing our federal budget. But more important, a broad majority of our people have moved to a higher standard of living, and we have managed to bring into the productive workforce those who have too long been at its periphery. This has enabled large segments of our society to gain skills on the job and the self-esteem associated with work. Our responsibility, at the Federal Reserve and in Congress, is to create the conditions most likely to preserve and extend the expansion. Should the economic expansion continue into February of next year, it will have become the longest in America's economic annals. Someday, of course, the expansion will end; human nature has exhibited a tendency to excess through the generations with the inevitable economic hangover. There is nothing in our economic data series to suggest that this propensity has changed. It is the job of economic policymakers to mitigate the fallout when it occurs, and, hopefully, ease the transition to the next expansion.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of an Order of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty against Banco Popular de Puerto Rico, San Juan, Puerto Rico, a state member bank. Banco Popular, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order in connection with its alleged violations of the Board's regulations implementing the National Flood Insurance Act. The Order requires Banco Popular to pay a civil money penalty of $10,000. A copy of the Order is attached.
Remarks by Governor Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. Before the Second Global Y2K National Coordinators Conference, United Nations, New York, New York June 22, 1999 Public Information and Public Confidence In Year 2000 Year 2000 is a unique problem that has various dimensions. It started as a technical problem, has progressed to being a senior management business issue and is now becoming a public confidence concern. In addition, it is unique in that we all know that the century date change will occur, but what will occur on that date is still open to differing perspectives. This is certainly a case in which the future is opaque. In this environment, there are, and will increasingly be, a variety of views and analyses. Some of them will be fact-based and responsible; others will perhaps be less analytical and more emotional. Why is Public Disclosure Important? Public disclosure of each business's plans, and indeed of country plans, for remediation, testing and renovation of systems, as well as general outlines for contingency plans are all critical. This is axiomatic, but it might be helpful to explain why. In a business context, individual counterparties, that is suppliers, customers, creditors and others, are all working to develop business continuity plans. Full and comprehensive information is essential to that process. The readiness of counterparties is being evaluated based on available information. Inadequate details in a business environment can well lead to negative perceptions in the marketplace, which may have pronounced market and/or economic consequences. Not surprisingly, in a number of instances, earlier pessimistic perceptions have been positively revised with greater disclosure of information. With respect to public confidence, Year 2000 seems to be an issue in which a better-informed public is a more confidant and calm public. For example, in the United States the financial regulators have recently completed a survey of public perceptions on this matter. The results show that those with the greatest exposure to the Year 2000 issue were more likely to believe that any problems that emerge will be short-lived and subject to repair. More broadly in the context of public confidence, we know that the public will become aware of and develop a heightened interest in Year 2000 at differing times. In an environment in which public perceptions emerge slowly, I believe that it is important to maintain a steady flow of accurate information to the public domain. As the public gradually awakens to this topic, a stream of balanced, factually-accurate and timely information can potentially counter the more sensationalist coverage that is surely going to emerge. In addition, it is important for information on Year 2000 to be placed in the proper context and in perspective. Accurate information from reputable sources will be important in providing that context. Finally, public relations experts indicate that public perceptions will firm at some point, and be less subject to revision. Since we do not know when that point will occur, it is important for accurate information to be always available. The frequency and volume of the more balanced messages may have to increase as we all get closer to the date change, but information sharing should not wait until the last moment. What Has Been Done? Fortunately, those who have spent time over the last several years considering the Year 2000 problem are aware of the need for information sharing to maintain business and public confidence. The Joint Year 2000 Council in January 1999 issued a Bulletin to the world's financial regulators entitled "Focus on Information Sharing," which called for enhanced disclosure and information sharing and summarized the work of a guidance paper on the same topic. Earlier this month we reinforced this message with a short advisory to financial regulators worldwide. The Global 2000 Co-ordinating Group, a committee of banks, securities firms, and insurance companies from throughout the world, provides a tool on their web site for financial institutions to disclose their Year 2000 plans and status. Global 2000 is a member of the Joint Council's External Consultative Committee and we endorse their disclosure efforts. In the United States, the financial regulators have issued guidance to all depository institutions that includes a requirement for them to have public awareness efforts underway to inform their customers of the steps being taken to prepare for the century date change. Similarly, regulators have reminded financial institutions that they should understand the degree of preparedness of their major customers. Finally, our Securities and Exchange Commission has mandated disclosure from all companies with public shareholders. It is important for us to understand that the information sharing being called for does not require guarantees of complete preparedness. Rather, honest disclosure of plans and progress toward completion of those plans is what is called for. What Should You Do? Given what I have said, it is clear that we each have a role to play in this unfolding event. If you represent a national Year 2000 authority, as most do, your role is twofold. First, I believe that you should encourage honest disclosure from government entities on their degree of preparedness and the general outline of contingency plans that they are making. Also, regulators should use the weight of regulatory control to encourage regulated entities to engage in voluntary self-disclosure. If you represent the media, you have a special obligation to engage in balanced and accurate reportage, not attempting to hide important facts, but not seeking the most sensational coverage. A broad synthesis that captures facts, not drama, is probably most useful. Finally, all of us as members of the public have an obligation to listen to the most responsible voices. We should recall that in times of uncertainty, many views are expressed; only the most factually accurate deserve our attention.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced that a public administrative hearing will commence on June 29, 1999 , in connection with an enforcement action against Guillaume Henri Fonkenell, a former Vice President of Bankers Trust Company, New York, New York, a state member bank. The hearing will be held before an Administrative Law Judge to determine whether a cease and desist order and an order to pay a civil money penalty should be issued against Mr. Fonkenell. Copies of the Board's combined Notice of Charges and of Hearing and Notice of the Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty and an amendment to the Notice are attached. The Notice alleges that in 1993 and 1994 Mr. Fonkenell knowingly and recklessly breached his fiduciary duties and engaged in violations of law and unsafe and unsound banking practices in connection with the marketing and sale of leveraged derivatives transactions, and entries that Mr. Fonkenell caused to be made in Bankers Trust's books and records. The administrative hearing will commence at 10:30 a.m. on June 29, 1999 at the following location: The Federal Reserve Bank of New York 33 Liberty Street Room 143 New York, New York A copy of the Notice is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve has issued guidance to supervisory staff and bankers on overseeing large complex banking organizations during a time of dramatic change in the financial system. The guidance, issued in a supervisory letter, emphasizes the importance of assessing key risk management processes and ongoing monitoring of an institution's risk profile, as well as tailoring the supervision program to an institution's principal business lines and risks. Key elements of the program include designating a senior supervisor as the central point of contact for each institution and establishing a dedicated supervisory team with specialized skills and experience suited to each institution. The approach recognizes that a small number of large and highly complex institutions account for a growing share of total banking assets. These institutions have moved into nontraditional activities including securities underwriting and dealing, derivatives trading, and loan securitizing. They are expanding their activities across both state and international borders. And, ongoing advances in information technology have increased the speed, complexity and volume of financial transactions, and thus have heightened the potential for swift changes in the risks confronting these institutions. Under the approach outlined in the letter, the supervisory team will update its supervisory plan at least quarterly by reviewing a steady flow of relevant information, including internal management reports, internal and external audits and publicly available information. In some cases, supervisors may have direct on-line access to management information. These streamlined techniques, emphasizing oversight of an institution's internal procedures for identifying and managing risk in contrast with traditional point-in-time examinations, should reduce the cost and burden of regulation. This approach also considers an institution's performance and risk-management procedures in relation to the performance and procedures of its peers. To minimize duplicative regulatory effort, the approach requires close consultation with other domestic banking agencies, state insurance commissioners, securities regulators and foreign bank supervisors. The Federal Reserve is developing an information system, the Banking Organization National Desktop, to be introduced next year, to provide supervisors a user- friendly way of sharing information. The supervisory letter is .
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Banco Popular del Ecuador, S.A., Quito, Ecuador, Banco Popular del Ecuador's Miami agency, the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta and the State of Florida Department of Banking and Finance. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today its approval of the application of Anglo Irish Bank Corporation plc, Dublin, Ireland, to establish a representative office in Boston, Massachusetts. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Anglo Irish Bank Corporation plc Dublin, Ireland Order Approving Establishment of a Representative Office Anglo Irish Bank Corporation plc ("Bank"), Dublin, Ireland, a foreign bank within the meaning of the International Banking Act ("IBA"), has applied under section 10(a) of the IBA (12 U.S.C. § 3107(a)) to establish a representative office in Boston, Massachusetts. The Foreign Bank Supervision Enhancement Act of 1991, which amended the IBA, provides that a foreign bank must obtain the approval of the Board to establish a representative office in the United States. Notice of the application, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published in a newspaper of general circulation in Boston, Massachusetts ( The Boston Globe , March 29, 1999). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the application and all comments received. Bank, with assets of approximately $6.5 billion, was incorporated in 1964, and became a publicly traded company in 1971. Bank's two largest shareholders, M&G Investments and Scottish Provident International, both institutional investors, own, respectively, 7.7 and 6.7 percent of Bank's shares. The remaining shares of Bank are widely held, with no single shareholder owning more than 5 percent of the shares. Bank engages in traditional banking activities, serving personal, institutional, and corporate clients. Bank has five offices in Ireland, three offices in the United Kingdom, and one bank subsidiary in each of the Isle of Man and Austria. Operating through a number of subsidiaries, both foreign and domestic, Bank also offers financing, fund management, and trust services. The proposed representative office would act as a liaison with existing and potential customers of Bank. It would market Bank's products to small and medium-sized corporations. It also would conduct due diligence, assemble credit information, make property inspections and appraisals, and negotiate terms. All transactions would be approved and booked at Bank's head office. In acting on an application to establish a representative office, the IBA and Regulation K provide that the Board shall take into account whether the foreign bank engages directly in the business of banking outside the United States and has furnished to the Board the information it needs to assess the application adequately. The Board also shall take into account whether the foreign bank is subject to comprehensive supervision or regulation on a consolidated basis by its home country supervisor (12 U.S.C. § 3107(a)(2); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(d)(2)). In addition, the Board may take into account additional standards set forth in the IBA and Regulation K (12 U.S.C. § 3105(d)(3)-(4); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)(2)). As noted above, Bank engages directly in the business of banking outside the United States. Bank also has provided the Board with information necessary to assess the application through submissions that address the relevant issues. With respect to home country authorities, the Board previously has determined, in connection with applications involving other banks in Ireland, that those banks were subject to comprehensive home country supervision on a consolidated basis. Bank is supervised by the Central Bank of Ireland on substantially the same terms and conditions as those banks. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that Bank is subject to comprehensive supervision and regulation on a consolidated basis by its home country supervisor. The Board also has taken into account the additional standards set forth in section 7 of the IBA and Regulation K (see 12 U.S.C. § 3105(d)(3)-(4); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)(2)). In this regard, the Central Bank of Ireland has no objection to establishment of the proposed representative office. With respect to the financial and managerial resources of Bank, taking into consideration Bank's record of operation in its home country, its overall financial resources, and its standing with its home country supervisor, the Board also has determined that financial and managerial factors are consistent with approval of the proposed representative office. Bank appears to have the experience and capacity to support the proposed representative office and has established controls and procedures for the proposed representative office to ensure compliance with U.S. law. With respect to access to information about Bank's operations, the Board has reviewed the restrictions on disclosure in relevant jurisdictions in which Bank operates and has communicated with certain relevant government authorities regarding access to information. Bank has committed to make available to the Board such information on the operations of Bank and any of its affiliates that the Board deems necessary to determine and enforce compliance with the IBA, the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956, as amended, and other applicable federal law. To the extent that the provision of such information may be prohibited by law, Bank has committed to cooperate with the Board to obtain any necessary consents or waivers that might be required from third parties for disclosure of such information. In addition, subject to certain conditions, the Central Bank of Ireland may share information on Bank's operations with other supervisors, including the Board. In light of these commitments and other facts of record, and subject to the conditions described below, the Board concludes that Bank has provided adequate assurances of access to any necessary information the Board may request. On the basis of all the facts of record, and subject to the commitments made by Bank as well as the terms and conditions set forth in this order, the Board has determined that Bank's application to establish the representative office should be, and hereby is, approved. Should any restrictions on access to information on the operations or activities of Bank subsequently interfere with the Board's ability to obtain information to determine and enforce compliance by Bank or its affiliates with applicable federal statutes, the Board may require termination of any of Bank's or its affiliates' direct or indirect activities in the United States. Approval of this application also is specifically conditioned on compliance by Bank with the commitments made in connection with this application, and with the conditions in this order. The commitments and conditions referred to above are conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its decision, and may be enforced in proceedings under 12 U.S.C. § 1818 against Bank and its affiliates. By order of the Board of Governors, effective June 28, 1999. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Footnotes Data are as of December 31, 1998. In assessing this standard, the Board considers, among other factors, the extent to which the home country supervisors: (i) ensure that the bank has adequate procedures for monitoring and controlling its activities worldwide; (ii) obtain information on the condition of the bank and its subsidiaries and offices through regular examination reports, audit reports, or otherwise; (iii) obtain information on the dealings with and relationship between the bank and its affiliates, both foreign and domestic; (iv) receive from the bank financial reports that are consolidated on a worldwide basis, or comparable information that permits analysis of the bank's financial condition on a worldwide consolidated basis; (v) evaluate prudential standards, such as capital adequacy and risk asset exposure, on a worldwide basis. These are indicia of comprehensive consolidated supervision. No single factor is essential and other elements may inform the Board's determination. See Allied Irish Banks, plc, 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin 607 (1997); Bank of Ireland , 81 Federal Reserve Bulletin 511 (1995). The Board's authority to approve the establishment of the proposed representative office parallels the continuing authority of the State of Massachusetts to license or otherwise permit the establishment of offices of a foreign bank. The Board's approval of this application does not supplant the authority of the State of Massachusetts and the Massachusetts Division of Banks ("Division") to license or otherwise permit the establishment of the proposed office of Bank in accordance with any terms or conditions that the Division may impose. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Meyer, Ferguson, and Gramlich.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice filed by BankBoston Corporation, Boston, Massachusetts; The Bank of New York Company, Inc., New York, New York; The Chase Manhattan Corporation, New York, New York; Citizens Financial Group, Inc., Providence, Rhode Island; Comerica Incorporated, Detroit, Michigan; First Union Corporation, Charlotte, North Carolina; Fleet Financial Group, Inc., Boston, Massachusetts; HSBC Holdings PLC, London, England; HSBC Holdings BV, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; HSBC Americas, Inc., Buffalo, New York; The Royal Bank of Scotland Group PLC, Edinburgh, Scotland; The Royal Bank of Scotland PLC, Edinburgh, Scotland; and Summit Bancorp, Princeton, New Jersey, to acquire Magic Line, Inc., Dearborn, Michigan, through NYCE Corporation, Woodcliff Lake, New Jersey, and thereby engage in providing data processing services and check verification services. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today its approval of the application of Deutsche VerkehrsBank AG, Frankfurt am Main, Germany, to establish a representative office in New York, New York. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
For immediate release The Federal Open Market Committee today voted to raise its target for the federal funds rate 25 basis points to 5 percent. Last fall the Committee reduced interest rates to counter a significant seizing-up of financial markets in the United States. Since then much of the financial strain has eased, foreign economies have firmed, and economic activity in the United States has moved forward at a brisk pace. Accordingly, the full degree of adjustment is judged no longer necessary. Labor markets have continued to tighten over recent quarters, but strengthening productivity growth has contained inflationary pressures. Owing to the uncertain resolution of the balance of conflicting forces in the economy going forward, the FOMC has chosen to adopt a directive that includes no predilection about near-term policy action. The Committee, nonetheless, recognizes that in the current dynamic environment it must be especially alert to the emergence, or potential emergence, of inflationary forces that could undermine economic growth.