For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of a consent Order against William Barber, an institution-affiliated party of the First Western Bank, Cooper City, Florida, a state member bank. The individual, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the Order to resolve allegations that he violated the Change in Bank Control Act in connection with his acquisition of beneficial ownership of the shares of the bank. A copy of the Order is attached. The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of a consent Order against William Carmichael, an institution-affiliated party of the First Western Bank, Cooper City, Florida, a state member bank. The individual, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the Order to resolve allegations that he violated the Change in Bank Control Act in connection with his acquisition of beneficial ownership of the shares of the bank. A copy of the Order is attached. The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of a consent Order against Richard Edwards, Vivian Edwards, and Jeremy Edwards, all institution-affiliated parties of the First Western Bank, Cooper City, Florida, a state member bank. The individuals, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the Order to resolve allegations that they violated the Change in Bank Control Act in connection with their acquisition of beneficial ownership of the shares of the bank. A copy of the Order is attached. The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of a consent Order against Grant Marant, an institution-affiliated party of the First Western Bank, Cooper City, Florida, a state member bank. The individual, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the Order to resolve allegations that he violated the Change in Bank Control Act in connection with his acquisition of beneficial ownership of the shares of the bank. A copy of the Order is attached. The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of a consent Order against Linda Marant, an institution-affiliated party of the First Western Bank, Cooper City, Florida, a state member bank. The individual, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the Order to resolve allegations that she violated the Change in Bank Control Act in connection with her acquisition of beneficial ownership of the shares of the bank. A copy of the Order is attached. The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of a consent Order against David Nieminen and Gay Lynn Nieminen, both institution-affiliated parties of the First Western Bank, Cooper City, Florida, a state member bank. The individuals, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the Order to resolve allegations that they violated the Change in Bank Control Act in connection with their acquisition of beneficial ownership of the shares of the bank. A copy of the Order is attached. The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of a consent Order against James Rouse and Jenene Rouse, both institution-affiliated parties of the First Western Bank, Cooper City, Florida, a state member bank. The individuals, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the Order to resolve allegations that they violated the Change in Bank Control Act in connection with their acquisition of beneficial ownership of the shares of the bank. A copy of the Order is attached. The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of a consent Order against H. Burns Warfield, an institution-affiliated party of the First Western Bank, Cooper City, Florida, a state member bank. The individual, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the Order to resolve allegations that he violated the Change in Bank Control Act in connection with his acquisition of beneficial ownership of the shares of the bank. A copy of the Order is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Open Market Committee decided today to leave its target for the federal funds rate unchanged. Strengthening productivity growth has been fostering favorable trends in unit costs and prices, and much recent information suggests that these trends have been sustained. Nonetheless, the growth of demand has continued to outpace that of supply, as evidenced by a decreasing pool of available workers willing to take jobs. In these circumstances, the Federal Open Market Committee will need to be especially alert in the months ahead to the potential for costs to increase significantly in excess of productivity in a manner that could contribute to inflation pressures and undermine the impressive performance of the economy. Against this background, the Committee adopted a directive that was biased toward a possible firming of policy going forward. Committee members emphasized that such a directive did not signify a commitment to near-term action. The Committee will need to evaluate additional information on the balance of aggregate supply and demand and conditions in financial markets.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced a decrease from $46.5 million to $44.3 million in the net transaction accounts to which a 3 percent reserve requirement will apply in 2000. This adjustment is known as the low reserve tranche adjustment. The Board also changed from $4.9 million to $5.0 million the amount of reservable liabilities of each depository institution that is subject to a reserve requirement of zero percent. Additionally, the Board increased the deposit cutoff levels that are used in conjunction with the exemption level to determine the frequency and detail of deposit reporting required for each institution from $81.9 million to $84.5 million for nonexempt depository institutions and from $52.6 million to $54.3 million for exempt depository institutions. For depository institutions that report weekly, the low reserve tranche adjustment and reservable liabilities exemption adjustment will apply to the reserve computation period that begins Tuesday, November 30, 1999, and the corresponding reserve maintenance period that begins Thursday, December 30, 1999. For institutions that report quarterly, the low reserve tranche adjustment and the reservable liabilities exemption adjustment will apply to the reserve computation period that begins Tuesday, December 21, 1999, and the corresponding reserve maintenance period that begins Thursday, January 20, 2000. In addition, normal shift procedures will resume in September 2000 for nonexempt institutions that would otherwise have shifted from quarterly to weekly reporting, and for exempt institutions that would otherwise have shifted from annual to quarterly reporting, in September 1999 but for Y2K adjustments to the category shift procedures. The Board's notice is attached.
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan The evolution of bank supervision Before the American Bankers Association, Phoenix, Arizona October 11, 1999 I appreciate once again being invited to participate in your annual convention. The convention theme, "Creating Sustainable Competitive Advantage," is well chosen for an industry that continues to be characterized by dramatic change. This morning I should like to address one aspect of response to change--the evolution of bank supervision. As the theme of your convention suggests, the economic landscape is continually evolving. To remain competitive, individual banks must adapt, and they have. It is no less natural to expect that supervisory policies and practices also would evolve and adapt over time. Banking supervision is responding, though admittedly not as rapidly as the industry itself. This is not necessarily all bad. The physician's admonition "First do no harm" is a desirable starting point for bank supervisors as well. Nevertheless, significant changes are in the pipeline. Today I would like to sketch the framework that is now being developed, growing out of work at the Federal Reserve, at other U.S. banking agencies, and by our colleagues abroad. The outline of this framework was presented in a consultative document released by the Basel Supervisors Committee in June. The details are preliminary, but the concepts are beginning to congeal and deserve your close attention, especially if you wish to influence the eventual outcome of the deliberations. The first concept I would highlight is that the scope and complexity of prudential policies should conform to the scope and complexity of the bank entities to which they are applied. This means, in practice, that few changes to the present system are necessary for the vast majority of banks in the United States. More broadly, however, a one-size-fits-all approach to regulation and supervision is inefficient and, frankly, untenable in a world in which banks vary dramatically in terms of size, business mix, and appetite for risk. Even among the largest banks, no two institutions have exactly the same risk profiles, risk controls, or organizational and management structure. Accordingly, prudential policies need to be customized for each institution: The more complex an institution's business activities, the more sophisticated must be our approach to prudential oversight. The need for a multi-track approach to prudential oversight is particularly evident as we face the reality that the megabanks being formed by growth and consolidation are increasingly complex entities that create the potential for unusually large systemic risks in the national and international economy should they fail. No central bank can fulfill its ultimate responsibilities without endeavoring to ensure that the oversight of such entities is consistent with those potential risks. At the same time, policymakers must be sensitive to the tradeoffs between more detailed supervision and regulation, on the one hand, and moral hazard and the smothering of innovation and competitive response, on the other. Heavier supervision and regulation designed to reduce systemic risk would likely lead to the virtual abdication of risk evaluation by creditors of such entities, who could--in such an environment--rely almost totally on the authorities to discipline and protect the bank. The resultant reduction in market discipline would, in turn, increase the risks in the banking system, quite the opposite of what is intended. Such a heavier hand would also blunt the ability of U.S. banks to respond to crisis events. Increased government regulation is inconsistent with a banking system that can respond to the kinds of changes that have characterized recent years, changes that are expected to accelerate in the years ahead. The desirability of limiting moral hazard, and of minimizing the risks of overly burdensome supervision and regulation, has motivated those of us associated with the Basel exercise to propose a three-pillared approach to prudential oversight. This approach emphasizes, and seeks to strengthen, market discipline, supervision, and minimum capital regulation. Market Discipline In trying to balance the necessary tradeoffs, and in contemplating the growing complexity of our largest banking organizations, it seems to us that the supervisors have little choice but to try to rely more--not less--on market discipline--augmented by more effective public disclosures--to carry an increasing share of the oversight load. This is, of course, only feasible for those, primarily large, banking organizations that rely on uninsured liabilities in a significant way. To be sure, these organizations already disclose a considerable volume of information to market participants, and, indeed, there is ample evidence that market discipline now plays a role in banking behavior. Nonetheless, the scale and clarity of disclosures is better at some institutions than at others and, on average, could be considerably improved. With more than a third of large-bank assets funded by noninsured liabilities, the potential for oversight through market discipline is significant, and success in this area may well reduce the need to rely on more stringent governmental supervision and regulation. The channels through which market discipline works are, of course, changes in access to funds and/or changes in risk premia as banks take on or shed risk or engage in certain types of transactions. The changing cost and availability of bank funding affect ex ante risk appetites of bank management and serve as market signals of a bank's condition to market participants and to examiners. But the prerequisite to the enhancement of market discipline in conjunction with supervision and regulation is improvement in the amount and kind of public disclosure that uninsured claimants need about bank activities and on- and off-balance-sheet assets in order to make informed judgments and to act on those judgments. Information on loans by risk category and information on residual risk retained in securitization are examples. The best way to encourage more disclosures is not yet clear. Our intent is to consult with the industry regarding the establishment of new disclosure standards and ways to evaluate their application. Supervision Improved public disclosure will, we believe, not only enhance market discipline but also create further incentives for improvements in banks' risk-management practices and technologies. Such improvements will enhance the supervisory pillar of prudential oversight. If supervisors are comfortable with a bank's internal risk-management processes, the most cost-effective approach to prudential oversight would have supervisors tap into that bank's internal risk assessments and other management information. To be sure, some "transaction testing" of risk-management systems by supervisors will necessarily remain. But as internal systems improve, the basic thrust of the examination process should shift from largely duplicating many activities already conducted within the bank to providing constructive feedback that the bank can use to enhance further the quality of its risk-management systems. It is these internal bank systems--coupled with public disclosure--that provide the first line of defense against undue risk-taking. Indeed, it should be emphasized that the focus of supervision and regulation--especially for the larger institutions--should be even less on detail and more on the overall structure and operation of risk-management systems. That is the most efficient way to address our interest in both the safety and soundness of the banking system and the overall stability of financial markets. Relying more extensively on banks' internal risk-management systems can also be used to enhance prudential assessments of a bank's capital adequacy. As the Basel consultative document suggests, over time our examination process for assessing bank capital adequacy would try to use the same techniques that banks are, and will be, using to evaluate their risk positions and the capital needed to support these risks. To spur this process in the United States, the Federal Reserve in June issued new examination guidance encouraging the largest and most complex banks to carry out self-assessments of their capital adequacy in relation to objective and quantifiable measures of risk. These self-assessments will be evaluated during on-site examinations and, eventually, are to be a factor in assigning supervisory ratings. A key component of these self-assessments will be each bank's internal risk evaluations of the credit quality of its customers and counterparties. Currently, such internal risk ratings are beginning to be used by a small number of banks in their risk-management, pricing, internal economic capital allocation, and loan loss reserve determinations. Some banks are further along in the process than others. Virtually all large banks are moving in that direction. The bank regulators already have begun incorporating reviews of these internal risk-rating processes into their on-site examinations, and last July the Federal Reserve issued examination guidance on this subject, including a summary of emerging sound practices in this area. The supervisory policies and procedures being contemplated will build on the increasingly sophisticated management and control systems that are rapidly becoming part of banks' best practice risk-management mechanisms. They will, as well, require both good judgment and sophistication on the part of bank examiners in order to avoid a cookie-cutter application of policies and to develop skills at evaluation that will match those available to the banks. For each of about thirty large, complex banking organizations--in Washington parlance, LCBOs--the Federal Reserve has already established dedicated teams of examiners, supplemented by experts in areas ranging from clearance and settlement to value-at-risk and credit-risk models. Each LCBO team is directed by a senior Reserve Bank official. Both that "central point of contact" and his or her supervisory team will be charged with following one LCBO and understanding its strategy, controls, and risk profile. Jointly, these teams will represent the Federal Reserve supervisory pillar as it applies to LCBOs. Minimum Capital Regulation In addition to emphasizing more effective market discipline and making supervisory assessments of bank capital adequacy more risk-focused, the June consultative paper highlights the need to make regulatory capital requirements--the third pillar of prudential oversight--more risk-focused as well. In recent years, it has become clear that the largely arbitrary treatment of risks within the current Basel Accord has distorted risk-management practices and encouraged massive regulatory capital arbitrage. That is, our rules have induced bank transactions that have the effect of reducing regulatory capital requirements more than they reduce a bank's risk position. Consequently, the fundamental credibility of regulatory capital standards as a tool for prudential oversight and prompt corrective action at the largest banking organizations has been seriously undermined. In reflection of the considerable differences among banks that I mentioned earlier, U.S. supervisors are developing proposals for a multi-track approach to address modifications to the regulatory capital rules, and this approach has been incorporated in the Basel consultative document. Within the United States, consideration is being given to a standardized capital treatment involving a quite simple regulatory capital ratio that might become applicable to the vast majority of institutions that are not internationally active. For another group of banks, change might involve such modest refinements to current capital requirements as closing certain loopholes and basing some risk-weights on available external credit ratings. For those comparatively few banking organizations whose scale, complexity, and diversity warrant a more sophisticated approach to capital adequacy, the Basel Committee has proposed another track that, at least initially, would seek to link regulatory capital requirements to the banks' internal risk ratings that I discussed earlier. Under this approach, the risk-weight assigned to a particular credit position would be based on the internal risk rating assigned by the bank holding that instrument. Regulatory staffs in the United States and other countries are currently attempting to work out the basic architecture of such an approach. Critical issues include how to validate banks' internal risk ratings and how to link risk-weights to these internal ratings so as to ensure economically meaningful and reasonably consistent capital treatment of similar risks across banks. This is an extremely difficult undertaking, and its success will require unprecedented collaboration between--and among--supervisors and the banking industry. The Framework It is, I believe, important to reiterate my earlier comment that bank supervision and regulation--especially capital regulation--are necessarily dynamic and evolutionary. We are striving for a framework whose underlying goals and broad strategies can remain relatively fixed, but within which changes in application can be made as both bankers and supervisors learn more, as banking practices change, and as individual banks grow and change their operations and risk-control techniques. Operationally, this means that we should not view innovations in supervision and regulation as one-off events. Rather, the underlying framework needs to be flexible and to embody a workable process by which modest improvements in supervision and regulation at the outset can be adjusted and further enhanced over time as experience and operational feasibility dictate. In particular, we should avoid mechanical or formulaic approaches that, whether intentionally or not, effectively "lock" us into particular technologies long after they become outmoded. We should be planning for the long pull, not developing near-term quick fixes. It is the framework that we must get right. The application might initially be bare-boned but over time become more sophisticated. For example, it could begin with a limited number of risk "buckets" and, over time, be expanded to include not only more risk categories, but also the use of an individual bank's full credit-risk model--all within the same supervisory framework and unique to each bank. The design of the improved oversight approach is a work in progress. We are endeavoring to develop a program that is the least intrusive, most market based, and most consistent with current and future sound risk-management practices possible, given our responsibilities for financial market stability.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Office of the Comptroller of the Currency Office of Thrift Supervision Federal Regulators Advise Banks and Thrifts About Risks In High Loan-to-Value Residential Real Estate Lending WASHINGTON -- Federal financial institution regulators today advised banks and thrifts about the risks associated with high loan-to-value (LTV) residential real estate loans. The issued today reminds insured institutions that the Interagency Guidelines for Real Estate Lending Policies adopted in 1992 apply to these transactions. The 1992 Guidelines advised institutions that they would come under increased supervisory scrutiny as the total of all high LTV loans approached 100 percent of total capital. Today's guidance describes steps regulators may take if an institution's high LTV loan portfolio exceeds 100 percent of total capital. Supervisory action might include a request to sell high LTV loans, raise additional capital or submit a plan to achieve compliance with the capital limitation. High LTV residential loans carry higher risks than more traditional residential real estate loans. However, the regulators advised banks and thrifts that high LTV residential loans -- which represent 90 percent or more of the value of the residence held as collateral -- can be profitable when risks are effectively managed and loans are priced based on that risk. The regulators also recognize that high LTV residential loans can serve a useful purpose in helping financially burdened borrowers consolidate and manage their debts. The regulators said that today's guidance is not intended to -- and should not -- restrict access to mortgage credit for affordable housing for low and moderate income borrowers. For example, high LTV home loans may be used to help first-time home buyers by financing closing costs or rehabilitation costs into their mortgage. There is also no intent in today's guidance to restrict financing of well-managed community development or rehabilitation programs. The guidance issued today listed four primary credit risks associated with this type of loan: increased risk of default and losses; inadequate collateral; longer terms, creating longer periods of exposure; and limited default remedies. This guidance is intended to remind financial institutions of their obligations to effectively manage the risks in their high LTV loan portfolios and to comply with fair lending and consumer protection laws and regulations.
For immediate release
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan Before a conference sponsored by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Washington, D.C. October 14, 1999 Measuring Financial Risk in the Twenty-first Century One of the broad issues that you have been discussing today is the nature of financial risk. This evening I will offer my perspective on the fundamental sources of financial risk and the value added of banks and other financial intermediaries. Then, from that perspective, I will delve into some of the pitfalls inherent in risk-management models and the challenges they pose for risk managers. Risk, to state the obvious, is inherent in all business and financial activity. Its evaluation is a key element in all estimates of wealth. We are uncertain that any particular nonfinancial asset will be productive. We're also uncertain about the flow of returns that the asset might engender. In the face of these uncertainties, we endeavor to estimate the most likely long-term earnings path and the potential for actual results to deviate from that path, that is, the asset's risk. History suggests that day-to-day movements in asset values primarily reflect asset-specific uncertainties, but, especially at the portfolio level, changes in values are also driven by perceptions of uncertainties relating to the economy as a whole and to asset values generally. These perceptions of broad uncertainties are embodied in the discount factors that convert the expectations of future earnings to current present values, or wealth. In a market economy, all risks derive from the risks of holding real assets or, equivalently, unleveraged equity claims on those assets. All debt instruments (and, indeed, equities too) are essentially combinations of long and short positions in those real assets. The marvel of financial intermediation is that, although it cannot alter the underlying risk in holding direct claims on real assets, it can redistribute risks in a manner that alters behavior. The redistribution of risk induces more investment in real assets and hence engenders higher standards of living. This occurs because financial intermediation facilitates diversification of risk and its redistribution among people with different attitudes toward risk. Any means that shifts risk from those who choose to withdraw from it to those more willing to take it on permits increased investment without significantly raising the perceived degree of discomfort from risk that the population overall experiences. Indeed, all value added from new financial instruments derives from the service of reallocating risk in a manner that makes risk more tolerable. Insurance, of course, is the purest form of this service. All the new financial products that have been created in recent years, financial derivatives being in the forefront, contribute economic value by unbundling risks and reallocating them in a highly calibrated manner. The rising share of finance in the business output of the United States and other countries is a measure of the economic value added from its ability to enhance the process of wealth creation. But while financial intermediation, through its impetus to diversification, can lower the risks of holding claims on real assets, it cannot alter the more deep-seated uncertainties inherent in the human evaluation process. There is little in our historical annals that suggests that human nature has changed much over the generations. But, as I have noted previously, while time preference may appear to be relatively stable over history, perceptions of risk and uncertainty, which couple with time preference to create discount factors, obviously vary widely, as does liquidity preference, itself a function of uncertainty. These uncertainties are an underlying source of risk that we too often have regarded as background noise and generally have not endeavored to capture in our risk models. Almost always this has been the right judgment. However, the decline in recent years in the equity premium--the margin by which the implied rate of discount on common stock exceeds the riskless rate of interest--should prompt careful consideration of the robustness of our portfolio risk-management models in the event this judgment proves wrong. The key question is whether the recent decline in equity premiums is permanent or temporary. If the decline is permanent, portfolio risk managers need not spend much time revisiting a history that is unlikely to repeat itself. But if it proves temporary, portfolio risk managers could find that they are underestimating the credit risk of individual loans based on the market value of assets and overestimating the benefits of portfolio diversification. There can be little doubt that the dramatic improvements in information technology in recent years have altered our approach to risk. Some analysts perceive that information technology has permanently lowered equity premiums and, hence, permanently raised the prices of the collateral that underlies all financial assets. The reason, of course, is that information is critical to the evaluation of risk. The less that is known about the current state of a market or a venture, the less the ability to project future outcomes and, hence, the more those potential outcomes will be discounted. The rise in the availability of real-time information has reduced the uncertainties and thereby lowered the variances that we employ to guide portfolio decisions. At least part of the observed fall in equity premiums in our economy and others over the past five years does not appear to be the result of ephemeral changes in perceptions. It is presumably the result of a permanent technology-driven increase in information availability, which by definition reduces uncertainty and therefore risk premiums. This decline is most evident in equity risk premiums. It is less clear in the corporate bond market, where relative supplies of corporate and Treasury bonds and other factors we cannot easily identify have outweighed the effects of more readily available information about borrowers. The marked increase over this decade in the projected slope of technology advance, of course, has also augmented expectations of earnings growth, as evidenced by the dramatic increase since 1995 in security analysts' projections of long-term earnings. While it may be that the expectations of higher earnings embodied in equity values have had a spillover effect on discount factors, the latter remain essentially independent of the earnings expectations themselves. That equity premiums have generally declined during the past decade is not in dispute. What is at issue is how much of the decline reflects new, irreversible technologies, and what part is a consequence of a prolonged business expansion without a significant period of adjustment. The business expansion is, of course, reversible, whereas the technological advancements presumably are not. Some analysts have offered an entirely different interpretation of the drop in equity premiums. They assert that a long history of a rate of return on equity persistently exceeding the riskless rate of interest is bound to induce a learning-curve response that will eventually close the gap. According to this argument, much, possibly all, of the decline in equity premiums over the past five years reflects this learning response. It would be a mistake to dismiss such notions out of hand. We have learned to no longer cower at an eclipse of the sun or to run for cover at the sight of a newfangled automobile. But are we really observing in today's low equity premiums a permanent move up the learning curve in response to decades of data? Or are other factors at play? Some analysts have suggested several problems with the learning curve argument. One is the persistence of an equity premium in the face of the history of "excess" equity returns. Is it possible that responses toward risk are more akin to claustrophobia than to a learning response? No matter how many times one emerges unscathed from a claustrophobic experience, the sensitivity remains. In that case, there is no learning experience. Whichever case applies, what is certain is that the question of the permanence of the decline in equity premiums is of critical importance to risk managers. They cannot be agnostic on this question because any abrupt rise in equity premiums must inevitably produce declines in the values of most private financial obligations. Thus, however clearly they may be able to evaluate asset-specific risk, they must be careful not to overlook the possibilities of macro risk that could undermine the value of even a seemingly well-diversified portfolio. I have called attention to this risk-management challenge in a different context when discussing the roots of the international financial crises of the past two and a half years. My focus has been on the perils of risk management when periodic crises--read sharply rising risk premiums--undermine risk-management structures that fail to address them. During a financial crisis, risk aversion rises dramatically, and deliberate trading strategies are replaced by rising fear-induced disengagement. Yield spreads on relatively risky assets widen dramatically. In the more extreme manifestation, the inability to differentiate among degrees of risk drives trading strategies to ever-more-liquid instruments that permit investors to immediately reverse decisions at minimum cost should that be required. As a consequence, even among riskless assets, such as U.S. Treasury securities, liquidity premiums rise sharply as investors seek the heavily traded "on-the-run" issues--a behavior that was so evident last fall. As I have indicated on previous occasions, history tells us that sharp reversals in confidence occur abruptly, most often with little advance notice. These reversals can be self-reinforcing processes that can compress sizable adjustments into a very short period. Panic reactions in the market are characterized by dramatic shifts in behavior that are intended to minimize short-term losses. Claims on far-distant future values are discounted to insignificance. What is so intriguing, as I noted earlier, is that this type of behavior has characterized human interaction with little appreciable change over the generations. Whether Dutch tulip bulbs or Russian equities, the market price patterns remain much the same. We can readily describe this process, but, to date, economists have been unable to anticipate sharp reversals in confidence. Collapsing confidence is generally described as a bursting bubble, an event incontrovertibly evident only in retrospect. To anticipate a bubble about to burst requires the forecast of a plunge in the prices of assets previously set by the judgments of millions of investors, many of whom are highly knowledgeable about the prospects for the specific investments that make up our broad price indexes of stocks and other assets. Nevertheless, if episodic recurrences of ruptured confidence are integral to the way our economy and our financial markets work now and in the future, the implications for risk measurement and risk management are significant. Probability distributions estimated largely, or exclusively, over cycles that do not include periods of panic will underestimate the likelihood of extreme price movements because they fail to capture a secondary peak at the extreme negative tail that reflects the probability of occurrence of a panic. Furthermore, joint distributions estimated over periods that do not include panics will underestimate correlations between asset returns during panics. Under these circumstances, fear and disengagement on the part of investors holding net long positions often lead to simultaneous declines in the values of private obligations, as investors no longer realistically differentiate among degrees of risk and liquidity, and to increases in the values of riskless government securities. Consequently, the benefits of portfolio diversification will tend to be overestimated when the rare panic periods are not taken into account. The uncertainties inherent in valuations of assets and the potential for abrupt changes in perceptions of those uncertainties clearly must be adjudged by risk managers at banks and other financial intermediaries. At a minimum, risk managers need to stress test the assumptions underlying their models and set aside somewhat higher contingency resources--reserves or capital--to cover the losses that will inevitably emerge from time to time when investors suffer a loss of confidence. These reserves will appear almost all the time to be a suboptimal use of capital. So do fire insurance premiums. More important, boards of directors, senior managers, and supervisory authorities need to balance emphasis on risk models that essentially have only dimly perceived sampling characteristics with emphasis on the skills, experience, and judgment of the people who have to apply those models. Being able to judge which structural model best describes the forces driving asset pricing in any particular period is itself priceless. To paraphrase my former colleague Jerry Corrigan, the advent of sophisticated risk models has not made people with grey hair, or none, wholly obsolete.
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan Business, the economy, and the new millenium Before the National Italian American Foundation, Washington, D.C. October 15, 1999 I am pleased to join the Italian American Congressional Delegation and the National Italian American Foundation once again. I very much appreciate the fact that both Senator Domenici and Congressman LaFalce have invited me to participate in your briefings more than once--either I have made a good impression or they're getting desperate. This year's subject, "Business, the Economy and the New Millennium," made a choice of topic quite easy. While I suspect I will not have much to add beyond what already is well known by this group of businesspeople about efforts to remediate and test computer systems in preparation for the rollover to January 1, 2000, I want to raise with you some of the issues I have considered as I think about the likely impact of Y2K. As you well know, we face an exceptionally complex problem that has required and will continue to require the commitment of significant amounts of resources to fix. The good news is that evidence is becoming more persuasive that our electronic infrastructure will be ready for the Century Date Change. The public's understanding of the degree of our Y2K readiness also has grown, and fears of widespread disruptions around the CDC appear to be waning, though we are not as yet home free. There is nothing exactly like the Century Date Change in our historical annals from which we can infer its potential consequences. But as a standard for monitoring developments, it is simply unrealistic to expect our advanced technology to function any better on January 1, 2000, than it has on any other day of the year. Moreover, while systems may fail as they have in the past, these failures never have resulted in broader and persistent--that is, systemic--breakdowns in our economy. In the event of breakdowns short of systemic, history teaches us that businesses are remarkably adaptive. In our market-based economy, economic incentives ensure that resources quickly move to their most-productive activities: In a crisis situation, whether systemic or short of that, companies expeditiously redeploy their labor and capital resources to facilitate the restoration of their key operations. Corporate management is wholly aware that a slow response to a breakdown can bring revenue losses in the short run and an erosion of their customer base in the long run. Simply put, in our competitive economic environment, the ability to recover quickly from a serious technical problem can literally be a matter of survival for some firms. Fortunately, our country has the skilled, well-educated workforce that is a precondition for such quick action. While ingenious solutions can sometimes originate from the executive suite, more often than not they grow out of the ability of engineers, technicians, and workers on the factory floor to improvise a temporary fix for a critical problem. Depth of experience and the ability of our workers to think "outside of the box" have prevented many a problem from turning into a disaster. Thus, while no one knows exactly what will happen on January 1--the CDC is a truly idiosyncratic event--we do have a good idea of how our society will respond if problems develop. As we prepare for the rollover, it is most important to keep in perspective just how far we have come in our Y2K preparations. Three years ago, only the largest and arguably the most forward-looking of organizations had mobilized for the Century Date Change. Today, many firms and government agencies have completed their testing, and those institutions that were late off the block are working very diligently to be ready by the end of the year. While it is easy to obsess about the few institutions in our society that may not be ready, let us not lose sight of the fact that the overwhelming majority of us are not only prepared but have contingency plans to deal with breakdowns. It is the economic effects of businesses and households endeavoring to adjust to the CDC in the next few months that I see as replacing technical concerns as our major challenge. I am not saying that we would have been better off if the existence of the Y2K problem had never been publicized. In that event, the remedial actions that have been expended over the past two years would surely have fallen short. Although the desirability of publicizing the existence of a pending significant technical breakdown was never in question--and never should have been--it always raised the potential hazard of an outsized, if only partly informed, disruptive reaction by the public. Given the potentially broad range of uncertain outcomes at the CDC, the cost of advance preventative preparations in most cases is probably correctly perceived by businesses and households to be low, or at least acceptable. Thus, with their own remediation efforts either complete or nearing completion, many large businesses are currently evaluating the readiness of their suppliers and the local infrastructure on which they depend. Based on such assessments, these companies are deciding whether, for example, to hold inventory levels above their tight, just-in-time programs as a precaution against Y2K-related disruptions. Because businesses are effectively buying insurance against an uncertainty, the less uncertainty, the smaller the perceived insurance need. Thus, accurate, credible, and timely information on the general state of readiness will be essential to reducing uncertainties in the months ahead. Businesses then can make more-informed decisions as to the type and magnitude of the precautions they need to take. If only a small percentage of businesses choose to add to their inventories as a hedge, the effect on production will be insignificant. However, should a large number of companies want to hold even a few extra days of inventories, the necessary, albeit temporary, increase in production (or imports) to accommodate such stock building could be quite large. While the evidence of precautionary inventory hedging to date is mixed, in the financial sphere, borrowers and lenders are clearly taking steps to build liquid assets and reduce their reliance on credit markets around the end of the year. This is reflected in a noticeable rise in deposit and commercial paper rates for funding that would be outstanding over year's end. Many corporate treasurers have moved forward their debt offerings to avoid any chance of a dearth of credit availability in the fourth quarter or difficulties funding short-term liabilities. The potentially most important piece in the Y2K puzzle for the rest of the year is the uncertain response of the American consumer as the year-end approaches. A small number of households, driven by fear of the unknown, tell pollsters that they are planning to build large stockpiles of food, water, fuel, and cash as the millennium approaches. Most, however, profess much more limited plans. Nonetheless, we at the Federal Reserve must be prepared for all contingencies and have made especial plans for currency availability in the remote possibility of heavy withdrawals from banks. I trust that such withdrawals will be modest since, as I have said before, the safest thing for consumers to do with their money around year-end is to leave it where it is. In summary, no one really knows what will happen when the century rolls over. The Century Date Change, to repeat, is a unique event, and the complexity of the problem suggests that something is likely to slip through the cracks. But as I mentioned earlier, the probability of a cascading of computer failures in mission-critical systems is now negligible, given the testing that has been done, the backup plans that are in place, and the great adaptability and ingenuity of the American worker. Moreover, the evidence of an increasingly compliant computer infrastructure appears to have assuaged at least some of the public's earlier Y2K concerns, according to several recent surveys. Nonetheless, we have not yet reached the period of extra heavy focus by the media on the CDC. It is too compelling a story for audiences that thrive on countdowns to the unknown. As attention heightens and rumors inevitably mushroom, it is important that what is known and what is not known be clearly articulated by those of us in both public and private leadership positions in Y2K management. In the final analysis, facts are the only antidote for rumors. We at the Federal Reserve are optimistic that computer problems associated with the Century Date Change and the response to the CDC will not be a major event for our nation. This is a testament to the extraordinary efforts of thousands of far-sighted technicians and business planners who, confronted with an intangible and abstract problem, have been able to convince businesses and governments to marshal vast resources for remedial actions. This has been a truly impressive feat. If we avoid fear-induced, significant economic responses in the months ahead, the Century Date Change will hopefully replicate the saga of "the dog that did not bark."
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced an extension of the comment period on proposals to allow electronic delivery of federally mandated disclosures. On September 14, 1999, the Board published revised proposals for public comment under five consumer protection regulations: B (Equal Credit Opportunity), E (Electronic Fund Transfers), M (Consumer Leasing), Z (Truth in Lending), and DD (Truth in Savings). The original deadline for public comment was October 29, 1999. The Board is extending the comment period until November 15, 1999 . The Board's notice is attached.
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan Do efficient financial markets mitigate financial crises? Before the 1999 Financial Markets Conference of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Sea Island, Georgia October 19, 1999 I am happy to address this conference, now in its eighth year, and endorse Atlanta Fed President Jack Guynn's choice of topic. Many of us, with the benefit of hindsight, have been endeavoring for nearly two years to distill the critical lessons from the global crises of 1997 and 1998. Your contributions to this analysis are timely and useful. Knowing that you have touched on a number of topics over the last few days, I wanted to focus on some of the issues I raised at the most recent meetings of the IMF and World Bank; in particular, why the financial turmoil engendered by disruption in Asia resulted in a crisis longer and deeper than we expected in its early days. In a sense, I am turning the question posed by this conference--Do efficient financial markets contribute to financial crises?--on its head by asking whether efficient financial markets mitigate financial crises. To answer the question, we need to look at the financial market situation of just over a year ago. Following the Russian default of August 1998, public capital markets in the United States virtually seized up. For a time, not even investment-grade bond issuers could find reasonable takers. While Federal Reserve easing shortly thereafter doubtless was a factor, it is not credible that this move fully explained the dramatic restoration of most, though not all, markets in a matter of weeks. The problems in our markets appeared too deep-seated to be readily unwound solely by a cumulative 75 basis point ease in overnight rates. Arguably, at least as important was the existence of backup financial institutions, especially commercial banks, that replaced the intermediation function of the public capital markets. As public debt issuance fell, commercial bank lending accelerated, effectively filling in some of the funding gap. Even though bankers also moved significantly to risk aversion, previously committed lines of credit, in conjunction with Federal Reserve ease, were an adequate backstop to business financing, and the impact on the real economy of the capital market turmoil was blunted. Firms were able to sustain production, and business and consumer confidence was not threatened. A vicious circle of the initial disruption leading to losses and then further erosion in the financial sector never got established. Capital Market Alternatives What we perceived in the United States in 1998 may reflect an important general principle: Multiple alternatives to transform an economy's savings into capital investment act as backup facilities should the primary form of intermediation fail. In 1998 in the United States, banking replaced the capital markets. Far more often it has been the other way around, as it was most recently in the United States a decade ago. When American banks stopped lending in 1990, as a consequence of a collapse in the value of real estate collateral, the capital markets were able to substitute for the loss of bank financial intermediation. Interestingly, the then recently developed mortgage-backed securities market kept residential mortgage credit flowing, which in prior years would have contracted sharply. Arguably, without the capital market backing, the mild recession of 1991 could have been far more severe. Our mild recession in 1991 offers a stark contrast with the long-lasting problems of Japan, whose financial system is an example of predominantly bank-based financial intermediation. The keiretsu conglomerate system, as you know, centers on a "main bank," leaving corporations especially dependent on banks for credit. Thus, one consequence of Japan's banking crisis has been a protracted credit crunch. Some Japanese corporations did go to the markets to pick up the slack. Domestic corporate bonds outstanding have more than doubled over the decade while total bank loans have been almost flat. Nonetheless, banks are such a dominant source of funding in Japan that this increase in nonbank lending has not been sufficient to avert a credit crunch. The Japanese government is injecting funds into the banking system in order to recapitalize it. While it has made some important efforts, it has yet to make significant progress in diversifying the financial system. This could be a key element, although not the only one, in promoting long-term recovery. Japan's banking crisis is also ultimately likely to be much more expensive to resolve than the American crisis, again providing prima facie evidence that financial diversity helps limit the effect of economic shocks. This leads one to wonder how severe East Asia's problems would have been during the past eighteen months had those economies not relied so heavily on banks as their means of financial intermediation. One can readily understand that the purchase of unhedged short-term dollar liabilities to be invested in Thai baht domestic loans would at some point trigger a halt in lending by Thailand's banks if the dollar exchange rate did not hold. But why did the economy need to collapse when lending did? Had a functioning capital market existed, along with all the necessary financial infrastructure, the outcome might well have been far more benign. Before the crisis broke, there was little reason to question the three decades of phenomenally solid East Asian economic growth, largely financed through the banking system. The rapidly expanding economies and bank credit growth kept the ratio of nonperforming loans to total bank assets low. The failure to have backup forms of intermediation was of little consequence. The lack of a spare tire is of no concern if you do not get a flat. East Asia had no spare tires. Managing Bank Crises Banks, being highly leveraged institutions, have, throughout their history, periodically fallen into crisis. The classic problem of bank risk management is to achieve an always-elusive degree of leverage that creates an adequate return on equity without threatening default. The success rate has never approached 100 percent, except where banks are credibly guaranteed, usually by their governments, in the currency of their liabilities. But even that exception is by no means ironclad, especially when that currency is foreign. One can wonder whether in the United States of the nineteenth century, when banks were also virtually the sole intermediaries, numerous banking crises would have been as disabling if alternative means of intermediation were available. In dire circumstances, modern central banks have provided liquidity, but fear is not always assuaged by cash. Even with increased liquidity, banks do not lend in unstable periods. The Japanese banking system today is an example: The Bank of Japan has created massive liquidity, yet bank lending has responded little. But unlike the United States a decade ago, alternative sources of finance are not yet readily available. The case of Sweden's banking crisis in the early 1990s, in contrast to America's savings and loan crisis of the 1980s and Japan's current banking crisis, illustrates another factor that often comes into play with banking sector problems: Speedy resolution is good, whereas delay can significantly increase the fiscal and economic costs of a crisis. Resolving a banking-sector crisis often involves government outlays because of implicit or explicit government safety net guarantees for banks. Accordingly, the political difficulty in raising taxpayer funds has often meant delayed resolution. Delay, of course, can add to the fiscal costs and prolong a credit crunch. Experience tells us that alternatives within an economy for the process of financial intermediation can protect that economy when one of those financial sectors undergoes a shock. Australia serves as an interesting test case in the most recent Asian financial turmoil. Despite its close trade and financial ties to Asia, the Australian economy exhibited few signs of contagion from contiguous economies, arguably because Australia already had well-developed capital markets as well as a sturdy banking system. But going further, it is plausible that the dividends of financial diversity extend to more normal times as well. The existence of alternatives may well insulate all aspects of a financial system from breakdown. Diverse capital markets, aside from acting as backup to the credit process in times of stress, compete with a banking system to lower financing costs for all borrowers in more normal circumstances. Over the decades, capital markets and banking systems have interacted to create, develop, and promote new instruments that improved the efficiency of capital creation and risk bearing in our economies. Products for the most part have arisen within the banking system, where they evolved from being specialized instruments for one borrower to having more standardized characteristics. At the point that standardization became sufficient, the product migrated to open capital markets, where trading expanded to a wider class of borrowers, tapping the savings of larger groups. Money market mutual funds, futures contracts, junk bonds, and asset-backed securities are all examples of this process at work. Once capital markets and traded instruments came into existence, they offered banks new options for hedging their idiosyncratic risks and shifted their business from holding to originating loans. Bank trading, in turn, helped these markets to grow. The technology-driven innovations of recent years have facilitated the expansion of this process to a global scale. Positions taken by international investors within one country are now being hedged in the capital markets of another: so-called proxy hedging. Building Financial Infrastructure But developments of the past two years have provided abundant evidence that where a domestic financial system is not sufficiently robust, the consequences for a real economy of participating in this new, complex global system can be most unwelcome. It is not surprising that banking systems emerge as the first financial intermediary in market economies as economic integration intensifies. Banks can marshal scarce information about the creditworthiness of borrowers to guide decisions about the allocation of capital. The addition of capital market alternatives is possible only if scarce real resources are devoted to building a financial infrastructure--a laborious process whose payoff is often experienced only decades later. The process is difficult to initiate, especially in emerging economies that are struggling to edge above the poverty level, because of the perceived need to concentrate on high short-term rates of return to capital rather than to accept more moderate returns stretched over a longer horizon. We must continually remind ourselves that a financial infrastructure is composed of a broad set of institutions whose functioning, like all else in a society, must be consistent with the underlying value system. On the surface, financial infrastructure appears to be a strictly technical concern. It includes accounting standards that accurately portray the condition of the firm, legal systems that reliably provide for the protection of property and the enforcement of contracts, and bankruptcy provisions that lend assurance in advance as to how claims will be resolved in the inevitable result that some business decisions prove to be mistakes. Such an infrastructure promotes transparency within enterprises and allows corporate governance procedures that facilitate the trading of claims on businesses using standardized instruments rather than idiosyncratic bank loans. But the development of such institutions almost invariably is molded by the culture of a society. Arguably the notion of property rights in today's Russia is subliminally biased by a Soviet education that inculcated a highly negative view of individual property ownership. The antipathy to the "loss of face" in Asia makes it difficult to institute, for example, the bankruptcy procedures of Western nations, and in the West we each differ owing to deep-seated views of creditor-debtor relationships. Corporate governance that defines the distribution of power invariably reflects the most profoundly held societal views about the appropriate interaction of parties in business transactions. It is thus not a simple matter to append a capital markets infrastructure to an economy developed without it. Accordingly, instituting convergence across countries of domestic financial infrastructures or even of the components tied to international transactions is a very difficult task. Indeed, weaknesses in financial infrastructure made Asian banking systems more vulnerable before the crisis and have impeded resolution of the crisis subsequently. Lack of transparency coupled with an implicit government guarantee for banks encouraged investors to lend too much to banks too cheaply, with the consequence that capital was not allocated efficiently. Poor bankruptcy laws and procedures have made recovery on nonperforming bank loans a long and costly procedure. Moreover, the lack of transparency and of a legal infrastructure for enforcing contracts and collecting debts in Russia are a prime cause of the dearth of financial intermediation in Russia at this time. Nonetheless, the competitive pressures toward convergence will be a formidable force in the future if, as I suspect, additional forms of financial intermediation are seen as benefiting an economy. Moreover, a broader financial infrastructure will likely also strengthen the environment for the banking system and enhance its performance. A recent study by Ross Levine and Sara Zervos suggests that financial market development improves economic performance, over and above the benefits offered by banking sector development alone. The results are consistent with the idea that financial markets and banks provide useful, but different, bundles of financial services and that utilizing both will almost surely result in a more robust and more efficient process of capital allocation. It is no coincidence that the lack of adequate accounting practices, bankruptcy provisions, and corporate governance have been mentioned as elements in several of the recent crises that so disrupted some emerging-market countries. Had these been present, along with the capital markets they would have supported, the consequences of the initial shocks of early 1997 might well have been quite different. It is noteworthy that the financial systems of most continental European countries escaped much of the turmoil of the past two years. And looking back over recent decades, we find fewer examples in continental Europe of banking crises sparked by real estate booms and busts or episodes of credit crunch of the sort I have mentioned in the United States and Japan. Until recently, the financial sectors of continental Europe were dominated by universal banks, and capital markets are still less well developed there than in the United States or the United Kingdom. The experiences of these universal banking systems may suggest that it is possible for some bank-based systems, when adequately supervised and grounded in a strong legal and regulatory framework, to function robustly. But these banking systems have also had substantial participation of publicly owned banks. Such institutions rarely exhibit the dynamism and innovation that many private banks have employed for their, and their economies', prosperity. Government participation often distorts the allocation of capital to its most productive uses and undermines the reliability of price signals. But at times when market adjustment processes might have proved inadequate to prevent a banking crisis, such a government presence in the banking system can provide implicit guarantees of resources to keep credit flowing, even if its direction is suboptimal. In Germany, for example, publicly controlled banking groups account for nearly 40 percent of the assets of all banks taken together. Elsewhere in Europe, the numbers are less but still sizable. In short, there is some evidence to suggest that insurance against destabilizing credit crises has been purchased with a less efficient utilization of capital. It is perhaps noteworthy that this realization has helped engender a downsizing of public ownership of commercial banks in Europe, coupled with rapid development of heretofore modest capital markets, changes which appear to be moving continental Europe's financial system closer to the structure evident in Britain and the United States. Continental European countries may gain an additional benefit from the increased development of their capital markets. With increased concentration of national banking systems, which will likely be followed by increased concentration of Europe-wide banking, comes the risk of an unusually large impact should the health of a megabank become impaired, causing the bank to curtail its lending. Having well-developed capital markets would likely help to mitigate these effects, as more firms would have alternative sources of funds. Conclusion Improving domestic banking systems in emerging markets will help to limit the toll of the next financial disturbance. But if, as I presume, diversity within the financial sector provides insurance against a financial problem turning into economy-wide distress, then steps to foster the development of capital markets in those economies should also have an especial urgency. Moreover, the difficult groundwork for building the necessary financial infrastructure--improved accounting standards, bankruptcy procedures, legal frameworks, and disclosure--will pay dividends of their own. The rapidly developing international financial system has clearly intensified competitive forces that have enhanced standards of living throughout most of the world. It is important that we develop domestic financial structures that facilitate and protect our international financial and trading systems, a process that will require much energy and commitment in the years ahead.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board, along with the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, today issued a final rule on a proposal to expand the examination frequency cycle for certain U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks. The rule is effective October 22, 1999 . This rule finalizes an interim rule, effective August 28, 1998, that made U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks with total assets of $250 million or less eligible for an 18-month examination cycle if they met the qualifying criteria set out in the rule. The ruling will implement provisions of section 2214 of the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act of 1996. The interagency notice is attached. |
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application of Illini Corporation, Springfield, Illinois, to acquire Farmer State Bank of Camp Point, Camp Point, Illinois. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM Illini Corporation Springfield, Illinois Order Approving Acquisition of a Bank Illini Corporation ("Illini"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 3 of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C.  1842) to acquire Farmers State Bank of Camp Point, Camp Point, Illinois ("Farmers Bank"). Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (64 Federal Register 41,429 (1999)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the proposal and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 3 of the BHC Act. Illini controls one subsidiary bank and is the 185th largest commercial banking organization in Illinois, controlling deposits of approximately $134.7 million, representing less than 1 percent of total deposits in commercial banking organizations in the state. Farmers Bank is the 554th largest commercial banking organization in Illinois, controlling deposits of approximately $26.7 million, representing less than 1 percent of total deposits in commercial banking organizations in the state. On consummation of the proposal, Illini would remain the 185th largest commercial banking organization in Illinois, controlling deposits of approximately $161.3 million, representing less than 1 percent of total deposits in the state. Illini and Farmers Bank do not compete in any banking market. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposal would not have a significantly adverse effect on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in any relevant banking market, and that competitive considerations are consistent with approval. The BHC Act requires the Board to consider the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the companies and banks involved in the proposal and certain supervisory factors. The Board has carefully considered the financial and managerial resources of Illini and its subsidiary bank in light of comments provided by a director of Illini ("Protestant"). The Board also has reviewed these factors in light of all the facts of record, including supervisory reports of examination and other confidential supervisory information assessing the financial and managerial resources of Illini; its subsidiary bank, Illini Bank, Sangamon, Illinois ("Illini Bank"); and Farmers Bank. The Board notes that Illini and Illini Bank are well capitalized with satisfactory earnings and would remain well capitalized after the proposed acquisition. Illini would incur debt as a result of this proposal, and appears to have sufficient resources to service that debt without impairing Illini Bank. The Board also notes that Illini and Illini Bank have engaged in a planned streamlining of operations and have found replacements to fill a number of recent key vacancies. Farmers Bank is a well capitalized bank with satisfactory management, and Illini proposes to retain the current management of Farmers Bank. Consummation of this proposal would result in the addition of a new shareholder who would control the second largest percentage of Illini's shares and who has substantial banking experience. The Board has considered the current and proposed management resources of Illini in light of examination reports and other supervisory information provided by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ("FDIC"), which is the primary federal supervisory agency for Illini Bank. Based on these and other facts of record, the Board concludes that considerations relating to the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of Illini, its subsidiary bank, and Farmers Bank are consistent with approval of the proposal, as are the other supervisory factors that the Board must consider under section 3 of the BHC Act. The Board has carefully considered the effect of the proposed acquisition on the convenience and needs of the community to be served in light of all the facts of record. Based on all the facts of record, including the performance records of Illini Bank and Farmers Bank under the Community Reinvestment Act ("CRA") (12 U.S.C.  2901 et seq.), the Board concludes that convenience and needs considerations are consistent with approval of the proposal. Based on the foregoing, and in light of all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the application should be, and hereby is, approved. Approval of the application is specifically conditioned on compliance by Illini with all the commitments made in connection with the proposal. For purposes of this order, the commitments and conditions referred to above shall be deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The acquisition of Farmers Bank shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day after the effective date of the order, or later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective October 25, 1999. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Footnotes All banking data are as of June 30, 1998. Protestant asserts that Illini has lost a number of its key management personnel over recent years, has limited managerial resources and would be unable to manage Farmers Bank, which is located 100 miles from Illini. Protestant also asserts that Illini's management is overwhelmed by litigation and has had a substantial breakdown in communication with many of Illini's shareholders. Finally, Protestant contends that the financial performance of Illini's subsidiary bank has been poor. Illini Bank received a "satisfactory" rating at its most recent CRA performance examination by the FDIC in January 1999. Farmers Bank received a "satisfactory" rating at its most recent CRA performance examination by the FDIC, as of February 1999. Protestant also requested that the Board hold a public meeting or hearing on the proposal. Section 3 of the BHC Act does not require the Board to hold a public hearing on an application unless the appropriate supervisory authority for the bank to be acquired makes a timely written recommendation of denial. The Board has not received such a recommendation from the appropriate supervisory authority. Under its rules, the Board may, in its discretion, hold a public meeting or hearing on a application to acquire a bank if a meeting or hearing is necessary or appropriate to clarify factual issues related to the application and to provide an opportunity for testimony. 12 C.F.R. 225.16(e). The Board has carefully considered Protestant's request in light of all the facts of record. In the Board's view, Protestant has had ample opportunity to present his views and, in fact, has submitted written comments that have been carefully considered by the Board in acting on the proposal. Protestant's request fails to identify disputed issues of facts that are material to the Board's decision and that may be clarified by a public meeting or hearing. Protestant also has failed to show that a public meeting or hearing is necessary for the proper presentation or consideration of his views. For these reasons, and based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that a public meeting or hearing is not required or warranted in this case. Accordingly, the request is hereby denied. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chairman Ferguson, and Governors Kelley and Gramlich. Absent and not voting: Governor Meyer.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today its approval of the application of KBC Bank N.V., Brussels, Belgium, to establish a branch in New York, New York; an agency in Atlanta, Georgia; and a representative office in Los Angeles, California. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM KBC Bank N.V. Brussels, Belgium Order Approving Establishment of a Branch, Agency, and Representative Office KBC Bank N.V. ("Bank"), Brussels, Belgium, a foreign bank within the meaning of the International Banking Act ("IBA"), has applied under section 7(d) of the IBA (12 U.S.C.  3105(d)) to establish a branch in New York, New York, and an agency in Atlanta, Georgia. Bank has also applied under section 10(a) of the IBA (12 U.S.C.  3107(a)) to establish a representative office in Los Angeles, California. The Foreign Bank Supervision Enhancement Act of 1991, which amended the IBA, provides that a foreign bank must obtain the approval of the Board to establish a branch, agency, or representative office in the United States. Notice of the application, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, was published on November 9, 1998 in a newspaper of general circulation in New York, New York (New York Daily News); Atlanta, Georgia (Atlanta Journal and Constitution); and Los Angeles, California (Los Angeles Times). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the application and all comments received. Bank, with consolidated total assets of $157 billion, is the second largest bank in Belgium. Through its offices and subsidiaries, Bank offers banking services in approximately thirty countries worldwide. Bank is a qualifying foreign banking organization within the meaning of Regulation K (12 C.F.R. 211.23(b)). Bank was established in connection with a series of mergers and related transactions creating its parent, KB ABB CERA Bank and Insurance Holding Company N.V. ("KBC Holding"), Brussels, Belgium. As part of these transactions, the former Kredietbank N.V. ("Kredietbank"), Brussels, Belgium, and the former CERA Bank C.V., Louvain, Belgium, were merged and their operations were contributed to Bank. Up until the merger, Kredietbank operated a branch in New York, New York; an agency in Atlanta, Georgia; and a representative office in Los Angeles, California. Bank has requested authority to retain and operate these offices through this application. Pursuant to Regulation K, the Board allowed the merger to proceed before an application to establish the offices was filed and acted on by the Board. In order to approve an application by a foreign bank to establish a branch, agency, or representative office in the United States, the IBA and Regulation K require the Board to determine that the foreign bank applicant engages directly in the business of banking outside of the United States, and has furnished to the Board the information it needs to assess the application adequately. The Board also shall take into account whether the foreign bank and any foreign bank parent is subject to comprehensive supervision or regulation on a consolidated basis by its home country supervisor (12 U.S.C.  3105(d)(2), 3107(a)(2); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(d)(2), 211.24(c)(1)). The Board may also take into account additional standards as set forth in the IBA and Regulation K (12 U.S.C.  3105(d)(3)-(4); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)(2)-(3)). As noted above, Bank engages directly in the business of banking outside the United States. Bank also has provided the Board with information necessary to assess the application through submissions that address the relevant issues. With respect to supervision by home country authorities, the Board previously has determined, in connection with an application involving another bank in Belgium, that the bank was subject to home country supervision on a consolidated basis. Bank is supervised by the Belgian Banking and Finance Commission (the "Commission") on substantially the same terms and conditions as that other bank. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that Bank is subject to comprehensive supervision on a consolidated basis by its home country supervisor. The Board also has taken into account the additional standards set forth in section 7 of the IBA and Regulation K (see 12 U.S.C.  3105(d)(3)-(4); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)(2)). The Commission has no objection to the establishment of the proposed branch, agency, and representative office. With respect to the financial and managerial resources of Bank, taking into consideration Bank's record of operations in its home country, its overall financial resources, and its standing with its home country supervisors, the Board has also determined that financial and managerial factors are consistent with approval of the proposed branch, agency, and representative office. Bank appears to have the experience and capacity to support the proposed branch, agency, and representative office and has established controls and procedures for the proposed offices to ensure compliance with U.S. law. With respect to access to information about Bank's operations, the Board has reviewed the restrictions on disclosure in relevant jurisdictions in which Bank operates and has communicated with relevant government authorities regarding access to information. Bank and its parents have committed to make available to the Board such information on the operations of Bank and any of its affiliates that the Board deems necessary to determine and enforce compliance with the IBA, the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956, as amended, and other applicable federal law. To the extent that the provision of such information to the Board may be prohibited by law, Bank and its parents have committed to cooperate with the Board to obtain any necessary consents or waivers that might be required from third parties for disclosure of such information. In addition, subject to certain conditions, the Commission may share information on Bank's operations with other supervisors, including the Board. In light of these commitments and other facts of record, and subject to the condition described below, the Board concludes that Bank has provided adequate assurances of access to any necessary information that the Board may request. On the basis of all the facts of record, and subject to the commitments made by Bank and its parents, as well as the terms and conditions set forth in this order, the Board has determined that Bank's application to establish the branch, agency, and representative office should be, and hereby is, approved. Should any restrictions on access to information on the operations or activities of Bank and its affiliates subsequently interfere with the Board's ability to obtain information to determine and enforce compliance by Bank or its affiliates with applicable federal statutes, the Board may require termination of any of Bank's direct or indirect activities in the United States. Approval of this application also is specifically conditioned on compliance by Bank and its parents with the commitments made in connection with this application and with the conditions in this order. The commitments and conditions referred to above are conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its decision and may be enforced in proceedings under 12 U.S.C.  1818 against Bank and its affiliates. By order of the Board of Governors, effective October 27, 1999. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Footnotes Unless otherwise indicated, data are as of June 30, 1999. Almanij N.V., Antwerp, Belgium, a publicly traded financial holding company, owns a majority interest in KBC Holding; the remaining interest is widely held. See 12 C.F.R. 211.24(a)(3). In assessing this standard, the Board considers, among other factors, the extent to which the home country supervisors: (i) ensure that the bank has adequate procedures for monitoring and controlling its activities worldwide; (ii) obtain information on the condition of the bank and its subsidiaries and offices through regular examination reports, audit reports, or otherwise; (iii) obtain information on the dealings with and relationship between the bank and its affiliates, both foreign and domestic; (iv) receive from the bank financial reports that are consolidated on a worldwide basis or comparable information that permits analysis of the bank's financial condition on a worldwide consolidated basis; (v) evaluate prudential standards, such as capital adequacy and risk asset exposure, on a worldwide basis. These are indicia of comprehensive, consolidated supervision. No single factor is essential, and other elements may inform the Board's determination. See Crdit Communal de Belgique S.A., 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 104 (1996). In this regard, KBC Holding and Almanij N.V. are also considered financial holding companies subject to the E.U. Directive on Consolidated Supervision and to oversight by the Commission. The Board's authority to approve the establishment of the proposed offices parallels the continuing authority of the States of New York, Georgia, and California to license offices of a foreign bank. The Board's approval of this application does not supplant the authority of the States of New York, Georgia, and California, respectively, to license the proposed offices of Bank in accordance with any terms or conditions that they may impose. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chairman Ferguson, and Governors Kelley, Meyer, and Gramlich.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today its approval of the application of Antwerpse Diamantbank N.V., Antwerp, Belgium, to establish a representative office in New York, New York. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM Antwerpse Diamantbank N.V. Antwerp, Belgium Order Approving Establishment of a Representative Office Antwerpse Diamantbank N.V. ("Bank"), Antwerp, Belgium, a foreign bank within the meaning of the International Banking Act ("IBA"), has applied under section 10(a) of the IBA (12 U.S.C.  3107(a)) to establish a representative office in New York, New York. The Foreign Bank Supervision Enhancement Act of 1991, which amended the IBA, provides that a foreign bank must obtain the approval of the Board to establish a representative office in the United States. Notice of the application, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published in a newspaper of general circulation in New York, New York (New York Daily News, April 26, 1999). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the application and all comments received. Bank, with total consolidated assets of approximately $1.07 billion, is primarily engaged in financing of and providing other financial services to participants in the diamond industry. Bank also operates a wholly owned bank subsidiary in Switzerland, which also provides financial services primarily to customers in the diamond industry. Bank is a subsidiary of KBC Bank N.V. (KBC Bank), Brussels, Belgium. KBC Bank, with total consolidated assets of $157 billion, is the second largest bank in Belgium. Through its offices and subsidiaries, KBC Bank offers banking services in approximately thirty countries worldwide. The proposed representative office would conduct marketing and promotional activities, and serve as a liaison between Bank and its customers and correspondents. In acting on an application to establish a representative office, the IBA and Regulation K provide that the Board shall take into account whether the foreign bank engages directly in the business of banking outside of the United States, and has furnished to the Board the information it needs to assess the application adequately. The Board also shall take into account whether the foreign bank and any foreign bank parent is subject to comprehensive supervision or regulation on a consolidated basis by its home country supervisor (12 U.S.C.  3107(a)(2); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(d)(2)). In addition, the Board also may take into account additional standards as set forth in the IBA and Regulation K (12 U.S.C.  3105(d)(3)-(4); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)(2)). As noted above, Bank and KBC Bank engage directly in the business of banking outside the United States. Bank also has provided the Board with information necessary to assess the application through submissions that address the relevant issues. With respect to supervision by home country authorities, the Board previously has determined, in connection with an application involving another bank in Belgium, that the bank was subject to home country supervision on a consolidated basis. Bank and its foreign bank parent, KBC Bank, are supervised by the Belgian Banking and Finance Commission (the "Commission") on substantially the same terms and conditions as the other bank. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that Bank and KBC Bank are subject to comprehensive supervision and regulation on a consolidated basis by their home country supervisor. The Board also has taken into account the additional standards set forth in section 7 of the IBA and Regulation K (see 12 U.S.C.  3105(d)(3)-(4); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)(2)). The Commission has no objection to the establishment of the proposed representative office. With respect to the financial and managerial resources of Bank, taking into consideration Bank's record of operations in its home country, its overall financial resources, and its standing with its home country supervisors, the Board has also determined that financial and managerial factors are consistent with approval of the proposed representative office. Bank appears to have the experience and capacity to support the proposed representative office and has established controls and procedures for the proposed representative office to ensure compliance with U.S. law. With respect to access to information about Bank's operations, the Board has reviewed the restrictions on disclosure in relevant jurisdictions in which Bank and KBC Bank operate and has communicated with relevant government authorities regarding access to information. Bank and its parents have committed to make available to the Board such information on the operations of Bank and KBC Bank and any of their affiliates that the Board deems necessary to determine and enforce compliance with the IBA, the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956, as amended, and other applicable federal law. To the extent that the provision of such information to the Board may be prohibited by law, Bank and its parents have committed to cooperate with the Board to obtain any necessary consents or waivers that might be required from third parties for disclosure of such information. In addition, subject to certain conditions, the Commission may share information on Bank's and KBC Bank's operations with other supervisors, including the Board. In light of these commitments and other facts of record, and subject to the condition described below, the Board concludes that Bank and KBC Bank have provided adequate assurances of access to any necessary information that the Board may request. On the basis of all the facts of record, and subject to the commitments made by Bank and its parents, as well as the terms and conditions set forth in this order, the Board has determined that Bank's application to establish the representative office should be, and hereby is, approved. Should any restrictions on access to information on the operations or activities of Bank and its affiliates subsequently interfere with the Board's ability to obtain information to determine and enforce compliance by Bank or its affiliates with applicable federal statutes, the Board may require termination of any of Bank's direct and indirect activities in the United States. Approval of this application also is specifically conditioned on compliance by Bank and its parents with the commitments made in connection with this application and with the conditions in this order. The commitments and conditions referred to above are conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its decision and may be enforced in proceedings under 12 U.S.C.  1818 against Bank and its affiliates. By order of the Board of Governors, effective October 27, 1999. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Footnotes Unless otherwise indicated, data are as of March 31, 1999. KBC Bank is wholly owned by KB ABB CERA Bank and Insurance Holding Company N.V. ("KBC Bank and Insurance"), Brussels, Belgium, which in turn is majority owned by Almanij N.V., Antwerp, Belgium, a publicly traded financial holding company; the remaining shares of KBC Bank and Insurance are widely held. Data as of June 30, 1999. In assessing this standard, the Board considers, among other factors, the extent to which the home country supervisors: (i) ensure that the bank has adequate procedures for monitoring and controlling its activities worldwide; (ii) obtain information on the condition of the bank and its subsidiaries and offices through regular examination reports, audit reports, or otherwise; (iii) obtain information on the dealings with and relationship between the bank and its affiliates, both foreign and domestic; (iv) receive from the bank financial reports that are consolidated on a worldwide basis or comparable information that permits analysis of the bank's financial condition on a worldwide consolidated basis; (v) evaluate prudential standards, such as capital adequacy and risk asset exposure, on a worldwide basis. These are indicia of comprehensive, consolidated supervision. No single factor is essential, and other elements may inform the Board's determination. See Crdit Communal de Belgique S.A., 82 Federal Reserve Bulletin 104 (1996). By order dated October 27, 1999, the Board determined that KBC Bank was subject to supervision on a consolidated basis. The Board's authority to approve the establishment of the proposed representative office parallels the continuing authority of the State of New York to license offices of a foreign bank. The Board's approval of this application does not supplant the authority of the State of New York and the New York State Banking Department ("Department") to license the proposed office of Bank in accordance with any terms or conditions that the Department may impose. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chairman Ferguson, and Governors Kelley, Meyer, and Gramlich.