For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today its approval of the application of Westdeutsche ImmobilienBank, Mainz, Germany, to establish a representative office in New York, New York. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Westdeutsche ImmobilienBank Mainz, Germany Order Approving Establishment of a Representative Office Westdeutsche ImmobilienBank ("Bank"), Mainz, Germany, a foreign bank within the meaning of the International Banking Act ("IBA"), has applied under section 10(a) of the IBA (12 U.S.C. § 3107(a)) to establish a representative office in New York, New York. The Foreign Bank Supervision Enhancement Act of 1991, which amended the IBA, provides that a foreign bank must obtain the approval of the Board to establish a representative office in the United States. Notice of the application, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published in a newspaper of general circulation in New York, New York (New York Times, July 24, 1998). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the application and all comments received. Bank, with assets of $7 billion, was established in January 1995, and is owned by three German Landesbanken, which are in turn owned by various savings banks associations and municipal and state authorities. Landesbank Rheinland-Pfalz Girozentrale ("LB Rh-Pfalz") owns 25 percent of Bank; Westdeutsche Landesbank Girozentrale ("WestLB") owns 50 percent of Bank; and Landesbank Baden-Wï¿½rttemberg ("LBW") owns 25 percent of Bank. All three Landesbanken are public law institutions that serve as the central and clearing bank for the savings banks in their respective states. The Landesbanken also provide commercial and investment banking services regionally, nationally, and internationally to both public and private entities and individuals. Bank engages principally in real estate activities. Bank provides real estate financing, consulting and service activities, project development, construction and property management, and portfolio management. Bank has twelve offices in Germany, a branch in Great Britain, and a representative office in the Netherlands. The proposed representative office would act as a liaison with customers and potential customers. It would also solicit new business, conduct research, make property inspections, verify external appraisals, secure title information, prepare applications for loans, and solicit investors to purchase such loans. In acting on an application to establish a representative office, the IBA and Regulation K provide that the Board shall take into account whether the foreign bank engages directly in the business of banking outside of the United States, and has furnished to the Board the information it needs to assess the application adequately. The Board also shall take into account whether the foreign bank and any foreign bank parent is subject to comprehensive supervision or regulation on a consolidated basis by its home country supervisor (12 U.S.C. § 3107(a)(2); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(d)(2)). The Board also may take into account additional standards as set forth in the IBA and Regulation K (12 U.S.C. § 3105(d)(3)-(4); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)(2)). As noted above, LB Rh-Pfalz, WestLB, LBW, and Bank engage directly in the business of banking outside the United States. Bank also has provided the Board with information necessary to assess the application through submissions that address the relevant issues. With respect to supervision by home country authorities, the Board previously has determined, in connection with applications involving other banks in Germany, including WestLB and LBW, that those banks were subject to home country supervision on a consolidated basis. Bank and LB Rh-Pfalz are supervised by the German regulators on substantially the same terms and conditions as those other banks. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that Bank and LB Rh-Pfalz are subject to comprehensive supervision and regulation on a consolidated basis by their home country supervisors. The Board also has taken into account the additional standards set forth in section 7 of the IBA and Regulation K (see 12 U.S.C. § 3105(d)(3)-(4); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)(2)). In this regard, the German Federal Banking Supervisory Office has no objection to the establishment of the proposed representative office. With respect to the financial and managerial resources of Bank, taking into consideration Bank's record of operation in its home country, its overall financial resources, and its standing with its home country supervisors, the Board also has determined that financial and managerial factors are consistent with approval of the proposed representative office. Bank appears to have the experience and capacity to support the proposed representative office and has established controls and procedures for the proposed representative office to ensure compliance with U.S. law. With respect to access to information about Bank's operations, the Board has reviewed the restrictions on disclosure in relevant jurisdictions in which Bank operates and has communicated with relevant government authorities regarding access to information. Bank and its parents have committed to make available to the Board such information on the operations of Bank and any of its affiliates that the Board deems necessary to determine and enforce compliance with the IBA, the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956, as amended, and other applicable federal law. To the extent that the provision of such information may be prohibited by law, Bank and its parents have committed to cooperate with the Board to obtain any necessary consents or waivers that might be required from third parties for disclosure of such information. In addition, subject to certain conditions, the German supervisors may share information on Bank's operations with other supervisors, including the Board. In light of these commitments and other facts of record, and subject to the condition described below, the Board concludes that Bank has provided adequate assurances of access to any necessary information the Board may request. On the basis of all the facts of record, and subject to the commitments made by Bank and its parents as well as the terms and conditions set forth in this order, the Board has determined that Bank's application to establish the representative office should be, and hereby is, approved. Should any restrictions on access to information on the operations or activities of Bank and its affiliates subsequently interfere with the Board's ability to obtain information to determine and enforce compliance by Bank or its affiliates with applicable federal statutes, the Board may require termination of any of Bank's or its affiliates' direct or indirect activities in the United States. Approval of this application also is specifically conditioned on compliance by Bank and its parents with the commitments made in connection with this application, and with the conditions in this order. The commitments and conditions referred to above are conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its decision, and may be enforced in proceedings under 12 U.S.C. § 1818 against Bank and its affiliates. By order of the Board of Governors, effective March 1, 1999. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Footnotes Data are as of June 30, 1998. On January 1, 1999, Landeskreditbank Baden-Wï¿½rttemberg and Landesgirokasse-ï¿½ffentliche Bank und Landessparkasse were merged into Sï¿½dwestdeutsche Landesbank Girozentrale ("Sï¿½dwestLB"). Sï¿½dwestLB, which has been renamed Landesbank Baden-Wï¿½rttemberg ("LBW"), is the surviving legal entity. In assessing this standard, the Board considers, among other factors, the extent to which the home country supervisors: (i) ensure that the bank has adequate procedures for monitoring and controlling its activities worldwide; (ii) obtain information on the condition of the bank and its subsidiaries and offices through regular examination reports, audit reports, or otherwise; (iii) obtain information on the dealings with and relationship between the bank and its affiliates, both foreign and domestic; (iv) receive from the bank financial reports that are consolidated on a worldwide basis or comparable information that permits analysis of the bank's financial condition on a worldwide consolidated basis; (v) evaluate prudential standards, such as capital adequacy and risk asset exposure, on a worldwide basis. These are indicia of comprehensive, consolidated supervision. No single factor is essential, and other elements may inform the Board's determination. See West Merchant Bank Limited , 81 Federal Reserve Bulletin 519 (1995); Sï¿½dwestdeutsche Landesbank Girozentrale , 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin 937 (1997). No material change has occurred in the manner of supervision of the banks since those determinations. The Board's authority to approve the establishment of the proposed representative office parallels the continuing authority of the State of New York to license offices of a foreign bank. The Board's approval of this application does not supplant the authority of the State of New York and the New York State Banking Department ("Department") to license the proposed office of Bank in accordance with any terms or conditions that the Department may impose. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Meyer, Ferguson, and Gramlich.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today issued two final rules amending the risk-based and leverage capital standards for state member banks (Regulation H) and the risk-based capital standard for bank holding companies (Regulation Y). The rules are effective April 1, 1999 . The rules address the risk-based capital treatment of construction loans on presold residential properties, junior liens on 1- to 4-family residential properties, and investment in mutual funds. For state member banks and bank holding companies, there is no change in the risk-based capital treatment of construction loans on presold residential properties or junior liens on 1- to 4-family residential properties. With regard to the risk-based capital treatment of investments in mutual funds, state member banks or bank holding companies may continue to assign an investment in a mutual fund to the risk category appropriate to the highest risk-weighted asset allowable under the stated investment limits in the fund's prospectus, or at their option, assign the investment on a pro rata basis to different risk categories according to the limits of the fund's prospectus. The total risk weight of the fund under either risk-weighting method may not be less than 20 percent. With regard to the leverage capital standard for state member banks, institutions with a composite rating of "1" under the Uniform Financial Institutions Rating System will continue to have a minimum ratio of Tier 1 Capital to total assets (leverage ratio) of 3.0 percent. Other institutions will now be required to maintain a minimum leverage ratio of 4.0 percent, rather than the previous minimum of 3.0 percent plus an additional cushion of 100 to 200 basis points. The Board notes that an institution may be required to maintain higher-than-minimum capital levels if warranted, and emphasizes that an institution should maintain a capital level commensurate with its risk profile. The Board issued an amendment addressing the bank holding company leverage capital guidelines in June 1998. These final rules were adopted on a joint basis with the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of Thrift Supervision. The final rules are attached. | |
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the applications of Arizona Bank, Tucson, Arizona (formerly known as Compass Bank, Tucson, Arizona), to acquire 15 branches in Arizona owned by subsidiary banks of Wells Fargo & Company, San Francisco, California, and to establish branches at the acquired locations. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Arizona Bank Tucson, Arizona Order Approving Acquisition and Establishment of Branches By order of the Board of Governors, effective March 3, 1999. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Appendix A Branch Locations in Arizona 419 West Central Avenue, Coolidge 85228. 2 East Birch Avenue, Flagstaff 86001. 1992 McCulloch Boulevard North, Lake Havasu City 86403. 1325 West Southern, Mesa 85202. 4450 East Main Street, Mesa 85205. 613 South Beeline Street Parkway, Payson 85441. 3348 West Thomas Road, Phoenix 85017. 6002 South Central Avenue, Phoenix 85040. 302 North First Avenue, Phoenix 85003. 781 East White Mountain Boulevard, Pinetop 85935. 7201 East McDowell Road, Scottsdale 85251. 7315 East Osborn Road, Scottsdale 85251. 211 South Carmichael Avenue, Sierra Vista 85635. 7605 South McClintock Drive, Tempe 85284. 1599 South Fourth Avenue, Yuma 85364. Appendix B Arizona Banking Market Definitions and Data Casa Grande The Casa Grande banking market is approximated by the towns of Arizona City, Casa Grande, Coolidge, Eloy, Florence, and Sacaton. Bank is the eighth largest banking and thrift institution ("depository institution") in the market, controlling deposits of $600,000, and would purchase one branch controlling deposits of $9.9 million. After consummation of the proposal, Bank would become the seventh largest of eight competitors in the market, controlling deposits of $10.6 million, representing 3.2 percent of total deposits controlled by depository institutions in the market ("market deposits"). The HHI would increase by one point to 1985. Flagstaff The Flagstaff banking market is approximated by the towns of Flagstaff and Williams. Bank is the seventh largest depository institution in the market, controlling deposits of $800,000, and would purchase one branch controlling deposits of $50.4 million. After consummation of the proposal, Bank would become the fifth largest of seven competitors in the market, controlling deposits of $51.2 million, representing 13.2 percent of market deposits. The HHI would not increase. Phoenix The Phoenix banking market is approximated by the Phoenix Ranally Metropolitan Area ("RMA"). Bank is the 32nd largest depository institution in the market, controlling deposits of $2.6 million, and would purchase eight branches controlling deposits of $256.7 million. After consummation of the proposal, Bank would become the ninth largest of 42 competitors in the market, controlling deposits of $259.3 million, representing 1.1 percent of market deposits. The HHI would not increase. Yuma The Yuma banking market is approximated by the Yuma RMA and the town of Welton. Bank is the ninth largest depository institution in the market, controlling deposits of $28,000, and would purchase one branch controlling deposits of $28.7 million. After consummation of the proposal, Bank would become the sixth largest of ten competitors in the market, controlling deposits of $28.7 million, representing 4.1 percent of market deposits. The HHI would not increase. Footnotes Bank is a wholly owned subsidiary of Compass Bancshares, Birmingham, Alabama. In October 1998, the Board approved the application by Norwest Corporation, Minneapolis, Minnesota, to acquire Wells Fargo & Company, San Francisco, California. See Norwest Corporation, 84 Federal Reserve Bulletin 1088 (1998) ("Norwest/Wells Order"). After consummation of the acquisition, Norwest changed its name to "Wells Fargo & Company." Bank would purchase 14 branches from Norwest Bank Arizona, Phoenix, Arizona, and one branch from Wells Fargo Bank, N.A., San Francisco, California. 12 U.S.C. § 1828(c)(5)(A). 12 U.S.C. § 1828(c)(5)(B). Banking market definitions and data are discussed in . Bank also would acquire four branches in banking markets with no competitive overlap. The Board notes that Bank's proposed branch acquisitions would comply with the divestiture commitments discussed in the Norwest/Wells Order. Under the DOJ Guidelines, 49 Federal Register 26,823 (June 29, 1984), a market in which the post-merger Herfindahl Hirschman Index ("HHI") is more than 1800 is considered to be highly concentrated. The Department of Justice has informed the Board that a bank merger or acquisition generally will not be challenged (in the absence of other factors indicating anticompetitive effects) unless the post-merger HHI is at least 1800 and the merger increases the HHI by more than 200 points. The Department of Justice has stated that the higher than normal threshold for an increase in the HHI when screening bank mergers and acquisitions for anticompetitive effects implicitly recognizes the competitive effects of limited-purpose and other nondepository financial entities. The commenter also expressed concerns about branch closures in LMI neighborhoods, particularly in Phoenix and Tucson. The Board notes that no branches would be closed as a result of Bank's proposed transaction. The Statement of the Federal Financial Supervisory Agencies Regarding the Community Reinvestment Act provides that a CRA examination is an important and often controlling factor in the consideration of an institution's CRA record and that reports of these examinations will be given great weight in the applications process. 54 Federal Register 13,742 and 13,745 (1989); see also Interagency Questions and Answers Regarding Community Reinvestment, 62 Federal Register 52,105 and 52,121 (1997). This was Bank's third consecutive "outstanding" rating. Compass Bancshares's other subsidiary bank, Compass Bank, Birmingham, Alabama, was rated "satisfactory," as of May 5, 1997. In 1997, Bank's percentage of mortgage originations to LMI borrowers and in LMI census tracts in its Tucson assessment area exceeded the percentage of originations by lenders in the aggregate in that area. Nonprofit organizations refer prospective LMI borrowers to Bank and Bank waives the origination, underwriting, and document preparation fees on adjustable rate mortgages. Bank will make mortgages with loan-to-value ratios of up to 89 percent without mortgage insurance for borrowers referred by some of the participating organizations. The number of loans to small businesses (businesses with annual revenues of $1 million or less) decreased in 1997 for Bank and for lenders in the aggregate, both in Bank's overall assessment area and in LMI areas. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan and Governors Kelley, Meyer, Ferguson, and Gramlich. Absent and not voting Vice Chair Rivlin. All deposit data are as of June 30, 1997, adjusted for structural changes through December 1, 1998, and rounded to the nearest $100,000. Market share data are based on calculations that include the deposits of thrift institutions at 50 percent. The Board previously has indicated that thrift institutions have become, or have the potential to become, significant competitors of commercial banks. See, e.g., Midwest Financial Group, 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 386 (1989); National City Corporation, 70 Federal Reserve Bulletin 743 (1984). Thus, the Board has regularly included thrift deposits in the calculation of market share on a 50 percent-weighted basis. See e.g., First Hawaiian, Inc., 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 52 (1991).
Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan On investing the social security trust fund in equities Before the Subcommittee on Finance and Hazardous Materials, Committee on Commerce, U.S. House of Representatives March 3, 1999 Mr. Chairman and other members of the committee, preparing for the retirement of the baby boom generation looms as one of our nation's most difficult challenges, and I commend the serious efforts being made here to address this important long-term problem. Before discussing my views on the issue of investing the social security trust fund in equities, I would like to examine the more fundamental issues that any retirement reform will have to address. The dramatic increase in the ratio of retirees to workers that seems inevitable, as the baby boom generation moves to retirement and enjoys ever greater longevity, makes our current pay-as-you-go social security system unsustainable. Furthermore, the broad support for social security appears destined to fade as the implications of its current form of financing become increasingly apparent. To date, with the ratio of retirees to workers having been relatively low, workers have not considered it a burden to share the goods and services they produce with retirees. The rising birth rate after World War II, which, in due course, contained the growth of the ratio of retirees to workers, helped make the social security program exceptionally popular, even among those paying the taxes to support it. Indeed, workers perceived it to be a good investment for their own retirement. For those born before World War II, the annuity value of benefits on retirement far exceeded the cumulative sum at the time of retirement of contributions by the worker and his or her employer, plus interest. For example, the implicit real rate of return on social security contributions was almost 10 percent for those born in 1905, and was about 6 percent for those born in 1920. The real interest rate on U.S. Treasury securities, by comparison, has generally been below 3 percent. But, births flattened after the baby boom, and life expectancy beyond age sixty-five continued to rise. Consequently, the ratio of the number of workers contributing to social security to the number of beneficiaries has declined to the point that maintaining the annuity value of benefits on retirement at a level well in excess of accumulated contributions has become increasingly unlikely. Those born in 1960, for example, are currently calculated to receive a real rate of return, on average, of less than 2 percent on their cumulative contributions. Indeed, even these low rates of return for more recent cohorts likely are being overestimated, because they are based on current law taxes and benefits. In all likelihood, short of a substantial infusion of general revenues, social security taxes will have to be raised, or benefits cut, given that the system as a whole is still significantly underfunded, at least according to the intermediate projections of the Old-Age and Survivors Insurance (OASI) actuaries. For the present value of current law benefits over the next 75 years to be fully funded through contributions, social security taxes would have to be raised about 2.2 percent of taxable payroll; to be fully funded in perpetuity, that is, to ensure that taxes and interest income will always be sufficient to pay benefits, social security taxes would have to be raised much more--perhaps something on the order of 4 to 5 percent of taxable payroll. This issue of funding underscores the critical elements in the forthcoming debate on social security reform, because it focuses on the core of any retirement system, private or public. Simply put, enough resources must be set aside over a lifetime of work to fund retirement consumption. At the most rudimentary level, one could envision households saving by actually storing goods purchased during their working years for consumption during retirement. Even better, the resources that would have otherwise gone into the stored goods could be diverted to the production of new capital assets, which would, cumulatively, over a working lifetime, produce an even greater quantity of goods and services to be consumed in retirement. The only way we will be able to finance retirement incomes that keep pace with workers' incomes is to substantially increase the national saving rate, increase the borrowing of foreign capital, or increase the output that a given capital stock, financed through this saving, can produce. The crucial retirement funding issues center on how to increase our national saving and how to allocate physical resources between workers and retirees in the future. We must endeavor to increase the real resources available to retirees without blunting the growth in living standards among our working population. In this light, increasing our national saving is essential to any social security reform. Privatization proposals that begin to address social security's existing unfunded liability would significantly enhance domestic savings; so would fuller funding of the current social security program. But the size of the unified budget surplus implied by such funding, many have argued, would be politically unsustainable. The President, recognizing this political risk, has proposed changing the budgetary framework so as to support a large unified budget surplus. This is a major step in the right direction that, if effective, would ensure that the current rise in government's positive contribution to national saving is sustained. The large surpluses projected over the next 15 years, if they actually materialize, would significantly reduce the fiscal pressures created by our changing demographics. Whichever direction the Congress chooses to go, whether toward privatization or fuller funding of social security, augmenting our national saving rate has to be the main objective. The Administration has also proposed investing a portion of the social security trust fund assets in equities, rather than in U.S. Treasuries alone. Having the trust fund invest in private securities most likely would increase its rate of return, although the increase might be less than historical rates of return would suggest, and certainly would be less on a properly risk-adjusted basis. But where would that higher return come from, and what would happen to private funds available for consumption in retirement? If social security trust funds are shifted from U.S. Treasury securities to private debt and equity instruments, holders of those securities in the private sector must be induced to exchange them, on net, for U.S. Treasuries. Private pension and insurance funds, among other holders of equities, presumably would swap equities for Treasuries. It seems likely that a rise in the interest rate paid on Treasuries, and perhaps an increase in equity prices and a reduction in the expected future return on equity, would be necessary in order to induce private investors to reallocate their portfolios from equities to U.S. Treasury securities. If this is indeed the case, then the net increment to the government of investing the trust fund in equities on an ongoing basis presumably would be less than the historical rates of return suggest. That said, exactly what changes in bond and stock prices would result from this type of large-scale swap of U.S. Treasuries for equities is extremely difficult to predict. But analyzing the macroeconomic effects of the portfolio reallocation is much less complicated. The transfer of social security assets from U.S. Treasuries to equities would not, in itself, have any effect on national saving. Thus, the underlying economic assets in the economy would be unchanged, as would the total income generated by those assets. Any increase in returns realized by social security must be offset by a reduction in returns earned on private portfolios, which represent, to a large extent, funds held for retirement. Investing social security assets in equities is, then, largely a zero-sum game. To a first approximation, aggregate retirement resources--from both social security and private funds--do not change. Only an increase in national saving or an increase in the efficiency with which we use our saving can help us meet the retirement requirements of the coming years. Indeed, improved productivity of capital probably explains much of why the American economy has done so well in recent years despite our comparatively low national saving rate. For productivity and standards of living to grow, financial capital raised in markets or generated from internal cash flow from existing plant and equipment must be continuously directed by firms to its most profitable uses--namely new physical capital facilities perceived as the most efficient in serving consumers' multiple preferences. It is this continuous churning, this so-called creative destruction, that has become so essential to the effective deployment of advanced technologies by this country over recent decades. Looking forward, the effective application of our capital to its most highly valued use is going to become, if anything, more important, as we strive to increase the resources available to provide for the retirement of the baby boomers without, in the future, significantly reducing the consumption of workers. An efficient market pricing mechanism for equities has been a key element in our superior allocation of saving into investment this past decade. Large investments in equities by the social security trust funds could impair that process. As I have indicated in earlier testimony, I doubt that it is possible to secure and sustain institutional arrangements that would insulate, over the long run, the trust funds from political pressures. These pressures, whether direct or indirect, could result in suboptimal performance by our capital markets, diminished economic efficiency, and lower overall standards of living than would be achieved otherwise. The experience of public pension funds seems to bear this out. Although relevant comparisons to private plans are difficult to construct, there is evidence that the average rate of return on state and local pension funds tends to be lower than the return realized on comparable private pension funds, other pooled investments, and market indexes. Of course, a significant part of this disparity would be eliminated were these returns adjusted for risk, because public pension plans are often invested more conservatively than private plans. But there is evidence that returns are lower even after accounting for differences in the portfolio allocation between stocks and bonds. For example, it has been shown that state pension plans that are required to direct a portion of their investments in-state and those that make "economically targeted investments" experience lower returns as a result. Similarly, there is evidence suggesting that, the greater the proportion of trustees who are political appointees, the lower the rate of return. A lower risk-adjusted rate of return on financial assets is almost invariably an indication of lower rates of return on the real underlying assets on which they are a claim. As I have also indicated in previous testimony, I do not deny that the federal government can manage equities without political interference if they are held in defined contribution funds or small defined benefit plans, such as the one run by the Federal Reserve. Defined contribution funds, such as the federal government's Thrift Savings Plan, are effectively self-policed by individual contributors, who would surely object were their retirement assets to be diverted to investments that offered less than market returns. But government defined benefit plans, like social security, provide guaranteed annuities that are wholly insulated from poor investment performance. Annuitants look to the federal government for their retirement incomes, not the performance of any trust funds. Thus, beneficiaries have no incentive to monitor the performance of their investments. And, while the government's small defined benefit funds do not reach the asset size threshold to make them a target, a multi-trillion dollar social security trust fund presumably would. It is possible that institutions could be created that would prevent the trust fund investments from being subject to political interference. But, investing the social security trust funds in equities does little or nothing to improve the overall ability of the U.S. economy to meet the retirement needs of the next century. Given this lack of evident benefit, it is unclear to me why we should take on the risk of interference, which, probably short of a Constitutional amendment, cannot be eliminated. Even if concerns about politically driven investment were not to materialize, what would have been gained by such a huge shuffling of funds? To the extent that a transfer of private retirement resources to social security is deemed necessary to fund currently promised benefits, why not do it directly through increased social security taxes, or an allocation of general revenues to the social security trust fund? Whatever the Congress does, it would be best not to obscure the choice of real resource allocation with complex financial structures that merely reshuffle claims to real resources, without increasing them. A collateral issue is relevant to this debate. If the Congress were to decide to do nothing to alter the path of receipts and outlays projected under current law, a large buildup in the social security trust fund would occur, along with a significant on-budget surplus, according to the projections of CBO and OMB. The consequence would, of course, be a significant decline in the current $3-3/4 trillion outstanding federal debt to the public. But, if the unified budget is in surplus for a protracted period of years, it is at least conceivable that the outstanding public debt would be eliminated. I might add that this would be the first such occurrence for this nation, the previous low having been $38 thousand in 1835 and 1836. Currently, the rise in the holdings of U.S. Treasuries by the social security trust fund is accomplished by the Treasury redeeming or buying back debt from the public, and selling it as special series nonmarketables to the trust fund. But, should the debt to the public fall to zero, there would be no additional Treasury instruments available to the trust fund from that source. Were the Treasury, nonetheless, to continue to sell debt to the trust funds, its cash balances at the Federal Reserve would build up. At that point, under existing policy, there would be no choice but to have the social security trust fund invest in private or quasi-private agency securities. I grant that, should these circumstances arise, the decision of how to handle social security investments would become a more pressing question. However, it is exceptionally difficult for me to focus seriously on so politically improbable, though so intriguing, an event. Of course, assessing the fiscal, financial, and economic state of the American economy in the early twenty-first century is an enormously difficult undertaking. We cannot confidently project large surpluses in our unified budget over the next fifteen years, given the inherent uncertainties of budget forecasting. How can we ignore the fact that virtually all forecasts of the budget balance have been wide of the mark in recent years? For example, as recently as February 1997, OMB projected a deficit for fiscal year 1998 of $121 billion--a $191 billion error. The CBO and others made similar errors. Likewise, in 1983, we confidently projected a solvent social security trust fund through 2057. Our latest estimate, with only a few changes in the program, is 2032. It is possible, as some maintain, that the OASI actuaries are too conservative, and that productivity growth could be far greater than is anticipated in their "intermediate" estimate. If that is, in fact, our prospect, the social security system is in less jeopardy than it currently appears. But proper fiscal planning requires that consequences of mistakes in all directions be evaluated. If we move now to shore up the social security program, or replace it, in part or in whole, with a private system, and subsequently find that we had been too pessimistic in our projections, the costs to our society would be few. If we assume more optimistic scenarios and they prove wrong, the imbalances could become overwhelming, and finding a solution would be even more divisive than today's problem.
Testimony of Richard A. Small Assistant Director, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation Proposed "Know Your Customer" regulation Before the Subcommittee on Commercial and Administrative Law, Committee on the Judiciary, U.S. House of Representatives March 4, 1999 Mr. Chairman, I am pleased to appear before the Subcommittee on Commercial and Administrative Law to discuss the proposed "Know Your Customer" regulation. As you are aware, the Federal Reserve, along with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the Office of Thrift Supervision, issued a notice of proposed rulemaking with regard to "Know Your Customer" on December 7, 1998. As a proposed regulation, there has been no final decision on the wording of any new regulation or, for that matter, whether it is necessary to have a new regulation. The rulemaking process provides for a period of time during which the public can comment on the specifics of the proposal. The comment period for this proposal concludes on March 8. As we are still in the midst of the comment period, I am not able to provide any information with regard to the Federal Reserve's determination as to how to proceed with the proposal. No determination will be made until the comment period has concluded and there has been an opportunity to complete the review of the comments that have been submitted. As we move forward in our review of the comments and our determination as to whether, or how to proceed with the proposed rule, we will carefully weigh three important issues. First, it has become clear that the proposal raises privacy concerns that also pose a real danger of eroding customer confidence in the institutions at which they bank. The Federal Reserve recognizes the sensitivity of this issue. Second, the Federal Reserve will continue to recognize that participating in the government's programs designed to attack the laundering of proceeds of illegal activities through our nation's financial institutions could enhance public confidence in the integrity of our financial system. Third, we also will be mindful of industry concern about the potential burden that a "Know Your Customer" regulation might impose and that in doing so it would place banking organizations at a competitive disadvantage as the result of obligations that would come from the "Know Your Customer" regulation that do not apply to other types of financial service organizations subject to the provisions of the Bank Secrecy Act, such as brokerage firms and money transmitters. It would be useful to provide some background information about "Know Your Customer" policies and the purpose of the proposed rule. The concept of "Know Your Customer" has been around for quite some time. Many banks today use such policies and procedures to protect the integrity of their institutions. In addition, bankers have expressed concern that there is no uniformity in the banking agencies' and Department of the Treasury's guidance on identifying transactions that would have to be reported under existing suspicious activity reporting regulations. In the past, there have been expressions of Congressional interest in "Know Your Customer" regulations. The Annunzio-Wylie Money Laundering Act of 1992 authorized the Department of the Treasury to prescribe minimum standards for the anti-money laundering programs of all financial institutions covered by the Bank Secrecy Act. The legislative history of this law and other legislation addressing the government's anti-money laundering efforts indicates that the Congress expected that the minimum standards would include "Know Your Customer" policies. In the Money Laundering Deterrence Act of 1998, which was approved by the House of Representatives near the end of the 1998 session, Section 9 included a requirement that the Secretary of the Treasury comply with the provisions of the Annunzio-Wylie Money Laundering Act by promulgating "Know Your Customer" regulations for financial institutions within 120 days of enactment of the legislation. These considerations led all of the federal bank supervisory agencies, including the Federal Reserve, to develop the proposal. In proposing the "Know Your Customer" regulation, it was our intent to provide banks with guidance as to what programs and procedures they should have in place to have sufficient knowledge of their customers to assist in the detection and prevention of illicit activities occurring at or through the banks. I should note that the proposal would not require banks routinely to turn over to the government information about their customers and would not require banks to monitor every customer transaction. In an effort not to create a substantial burden for the majority of banking organizations, the proposal sets forth the concept of developing and applying "Know Your Customer" programs based on the perceived risks associated with the various customers and the types of transactions that the banks understood would be conducted by the customers. For the majority of customers, we assumed that banks would find that they posed no or minimal risk and their "Know Your Customer" programs would be nothing more than formalizing existing procedures for identifying customers and following existing suspicious activity reporting requirements. The proposal also recognized that privacy was a critical issue. We specifically solicited comments on "whether the actual or perceived invasion of personal privacy interests is outweighed by the additional compliance benefits anticipated by [the] proposal." To date, the response from the public on this issue has been unprecedented. The public comments indicate that bank customers believe that the "Know Your Customer" rule will result in material invasions of their personal privacy interests. As I noted at the beginning, the comments have highlighted important issues, both with respect to privacy and other aspects of the proposal, that we will be considering in the days ahead.
Remarks by Governor Edward M. Gramlich Small business access to capital and credit At the Federal Reserve System Research Conference on Business Access to Capital and Credit, Arlington, Virginia March 8, 1999 I am pleased to be here today to kick off the conference on small business access to credit and capital. Politicians often pay lip service to the importance of small business, but a look at the data shows that this lip service is right on the mark. The role that small business plays in the economy, and the role that credit conditions play in determining the health of small business, are interesting and important topics. A recent Federal Reserve Report on the Availability of Small Business Credit illustrates the importance of the role played by small business in the economy. Over 20 million business entities filed tax returns in 1994, the vast majority of these being small businesses. Small businesses employ more than half of the private work force and are responsible for approximately 50 percent of all sales and private gross domestic product, often in firms on the leading edge of technology. The number of small businesses nationwide has grown at a brisk 5 percent pace in recent years. These numbers have come about because of a positive environment for small business in the past few years. Traditional lenders have eased standards and accommodated rising loan demand with attractive lending terms for creditworthy borrowers. This has made it easier and faster for small businesses to borrow. Increasingly, larger banks with active small business lending operations are applying consumer credit techniques to loans for very small firms. In addition, community-based lending initiatives have generated many new programs to attract investors and financing to small enterprises in local communities. What We Know To frame the conference, it might be worthwhile to spend time reviewing some of the important trends in lending to small business, and what these trends imply for small business access to credit. Public and Private Sector Finance Small firms need and use credit. Nearly three-fifths of all small businesses surveyed in the Federal Reserve's 1993 National Survey of Small Business Finances used some form of credit. While a large share of this credit is private, the public sector plays a role as well, through programs that mitigate small business lending risks. Bank call reports indicate that from 1994 to 1998, there was a steady increase in commercial bank lending to small business, from $294 billion worth of small business loans in 1994 to $370 billion in 1998 (nearly 6 percent annual growth). This growth in overall commercial bank lending suggests a rising business loan demand and a willingness of banks to accommodate that demand. Small businesses that meet periodically with Federal Reserve Bank officials to discuss conditions in the twelve districts have been consistently upbeat about credit conditions. One factor in this growth is competition. The competition for business credits among banks and nonbanks has been intense in recent years and has resulted in aggressive marketing strategies, product innovation, and a wider range of services offered to small firms. Another factor involved changes in the Community Reinvestment Act regulations, which now require larger financial institutions to collect and report data on loans made to small businesses and small farms. As shown in the morning session of this conference, these data have provided useful new information about small business loan market penetration. Bank Consolidation Recent mergers and acquisitions, involving many of the nation's largest and most geographically diverse banking institutions, have had a sizeable impact on the industry. This consolidation has fueled a debate about the impact on small businesses. Many small business owners fear that small community banks that are acquired by large regional or national banks may no longer have officials that are knowledgeable about their circumstances and responsive to their needs. Business owners also fear that large financial institutions will have more profitable investment opportunities than the small business loan portfolios found in the banks they acquire. Small business owners are also concerned that if they lose their local banking offices, they will have less access to banking services and loans. But empirical evidence concerning the effects of bank consolidations on small business gives only weak confirmation to these fears. Researchers have found that large banks do maintain lower ratios of small business loans to assets than do small banks. Yet when small banks buy other small banks, the new entities tend to be more active small business lenders than the banks that were purchased. A study of the new CRA data, reported in the September 1998 Federal Reserve Bulletin, also offers some important information about lending to small business. While locally based commercial banks and thrift institutions play a role in the small business credit market, so do out-of-market providers. Overall, the new CRA data reveal that out-of-market lenders are numerous in both urban and rural banking markets and they generally outnumber in-market institutions. Bank and Non-Bank Competition for Small Business Credit There has been a decline in the commercial banks' share of overall lending. The reason for the decline involves technological changes in communications and information storage that have enabled an increasing number of large firms to gain direct access to capital markets. These same technological changes have facilitated competition from non-bank sources, such as thrifts, savings banks, credit unions, finance companies, insurance companies, mortgage companies, leasing companies, and the like. Whatever the reasons for the overall trend in commercial bank lending, it has raised questions about the future role of commercial banks in providing credit to small businesses. Banks are believed to have a comparative advantage in lending to small businesses largely due to their ability to assess and monitor the operation of enterprises in their local communities. This factor particularly affects small business access to credit in rural areas. Small banks experience a great deal of competition for deposits from money market mutual funds and other deposit taking institutions. Rural banks today report that many of them are faced with static or declining deposit bases, a traditional source of low-cost funds. Many rural bankers are seeing a large transfer of wealth as farms and businesses are liquidated upon the death of the owners. In many cases, the funds on deposit at a local bank move with the new owners. And these heirs frequently live and work in metropolitan communities located far from their original homes. As they lose these low-cost, lendable funds, many rural banks are finding it more difficult to serve the credit needs of their customers. Secondary Markets Another important development in overall credit markets has been the rapid growth of secondary loan markets. Residential mortgages, credit card receivables, and automobile loans can and are easily bundled and sold in the secondary market. Securitization enables lenders to improve their return on capital, achieve liquidity, and achieve balance sheet diversity. And borrowers whose loans are eligible for securitization typically enjoy lower financing costs. But apart from some successes found in SBA loan pools, small business loans are in general not easily securitized. Highly diverse small business loans are not easily grouped into large homogeneous pools that credit agencies and investors can efficiently analyze. Underwriting standards tend to vary among originators. Until underwriting standards and documentation for these loans become more uniform and information for estimating the risk of loss more available, markets for securitized small business loans will remain small. Other Impediments Faced by Small Firms Seeking Access to Credit There are still other impediments to the small business credit process. All businesses face the cost of regulation and various legal constraints. Small businesses typically have not reached a size or complexity to warrant functional specialization and often must chart an independent course through the rules and regulations that apply to them -- a costly and potentially burdensome proposition. Lending to small businesses is generally riskier and more costly than lending to large firms. Small businesses are very susceptible to swings in the economy and have a much higher failure rate than larger operations. And, historically lenders have had difficulty determining the creditworthiness of small business loan applicants. Small businesses are extremely diverse and range from small corner grocery stores to high tech data base managers and software providers. This heterogeneity, together with widely varying uses of the borrowed funds, has made it difficult to develop general standards for assessing small business loan applications and has made evaluating such loans relatively expensive. Small business owners must contend with lenders with varying underwriting standards, varying appetites for risk, and varying expected rates of return for loans they may approve. The vagaries of local economies may also influence the likelihood that a small firm gets approved for credit. The reason for denial may bear no relationship to the financial condition of the business, the level of reserves, or other financial characteristics of the business itself, but be based only on the conditions present in the local economy. While small firms are faced with many impediments in gaining access to credit, new technologies, such as credit scoring, offer the promise of breaking down some of those barriers. Credit scoring increases the consistency, speed, and often the accuracy of credit evaluations. It also lowers the cost of gathering relevant information. Moreover, credit scoring uses automated systems and loan decisions can be rendered in minutes or hours rather than in days and weeks. However, bank regulators must continue to ensure that the bank's credit scoring models are accurate and nondiscriminatory. What We Don't Know and Need to Learn More About While there are already rich sources of data provided by lenders meeting their CRA requirements and by national surveys of small business finances, one point of this conference is to focus on information needs. For example, there is little information about the incidence of loan denials and the profile of the credit-constrained firms, especially those owned by women and minorities. We know little about the application of flexible underwriting criteria and liberal repayment terms offered to small business borrowers and about how those firms perform when these techniques are utilized. We should analyze further the continuing effects of bank consolidation, the use of credit scoring, and the increased incidence of out-of-market and non-bank financial service providers and the effects they have on small business credit markets. We can also benefit from learning more about the kinds of technical assistance and information that assists women and minority owned small businesses become more attractive candidates for credit. Look to the Future There are many reasons to be encouraged about the prospects for small business. Our economy has experienced strong growth and this growth has been reflected in strong small business growth. The globalization of the economy has brought opportunities for many small businesses to participate in international trade. In addition to trying to promote a healthy economy, the Federal Reserve can help the process by doing what it can to improve data collection and analysis. The Board is joining with its regional Federal Reserve Banks to collect and disseminate some of this information. The Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland and the Small Business Administration have an initiative to expand small business access to financing and business development technical assistance. The Federal Reserve Bank of Boston has developed a microenterprise-training curriculum, designed to provide lending and technical assistance training to organizations that offer services to micro-entrepreneurs. And the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City will soon release proceedings from a national conference that explored the status of equity capital markets in rural America and the research about innovative ways of getting equity to rural entrepreneurs. This conference is an important milepost, both in understanding small business and their need for credit, and in promoting data collection and analysis. The situation is at the same time promising and challenging. I look forward to the discussions ahead, and wish you a successful conference.
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan Mortgage finance At the Mortgage Bankers Association, Washington, D.C. March 8, 1999
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan Changes in small business finance At the Federal Reserve System Research Conference on Business Access to Capital and Credit, Arlington, Virginia March 9, 1999 I am pleased that this Conference has been able to draw together such a knowledgeable group of Federal Reserve System economists and experts from outside the System to address issues of great significance to our business and banking communities. There are, no doubt, many different views on the potential effects that developments such as credit scoring, loan securitization, and bank consolidation, among others, are having on credit availability for U.S. businesses. But I think we would all agree that sound analysis and open discussion in meetings like this are essential to furthering our understanding of financial markets. It is also important to place recent developments in business finance in the context of the fundamental forces that have shaped our economy during the 1990s. I will focus my remarks today on what I view as key elements in this process and the implications for small businesses. The U.S. Economy and Technological Change The United States is currently in its ninth year of economic expansion, an exemplary accomplishment by any standard. Growth of output has remained vigorous, unemployment is lower than it has been in nearly thirty years, and yet, despite the tautness in labor markets, there have been no obvious signs of emerging inflation pressures. From the perspective of small businesses, the 1990s have provided a challenging and positive environment for developing and marketing new ideas. Even the most reclusive among us cannot help but be aware of the surging growth of young high-tech firms and the flashy presence of new Internet businesses. But times seem to have been good for expanding traditional lines of business as well. Our regional Federal Reserve Banks consult regularly with representatives from their small business communities. The feedback that we have received from these groups and information from surveys of small businesses--such as those taken by the National Federation of Independent Business--have revealed high levels of business optimism in recent years. The most common complaints--other than dissatisfaction with the tax structure--have centered on the difficulty of filling jobs with qualified workers in the midst of strong competing demands for labor. While troublesome, such concerns are also indicative of an expanding economy that is productively competing for scarce resources. For the vast majority of small businesses, access to credit has not been a top concern in this expansion, but many business owners are quite anxious about the future as the familiar ways of financing business undergo sometimes dramatic changes. A remarkable element in our recent prosperity has been the rapid acceleration in the application of computer and telecommunications technologies, which have engendered a significant increase in productivity in this expansion. Although difficult to pin down empirically, some calculations suggest that the rate of return on capital facilities put in place during recent years has moved up markedly. Meanwhile, the process of recognizing this greater value has produced capital gains in asset markets that have lowered the cost of investment in new plant and equipment. Dramatically declining inflation expectations have helped to lower risk premiums on debt and have contributed importantly to the favorable investment environment. In addition to improvements in the efficiency of the capital stock, we likely are witnessing payoffs from improved organizational and managerial efficiencies of U.S. businesses and from the greater education--in school and on the job--that U.S. workers have acquired to keep pace with the new technology. All these factors have been reflected in an acceleration of labor productivity growth. While the pace of technological change has been breathtaking, the process of innovation is not itself a new phenomenon. Capital equipment, production processes, and financial and labor market infrastructures are always in a state of flux. I believe the words that best characterize this phenomenon are those used several decades ago by Joseph Schumpeter who described the process of "creative destruction." Competition and innovation breed the continuous churning of our capital stock in ways that, on balance, result in more efficient production of goods and services and enhance our standard of living. New businesses are formed and existing businesses fail or contract, new products and processes replace old ones, new jobs are created and old jobs are lost. I never cease to be amazed at the ability of our flexible and innovative economic system to take advantage of emerging technologies in ways that raise our productive capacity and generate higher asset values. In this country, technological advance is a process that combines the best creative thinking of entrepreneurs and research scientists in business and academia. It is a process that thrives in a competitive market environment in which risk-taking is valued and in which prices and asset values signal how ideas and resources can be applied most productively. Clearly, small businesses are crucial players in this process. Nowhere in the world are the synergies of small and large businesses operating side by side in a dynamic market economy more apparent than in this country. The list of innovations by small businesses is enormous, in fields such as computer technologies, software, aerospace, pharmaceuticals, and satellite communications. And while we would be foolish to ignore the significant contributions of corporate giants, it is important to note that many of today's corporate giants were small businesses not all that long ago. America's innovative energy draws from the interaction of both large and small businesses, and will continue to do so. Changes in Financial Markets An important key to the success of small and large businesses is having access to capital and credit. First and foremost, I would emphasize that credit alone is not the answer. Businesses must have equity capital before they are considered viable candidates for debt financing. Equity acts as a buffer against the vagaries of the marketplace and is a sign of the creditworthiness of a business enterprise. The more opaque the business operations, or the newer the firm, the greater the importance of the equity base. The United States has been a leader in the development of public and private markets for equity capital. Venture capital investments in rapidly growing small businesses totaled more than $14 billion in 1998, with much of the funds provided by private partnerships. Probably an even larger amount was invested privately by high net-worth individuals--so-called ï¿½angel' investors. These sources are an essential part of the financial foundation for the dynamic young enterprises that are so central to our wealth-creating process. Still, more than two-thirds of equity financing for small businesses comes from the owner or family and friends. Continued efforts to develop the markets for private equity investments will be rewarded by an innovative and productive business community. This is especially true in lower-income communities, where the weight of expansive debt obligations on small firms can severely impede growth prospects, or more readily lead to business failures. On the credit side, the same forces that have been reshaping the broader economy have also been transforming the financial services industry. The advent of computer and telecommunications technology has lowered the cost and broadened the scope of financial services. These developments have made it increasingly possible for borrowers and lenders to transact directly, and we have seen a proliferation of specialized lenders and new financial products that are tailored to meet very specific market needs. At the same time, the development of credit scoring models and securitization of pools of loans hold the potential for opening the door to national credit markets for a broad spectrum of businesses operating in local and regional markets. As a result, competitive pressures in the financial services industry are probably greater than ever before. This competition has been heightened by deregulation and the removal of barriers to interstate banking. Evidence that this process is well under way can be found in the new CRA data on small business lending. These data show, for example, that institutions located outside the local community are an important source of credit for many businesses. Changes in financial markets are perhaps most apparent in the realignment taking place among our commercial banks. Most projections of the future U.S. banking structure call for a substantial reduction in the number of American banks. Recent mergers have already resulted in the creation of nationwide banks and large financial service companies. More are sure to come. However, we should not expect that all institutions will become financial supermarkets. Indeed, I have no doubt that thousands of smaller banks will survive the consolidation trend, reflecting both their individual efficiencies and competitive skills, on the one hand, and the preferences of the marketplace for personalized service on the other. The demand for traditional services by smaller businesses and by households should continue to flourish. And the information revolution, while it has deprived banks of some of the traditional lending business with their best customers, has also benefitted banks by making it less costly for them to assess the credit and other risks of customers they would previously have shunned. Thus, banks of all types will likely continue to engage in a substantial amount of traditional banking. Indeed, an often-expressed concern with the ongoing consolidation of the U.S. banking systems is a feared reduction in the supply of credit to small businesses. However, studies of the dynamic effects of bank mergers and acquisitions suggest that while mergers are apt to reduce small business lending by the participants, this decline appears to be offset in part, or even in whole, by an increase in lending by other institutions in the same local market. With the benefits of improving technology, well-managed regional institutions will seize the opportunity to increase their customer base in markets where large institutions have acquired local competitors. I think it is safe to say that, whatever their cost advantages, large automated systems can never fully displace the value of personal contact and familiarity with local economic circumstances, which are the keystone of community banking. Potential Impediments to Efficient Resource Utilization Overall, our evolving financial system has been highly successful in promoting growth and higher standards of living. However, much work remains to be done to improve the process. Barriers still prevent the free flow of capital and people to their most productive employment. In the small business sector, potential impediments include: lack of market information, difficulties in assessing risk, high transactions costs for small loans, and, in rural areas, special challenges associated with geographic distance from lenders and potential markets. One particular barrier--apparent disparities in the access to credit for minority-owned businesses--is the focus of several papers being presented at this conference. In some cases, these studies have found discrepancies in the turn-down rates for minority-owned small business applicants responding to our small business survey. Not all of these differences are readily explained by income, balance sheet factors, or credit histories, although considerably more work needs to be done to take account of possible explanatory factors not included in the studies to date. But, if after such examination the gap persists, it raises disturbing questions. To the extent that market participants discriminate--consciously or, more likely, unconsciously--credit does not flow to its most profitable uses and the distribution of output is distorted. In the end, costs are higher, less real output is produced, and national wealth accumulation is slowed. By removing the non-economic distortions that arise as a result of discrimination, we can generate higher returns to human capital and other productive resources. It is important for lenders to understand that failure to recognize the profitable opportunities represented by minority enterprises not only harms these firms, it harms the lending institutions and, ultimately, robs the broader economy of growth potential. In this regard, we need to make further progress in establishing business relationships between the financial services sector and the rapidly growing number of minority- and women-owned businesses. This conference highlights several developments that hold the promise of improving such links. As large banks and finance companies try mass-market approaches to small business lending, the potential for inappropriate discrimination is diminished. In addition, new intermediaries--such as community development corporations, micro-business loan funds, or multi-bank and investor loan pools--are beginning to build expertise in specific areas of the small and minority business marketplace. These innovators are working with traditional lenders to develop new approaches to managing costs and evaluating the risks associated with providing financing for very small and young firms. Conclusion Let me conclude my remarks by thanking the participants at this conference for helping us to better understand the forces at play in financing small businesses. Several of the papers presented have drawn on data reported by banks as part of their CRA requirements and several others have used data from the Federal Reserve's 1993 National Survey of Small Business Finances. The Fed currently is working on its third survey of 6,000 small businesses--to be known as the 1998 Survey of Small Business Finances. We expect this new information, coupled with annual CRA reports, to add greatly to our knowledge of changes taking place in small business finance. I want to thank in advance any small business that is selected to be part of the Fed's new survey and to encourage them to participate. It takes a lot of time and effort for survey respondents to answer our detailed questions, but as evidenced by the presentations here, the information is very valuable to us. More broadly, it is the type of information that provides the basis for sound analytical research on many important issues.
JOINT PRESS RELEASE The Securities and Exchange Commission, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Federal Reserve Board, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and Office of Thrift Supervision have jointly issued the attached letter to financial institutions on the allowance for loan losses. Securities and Exchange Commission Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Federal Reserve Board Office of the Comptroller of the Currency Office of Thrift Supervision JOINT INTERAGENCY LETTER TO FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS Last November, the Securities and Exchange Commission, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Federal Reserve Board, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and Office of Thrift Supervision (the Agencies) issued a Joint Interagency Statement in which they reaffirmed the importance of credible financial statements and meaningful disclosure to investors and to a safe and sound financial system. The Joint Interagency Statement underscored the requirement that depository institutions record and report their allowance for loan and lease losses in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). We stress and continue to emphasize the importance of depository institutions having prudent, conservative, but not excessive, loan loss allowances that fall within an acceptable range of estimated losses. We recognize that today instability in certain global markets, for example, is likely to increase loss inherent in affected institutions' portfolios and consequently require higher allowances for credit losses than were appropriate in more stable times. Despite the issuance of the November Joint Interagency Statement, there is continued uncertainty among financial institutions as to the expectations of the banking and securities regulators on the appropriate amount, disclosure, and documentation of the allowance for credit losses. The Agencies now announce additional measures designed to address this continued uncertainty. These measures are consistent with the Agencies' mutual objective of, and focus on, addressing prospectively, where feasible, issues related to improving the documentation, disclosure, and reporting of loan loss allowances of financial institutions. The Agencies are establishing a Joint Working Group, comprised of policy representatives from each of the Agencies, to gain a better understanding of the procedures and processes, including "sound practices," used generally by banking organizations to determine the allowance for credit losses. An important aspect of the Joint Working Group's activities will be to receive input from representatives of the banking industry and the accounting profession on these matters, and will not involve joint examinations of institutions. The common base of knowledge that results will facilitate the joint and individual efforts of the Agencies to provide improved guidance on appropriate procedures, documentation, and disclosures to the banking industry. This will assist the banking community in complying with GAAP and will improve comparability among financial statements of depository and other lending institutions. The Joint Working Group will also share information and insights concerning issues of mutual concern that may arise. Using information gathered through the Joint Working Group and from representatives of the accounting profession and the banking industry, the Agencies will work together to issue parallel guidance, on a timely basis, and within a year on the first two items listed below, in the following key areas regarding credit loss allowances: Appropriate Methodologies and Supporting Documentation . The Agencies intend to issue guidance that will suggest procedures and processes necessary for a reasoned assessment of losses inherent in a portfolio and discuss ways to ensure that documentation supports the reported allowance. Enhanced Disclosures . This guidance will address appropriate disclosures of allowances for credit losses and the credit quality of institutions' portfolios by identifying key areas for enhanced disclosures, including the need for institutions to disclose changes in risk factors and asset quality that affect allowances for credit losses. The enhanced disclosures would contribute to better understanding by investors and the public of the risk profile of banking institutions and improve market discipline. The Agencies will work together to encourage and support the Financial Accounting Standards Board's process of providing additional guidance regarding accounting for allowances for loan losses. The Agencies emphasize that GAAP requires that management's determination be based on a comprehensive, adequately documented, and consistently applied analysis of the particular institution's exposures, the effects of its lending and collection policies, and its own loss experience under comparable conditions. In addition, the Agencies will support and encourage the task force of the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA) that is developing more specific guidance on the accounting for allowances for credit losses and the techniques of measuring the credit loss inherent in a portfolio at a particular date. In particular, the AICPA task force will focus on providing guidance on how best to distinguish probable losses inherent in the portfolio as of the balance sheet date -- the guidepost agreed to by the Agencies for reporting allowances in accordance with GAAP -- from possible or future losses not inherent in the balance sheet as of that date. Additionally, the Agencies will ask the AICPA task force to consider recently developed portfolio credit risk measurement and management techniques that are consistent with GAAP as part of this effort. The AICPA project already has been initiated and will include representatives from the accounting profession and the banking industry, as well as observers from the SEC and the banking agencies. Senior staff of the Agencies will continue to meet to discuss banking industry accounting and financial disclosure policy issues of interest that affect the transparency of financial reporting and bank safety and soundness. These discussions will address progress in the application of accounting and disclosure standards by banking institutions, including those impacting the allowance for credit losses, with particular focus on recently identified issues and trends. The meetings also will be used to coordinate projects of the Agencies in areas of mutual interest. The first of these meetings was held on January 27. The Agencies believe that the actions announced above will promote a better and clearer understanding among financial institutions of the appropriate procedures and processes for determining credit losses in accordance with GAAP. The Agencies intend that these steps will enhance the transparency of financial information and improve market discipline, consistent with safety and soundness objectives. In recognition of the specialized regulatory nature of the banking industry and in order to resolve ongoing uncertainties in the industry, with the announcement of these initiatives, the Agencies' focus, in so far as feasible, will be on enhancing allowance practices going forward.
Remarks by Governor Laurence H. Meyer At the 1999 F. Hodge O'Neal Corporate & Securities Law Symposium, Washington University School of Law, St. Louis, Missouri March 12, 1999 Financial Modernization: The Issues It is a pleasure to be back, both at the university and in the city in which I spent so many enjoyable and interesting years. To be sure, I have noticed recently the quaint habit of the locals to talk about real topics, and it is, I must say, refreshing to hear non-Washington conversation. I must also tell you that I have learned to speak governmentese and, what's more, I am enjoying both the language and the challenges that being a member of the Federal Reserve Board brings. Today, I would like to talk to you about something that has devoured much of my time at the Fed and has also taught me to listen more closely to the nuances of government-speak--financial modernization. The issues are real and affect all of us in our daily lives. Financial modernization is the term used to cover legislation that would permit financial firms--banks, securities dealers, thrifts, and insurance companies--to get into each other's business. Some variants would authorize commercial firms and banking to combine as well. "Modernizing" requires the unwinding of legislation adopted in the 1930s to address real and imagined conflicts that were thought to have contributed to the Great Depression, or at least to have made it worse. At the outset, we ought to understand what it is that is driving this effort. For so long, it seems, we lived in a world in which we had our checking account at a bank, our mortgage at the S&L, bought our insurance from an independent agent and our stocks from a broker. If we were lucky enough to have a little extra, we bought other assets and investments from other specialists, and hardly ever thought of breaking out of the traditional mold. But technology and globalization have irreversibly changed what had become the post-war norm. High-speed computers and constant pressure to press the envelope of regulatory limits made possible everything from money market mutual funds to derivatives; from loans once held permanently by a bank to securitization into a capital market instrument; from computer shopping for a mortgage to a higher yielding deposit at a virtual bank; from equity mutual funds from a bank or a broker to a checking account at your credit union; from a company that will lend you a mortgage to one that will do that and sell you a casket (yes a casket manufacturer owns an S&L); and I could go on. And let's not forget all of the firms from abroad that want to lend you money or sell you assets, just as our financial institutions operate around the world doing the same. Financial markets are so interconnected now that developments in Tokyo related to the yen, or Moscow and the ruble, or Rio de Janeiro and the real are going to affect how much you pay to get a mortgage loan in St. Louis. The framework that was essentially constructed in the 1930s seems--and is--incompatible with the world I've just described. It is a world to which we cannot return. The financial services industry is moving in the direction of expanded activities and increased competition, driven by market realities, financial innovations, technological change, and global competition. Federal banking regulators have been trying to adjust by changing rules and using loopholes, but the existing statutes limit their options and make it clear that clean and full rationalization of the structure of the U.S. financial system will require congressional action. Indeed, financial modernization is an attempt to recognize the new realities by changing the old laws. While, in the process, consumers will, it seems clear, be made better off, some institutions will be made worse off by new competition, and existing participants will be jockeying for a more favorable position. Unfortunately, that includes regulators, each of which now has a piece of the regulatory pie, and, if I may mix my metaphors, each of which is interested in protecting its turf and prerogatives. Such issues are, however, no different from any other major economic legislation that Congress faces every day, and for which it makes choices. Indeed, there is substantial agreement now--something that has not existed until recently--that the time has come and action must be taken. But there are some fundamental differences of approach that must be evaluated as we consider financial modernization, and that's what the rest of my remarks will address. Consider for a moment that, in our market economy, businesses can by and large sell what they want, where they want. Why is it different for banks? Well, we have learned the hard way that these businesses can have a significant effect on our economy--its stability and its growth--and the wealth of the individuals that deal with them. As a result, not only have we regulated financial institutions quite a bit, we have also--in order to protect individuals and reduce the aggregate fluctuations of the economy--conveyed certain benefits on them, especially on the banks. We insure, or guarantee, some of their claims; we provide banks access to liquidity when they need it, through the discount window where they can borrow when in temporary difficulties; we provide banks access to a payments system that can transfer funds rapidly, allowing their customers instant liquidity; and we supervise them so that bank customers can feel more confident about dealing with them. Collectively, we call all of these benefits the "safety net." Collectively they permit banks to obtain funds more cheaply than would otherwise be the case. Or put differently, an important by-product of our decisions to stabilize banks and to protect those that deal with them is that the banks receive a subsidy from the government--in this case a lower cost of funding. That fact, an unintended by-product of other economic policies, has become critical to the argument between two competing camps on how best to accomplish financial modernization. Why is that? Well, let's consider the more obvious impacts of the safety net per se and of its implicit subsidy. First, the safety net, by lowering the cost of bank funding, provides a bank with a competitive advantage over other financial institutions. The banking system ends up larger than it otherwise would be and the rivals of banks find banks a little stiffer competitors than they otherwise might be. It is true that, as economists would argue, the value of the subsidy gets spread or dispersed by competition (1) to depositors, (2) to borrowers, and (3) to initial shareholders who capture the capitalized value of the subsidy. But, none of these change the fact that the subsidy makes banks stronger competitors; it "unlevels the playing field," in governmentese. And, as I will discuss more fully in a moment, it is for this reason that policy- makers should be interested in, if not trying to eliminate subsidies, at least constraining their spread. The safety net has another significant unintended effect, beyond the subsidy and its inter-institutional competitive implications: it weakens--in some cases eliminates--the incentive for creditors of banks to be concerned about the strength of the bank. Why should a depositor of less than $100,000 care if the bank is creditworthy, if it will live up to its obligations? After all, the government will promptly pay off the deposit if the bank does not. Even uninsured creditors are less careful than they might be for other businesses to whom they have lent money--for that is what a deposit is, a loan to a bank--because they know the bank is supervised and has access to liquidity through the Fed. All of this means that there is less market discipline restricting the behavior of banks. Bank management thus presents what economists call, and members of Congress have adopted in their own vocabulary, a "moral hazard." This is shorthand for the fact that bank management, being less subject to the kind of realities that others who borrow money must face, are more free to take on risk than they otherwise would be: their risk taking, at least over some pretty wide range, does not much affect the rate they have to pay to borrow money from the public. One of the implications that flow from moral hazard, therefore, is that the incentive structure is distorted: profits belong to the private sector but a significant part of the potential losses are socialized. Put differently, there is a disconnect between the rewards from, and the costs of, taking risk. As a result, there is a fourth impact of the safety net--beyond subsidy and competitive and risk incentive distortions--the taxpayers, that bear the cost of the potential risk, must protect themselves through the supervision and regulation of the issuer of the guaranteed deposit. No doubt we supervise and regulate banks and other financial institutions because we have learned that their failures can have disproportionately large impacts on the macro real economy. But, in addition, we supervise as a substitute for a missing or weakened form of supervision that other borrowers have--the market discipline that creditors bring to bear in their own self interest. Banks, with less market discipline, are thus supervised and regulated by government agencies in large part in order to monitor and perhaps limit the extra risk that banks can take because they have the protection of the safety net. Supervision and regulation are not per se good things. They represent interference--there is no other word--with the market process, and as such, this stifles innovation and some desirable risk taking. We should not want to see this supervision and regulation spread because it interferes with markets and choices and if the safety net is extended, we will extend, by necessity, supervision and regulation. In governmentese, when businesses succeed in tapping the honey pot, as sure as God made little green apples, the regulator will have to be there to protect the taxpayer. I hope by now it is clear that the safety net creates a whole category of problems for financial modernization. The recipient institutions, banks, have a competitive advantage through the subsidy implicit in the safety net; their risk incentives are distorted, if not corroded, by the safety net; and inefficiencies and burdens are placed on them through supervision and regulation to protect the public from both the effects and costs of excess risk taking that the safety net creates. It is, I submit, critical that we do not, at least unintentionally, in the process of financial modernization extend the safety net more broadly than exists today. To do so, I believe would expose our system to greater risk and more regulation--both steps that could well kill the goose that lays the golden egg. How, you might well ask, can we avoid this effect if financial modernization is defined as letting financial institutions into each other's business? For, if an insurance company buys a bank or a bank buys a securities firm is not lower cost, subsidized funds from the bank--going to get spread around? Well, yes and no and it depends. Now that I've clarified that, let me explain just a bit further, or at least look at the options and the trade-offs. There are three ways you can absolutely assure that the safety net does not get spread any wider. The first is to eliminate the safety net--just do away with deposit insurance, the discount window, Fedwire, and bank supervision. The second is to do away with the need to have the safety net by doing away with banks as we know them: create replacements called narrow banks, banks that, by law, hold only very safe assets making all but a rudimentary safety net redundant. The third is just to leave banks out of financial modernization: prohibit other financial institutions from acquiring a bank and prohibit banks from acquiring other financial institutions. By even raising these options I am showing my background and my limited term in the city by the Potomac because none of these are, in my judgement and the judgement of the political pros, acceptable to the body politic. They have not been, are not, and will not be on the political agenda. Nor, as an economist and a public policymaker, am I sure that any of these options are good public policy. Narrow banking raises in my mind some very complicated issues of risk shifting that may simply cause the same problems that created our original macro stability need for the safety net to show up elsewhere. It might be nice to roll back the size of deposit insurance, if we could. It would certainly be nice to underline to uninsured depositors the risks that they take by forcing more disclosures of banks' risk positions and requiring the authorities to act at the time of failures in ways that cause these depositors to bear the cost of their miscalculation or bad luck. But, I think deposit insurance and the whole of the safety net have stood us in good stead in the macro stability area and it would be a mistake to dismantle them. Rather, it might be best to revise our supervisory and regulatory policies in ways that simulate market discipline without the side effects that we wish to avoid. This is a road we've already begun to tread. If we excluded banks from financial modernization in order to avoid safety net and subsidy transference over a wider area, banks would simply take a smaller share of the total financial markets pie as their less protected and subsidized competitors expanded. I doubt that banks would wither away, but they would surely become less important. Other institutions would become more important lenders and more important borrowers--that is, creators of assets for the public to hold. Should we care? After all, what is important is not the return to bank stockholders or the salaries of bank managers. What are important is that borrowers and lenders get served cheaply and efficiently and that the financial system contributes to economic growth and stability. If banks are less important and other institutions are more important, so what? My conclusion is that we should not try to leave banks out of financial modernization. As I noted earlier, such an approach is a political nonstarter that may just hold up the whole modernization process. I've also decided that it's inequitable and inefficient. Such a decision is a unilateral action to reduce the capital value of banking and it would require a painful and costly exodus of financial capital and human expertise to other financial institutions. Perhaps most important, there is an institutional vehicle that is available that would permit banking organizations to participate in financial modernization with a minimal risk of transference of the safety net subsidy: the bank holding company. As this audience well knows, a bank holding company is a corporation that owns a bank and other authorized financial businesses. To be sure, some of the safety net subsidy leaks out of the bank to its holding company affiliates: a bank holding company has cheaper financing simply because its major subsidiary is an insured bank. In addition, a bank pays dividends, earned in part with the subsidy, to the holding company parent that can be used to finance the other affiliates and a bank can lend to its affiliates. But all this leakage appears to be rather limited, with most of the subsidy contained at the bank. Dividend payments from the bank are limited by the banks' need to maintain capital by regulation and supervision, and statute caps the lending by banks to their affiliates. In the future, banks will become a smaller part of the holding company if and as financial modernization permits them to enter other businesses. Thus, I have concluded that the holding company vehicle seems to be a perfectly reasonable way to limit the safety net transference. One may well say that, as a member of the Federal Reserve Board and as one that has admitted liking his job there, this conclusion is not unbiased. The Federal Reserve, after all, supervises all bank holding companies (and state member banks, which account for only about a quarter of aggregate bank assets). Thus, I can be accused of adopting a position that protects the Fed's turf. More about that in a minute, but first let's take a look at the other structural model for bank participation in financial modernization, championed by the U.S. Treasury. The Treasury has been the proponent of the "option" of using either the bank holding company or the bank subsidiary as the vehicle for new permissible activities. A bank could choose either for the location of its securities firm or insurance company affiliate. Such a choice reminds me of the story about the sports writer Haywood Hale Broun who was authorized by his editor to hire an assistant for $35 or $40 a week, and promptly gave the most promising applicant the choice between these two sums. A subsidiary is clearly the most attractive for the bank because it is the best vehicle for transferring the safety net subsidy: the capital invested in the subsidiary is totally funded by the bank and thus benefits dollar for dollar from the bank subsidy. The subsidiary option would thus be the choice de jure of intelligent bank management, causing all of the things that one should worry about. It would give the sub a funding cost competitive advantage vis-a-vis independent rivals and even bank holding company affiliates. It would, in addition, distort incentives for risk taking because of that direct lower cost of capital, as well as because creditors of the sub would presume parent bank assistance in times of stress, since losses at the sub fall directly on the parent bank's capital. As long as there is a safety net, the bank subsidiary approach to financial modernization is a truly bad idea and the Federal Reserve Board strongly opposes it on the merits. Beyond the safety net, the operating subsidiary creates significant potential conflicts among supervisors. One of the criteria for competitive equity and equal treatment among institutions is to assume, in so far as possible, equal supervisory and regulatory treatment regardless of structure or ownership--what in governmentese is called functional regulation. Reflective, I believe, of the close, intimate relationship between a bank and its subsidiary, the departments of the Treasury that regulate national banks, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, as well as the Office of Thrift Supervision, have already indicated their opposition to relying on and deferring to regulation of securities subs of their depository institutions by the SEC and insurance subs of these entities by the state insurance regulators. Even if these problems were addressed, it seems entirely possible that, since losses of subsidiaries are borne by their bank parent, difficulties at subs sow the seeds of conflict between the functional regulator of the sub and the regulator of the bank. Difficult issues would arise about which entity should be assisted in times of stress, as well as about the effect of any action by one regulator on the entity supervised by another. The parent of a subsidiary of a holding company is not an entity that is protected by the safety net and the risk of these conflicts is minimized. My colleagues and I are also concerned about the implications of the bank subsidiary form on the safety and soundness of banks. It is not, let me hasten to add, that we think most of the proposed new financial activities are unusually risky. They are not. Rather, as I have noted, whatever the risk, it is a fact that any loss suffered by the new subsidiary must fall on the bank's capital and weaken the bank. In contrast, losses at a subsidiary of the holding company fall on the holding company's capital, not the bank's. The Treasury likes to underline how the profits of a bank sub strengthen the bank because subsidiary profits increase the bank's capital, and their accounting and arithmetic on this are impeccable. However, if there is to be a real benefit one has to assume that more can be earned on the bank's investment in the sub than it can earn in banking. It is an iron law of financial economics that the higher the return the higher the risk, and the higher the risk the higher the chance of loss--and that is, in fact, our concern. The Treasury believes our concerns are unfounded because they would cap the investment in the sub to the amount of the excess regulatory capital of the bank and deduct that investment from the bank's regulatory capital. Poof, it's gone! And any bank sub losses would thus do nothing to the bank's capital because first, the deduction has already occurred and second, at the split second when sub losses equal the initial investment, the sub, by rule would be declared bankrupt and any losses above that amount would be reversed when the bankruptcy is closed out. I'm not sure what the lawyers in the audience may think of that, but economists and market types have some real doubts. Excess regulatory capital is a regulator's construct. The market looks at that capital as real, as does the bank management that is holding the capital the market demands of it. Indeed, under GAAP there will be no deduction and bank creditors--like uninsured depositors--will look to that capital for protection. And, I'm sure this audience will agree, the creditors of the failed sub will meet the bank in court, trying to require private bank assumption of subsidiary debt, and the reversal of any losses in excess of the original investment--which can happen in minutes intra-day in today's financial markets--can well take months or years to resolve. Full analysis requires that we step back from these increasingly technical arguments. All sides, I think, agree that we need financial reform. Both sides agree that the safety net is a problem. The disagreement is about structure and the disagreement is strongly and deeply felt. The issue of turf has been raised. The Fed supports bank holding companies as the structure, and it supervises and regulates bank holding companies. The Treasury supports the operating subsidiary of the bank--the op sub--option, and through a department of the Treasury, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, it supervises national banks, the class of banks most likely to take advantage of new permissible activities. What are the respective turf arguments? The Treasury argues that in a republic the elected administration should have a significant, important voice in economic policy, including banking. This argument, by the way, is not limited to the current Administration; it has been voiced by several recent administrations from both parties. But that position requires that the administration's policy entry be through the national banking system, which it supervises. Indeed, in the current discussions the Treasury asserts that without its version of modernization, the national banks will decline--a curious observation since national banks' market share has risen notably with interstate banking. I, for one, believe that the Treasury's posture on the need to be a significant policymaker in banking has merit. We should look for ways to assure that they play a significant role in banking and financial markets. But, I, for one, also think it would be a terrible mistake to do so in a way that spreads the distortions and costs of the safety net and increases the risks to the banking system. Finally, I feel compelled to explain the need for the Federal Reserve to continue to be a significant participant in bank supervision. This role is exercised through two relationships. First, the Fed is the primary bank regulator for state member banks. I noted earlier that state member banks represent only one-fourth of total banking assets. More important, perhaps, in relation to the Fed's systemic risk responsibilities, the Fed is the primary regulator of only seven of the largest twenty-five banking organizations. Therefore, the primary window through which the Fed maintains contact with, and oversight of, the largest and most complex banking organizations is as supervisor of bank holding companies. The latter role, I might add, would decline significantly if the op sub, the banking subsidiary, approach were adopted. The economics of the safety net subsidy simply would induce a massive shift from bank holding companies to bank subsidiaries, leaving the holding company an unneeded husk in relatively short order. Why should we care? Or why should anyone not an employee of the Fed care? The Federal Reserve, in its role as the central bank of the United States, is the institution that is charged not only with monetary policy and contributing to macro economic stability, but also to avoiding and managing financial crises. I believe that responsibility requires that we have the authority to act and that our staff maintain the expertise about how the system really works that simply cannot be obtained from reading reports from another agency or even textbooks from scholars at Washington University. That expertise, I believe, comes only from hands on knowledge of banking and financial institutions and markets that can come only from supervision. If our supervisory responsibility begins to atrophy, so will our skills. A central bank with ivory tower knowledge will not be able to deal adequately with financial crises.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the proposal of Commerzbank AG, Frankfurt am Main, Germany, to retain control of Korea Exchange Bank, Seoul, Korea, and thereby acquire California Korea Bank, Los Angeles, California. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Commerzbank AG Frankfurt am Main, Federal Republic of Germany Order Approving the Formation and Acquisition of a Bank Holding Company Commerzbank AG ("Commerzbank") has requested the Board's approval under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act (12 U.S.C. §1842) ("BHC Act") to become a bank holding company by retaining control of Korea Exchange Bank, Seoul, Korea ("KEB"). KEB owns all of the voting shares of California Korea Bank, Los Angeles, California ("California Bank"). Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (63 Federal Register 47,500 (1998)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the application and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 3 of the BHC Act. Commerzbank, with consolidated total assets of approximately $386 billion, is the fourth largest banking organization in Germany. Commerzbank engages in banking operations in the United States through branches in New York, New York; Chicago, Illinois; and Los Angeles, California, and an agency in Atlanta, Georgia. Commerzbank also engages in nonbanking activities in the United States through a number of subsidiaries. KEB, with $47 billion in consolidated total assets, is the third largest banking organization in Korea. KEB is the parent of California Bank, which is the 78th largest depository institution in California, controlling less than 1 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in the state. KEB also operates branches in New York, New York; Chicago, Illinois; and Seattle, Washington, and an agency in Los Angeles, California. The Board has carefully considered the competitive effects of the proposal in each relevant banking market, including the Los Angeles, California, banking market. Commerzbank and KEB each controls less than 1 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in each relevant banking market and numerous competitors would remain in each relevant banking market after consummation of the proposal. Accordingly, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposal is not likely to result in any significantly adverse effects on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in any relevant banking market. Certain Supervisory Considerations Under section 3 of the BHC Act, the Board may not approve an application involving a foreign bank unless the bank is "subject to comprehensive supervision or regulation on a consolidated basis by the appropriate authorities in the bank's home country." Regulation K provides that a foreign bank may be considered subject to consolidated supervision if the Board determines that the bank is supervised or regulated in such a manner that its home country supervisor receives sufficient information on the worldwide operations of the foreign bank, including the relationship of the bank to its affiliates, to assess the foreign bank's overall financial condition and compliance with law and regulation. The Board previously has determined, in applications under the IBA, that certain German commercial banks were subject to comprehensive consolidated supervision by their home country authorities. In this case, the Board has determined that Commerzbank is supervised on substantially the same terms and conditions as those other German commercial banks. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that Commerzbank is subject to comprehensive supervision and regulation on a consolidated basis by its home country supervisor. The BHC Act also requires the Board to determine that the foreign bank has provided adequate assurances that it will make available to the Board such information on its operations and activities and those of its affiliates that the Board deems appropriate to determine and enforce compliance with the BHC Act. The Board has reviewed the restrictions on disclosure in jurisdictions where Commerzbank has material operations and has communicated with the relevant authorities concerning access to information. Commerzbank has committed that, to the extent not prohibited by applicable law, it will make available to the Board such information on the operations of Commerzbank and any of its affiliates that the Board deems necessary to determine and enforce compliance with the BHC Act, the IBA, and other applicable federal law. Commerzbank also has committed to cooperate with the Board to obtain any waivers or exemptions that may be necessary in order to enable Commerzbank to make any such information available to the Board. In light of these commitments and other facts of record, the Board has concluded that Commerzbank has provided adequate assurances of access to any appropriate information the Board may request. Financial, Managerial, and Convenience and Needs Considerations The BHC Act also requires the Board to consider the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the banks involved and the convenience and needs of the communities to be served. Commerzbank's capital ratios exceed the minimum levels that would be required under the Basle Capital Accord, and are considered equivalent to the capital that would be required of a U.S. banking organization. California Bank's capital ratios exceed the "well capitalized" thresholds and would be unchanged by this transaction. The Board notes, moreover, that the proposal does not involve any expansion of the banking or nonbanking activities of KEB, and that Commerzbank's investment in KEB has strengthened KEB's capital position and made additional financial resources available to California Bank. Based on these and all the facts of record, including confidential examination and other supervisory information concerning the foreign banks involved in the proposal as well as their existing U.S. operations, the Board concludes that financial and managerial factors are consistent with approval, as are the other supervisory factors the Board must consider under section 3 of the BHC Act. California Bank received a "satisfactory" performance rating at its most recent examination under the Community Reinvestment Act (12 U.S.C. §2901 et seq. ) by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, as of January 22, 1996. In light of all the facts of record, the Board concludes that convenience and needs considerations also are consistent with approval. Based on the foregoing and all other facts of record, the Board has determined that the application should be, and hereby is, approved. The Board's approval of the proposal is expressly conditioned on Commerzbank's compliance with all the commitments made in connection with the application. The commitments and conditions relied on by the Board in reaching this decision are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with .its findings and decision and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. By order of the Board of Governors, effective March 15, 1999. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Footnotes Commerzbank has requested the Board's approval to control up to 40 percent of KEB's voting shares. In July 1998, Commerzbank acquired newly issued shares of KEB, representing approximately 32 percent of KEB's voting shares. This investment was part of a plan to increase KEB's capital, which was approved by the Korean Financial Supervisory Commission. Before consummation of the investment, and with the approval of the Board and the California Department of Financial Institutions (the "Department"), KEB placed all of its shares of California Bank in a voting trust controlled by an independent trustee pending regulatory approval of Commerzbank's acquisition of California Bank. See Letter from Robert deV. Frierson, Associate Secretary of the Board, to Robert L. Tortoriello, dated July 27, 1998. Under the terms of the trust agreement, the voting trust terminates if the Board and the Department approve Commerzbank's retention of its ownership interest in California Bank. The Department approved Commerzbank's application to acquire control of California Bank on October 19, 1998. Asset data are as of September 30, 1998, and use exchange rates then in effect. Ranking data are as of December 31, 1997. Deposit data are as of June 30, 1997. In this context, depository institutions include banks, savings and loan associations, and savings banks. The Los Angeles banking market is approximated by the Los Angeles Ranally Metropolitan Area. Market share data are based on calculations in which the deposits of thrift institutions are included at 50 percent. The Board previously has indicated that thrift institutions have become, or have the potential to become, significant competitors of commercial banks. See, e.g., Midwest Financial Group, 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 386 (1989); National City Corporation , 70 Federal Reserve Bulletin 743 (1984). Thus, the Board has regularly included thrift deposits in the calculation of market share on a 50-percent weighted basis. See, e.g., First Hawaiian, Inc. , 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 52 (1991). After consummation of the proposed acquisition, California will be the home state of both KEB and Commerzbank for purposes of the BHC Act and, accordingly, the proposed transaction is not barred by section 3(d) of the BHC Act. See 12 U.S.C. ï¿½§1841(o)(4), 1842(d). New York is the home state of both KEB and Commerzbank for purposes of the International Banking Act (12 U.S.C. §3101 et seq. ) and Regulation K, and the continued operation of the existing branches of Commerzbank and KEB is not barred by the International Banking Act or Regulation K. 12 U.S.C. §1842(c)(3)(B). As provided in Regulation Y, the Board determines whether a foreign bank is subject to consolidated home country supervision under the standards set forth in Regulation K. See 12 C.F.R. 225.13(a)(4). In assessing this standard, the Board considers, among other factors, the extent to which the home country supervisors (i) ensure that the bank has adequate procedures for monitoring and controlling its activities worldwide; (ii) obtain information on the condition of the bank and its subsidiaries and offices through regular examination reports, audit reports, or otherwise; (iii) obtain information on the dealings with and relationship between the bank and its affiliates, both foreign and domestic; (iv) receive from the bank financial reports that are consolidated on a worldwide basis, or comparable information that permits analysis of the bank's financial condition on a worldwide consolidated basis; (v) evaluate prudential standards, such as capital adequacy and risk asset exposure, on a worldwide basis. These are indicia of comprehensive consolidated supervision. No single factor is essential and other elements may inform the Board's decision. See 12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)(1)(ii). See Sudwestdeutsche Landesbank Girozentrale , 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin 937 (1997); West Merchant Bank Limited , 81 Federal Reserve Bulletin 519 (1995). Commerzbank currently underwrites and deals in bank-ineligible securities through Commerzbank Capital Markets Corporation, New York, New York, pursuant to grandfather rights established by section 8(c) of the IBA. See 12 U.S.C. §3106(c)(1). The IBA provides that a foreign bank's grandfather rights under section 8(c) shall terminate two years after the date on which the foreign bank becomes a bank holding company. See id. at §3106(c)(2). Accordingly, Commerzbank must conform any activities that it engages in pursuant to section 8(c) of the IBA to the requirements of the BHC Act by July 27, 2000. Voting for this action: Vice Chair Rivlin and Governors Kelley, Meyer, Ferguson, and Gramlich. Absent and not voting: Chairman Greenspan.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the proposal of The Fuji Bank, Limited, to acquire a majority interest in The Yasuda Trust and Banking Co., Ltd., both in Tokyo, Japan, and thereby acquire Yasuda Bank and Trust Company, New York, New York. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. The Fuji Bank, Limited Tokyo, Japan Order Approving the Acquisition of a Bank Holding Company The Fuji Bank, Limited ("Fuji"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 3 of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. §1842) to acquire more than 50 percent of the voting securities of The Yasuda Trust and Banking Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan ("Yasuda"), and thereby acquire Yasuda's wholly owned U.S. subsidiary bank, Yasuda Bank and Trust Company (U.S.A.), New York, New York ("Yasuda Bank"). Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (64 Federal Register 6,361 (1999)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the proposal and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 3 of the BHC Act. Fuji, with total consolidated assets of approximately $417 billion, is the fifth largest banking organization in Japan. In the United States, Fuji owns The Fuji Bank and Trust Company, New York, New York, a state-chartered insured bank. Fuji also operates branches in New York, New York, and Chicago, Illinois; agencies in Los Angeles, California, and Houston, Texas; and a representative office in New York, New York. In addition, Fuji engages through its nonbanking subsidiaries in a number of activities in the United States that are permissible under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Yasuda, with total consolidated assets of approximately $61 billion, is the 23rd largest banking organization in Japan. In addition to Yasuda Bank, Yasuda currently operates a representative office in New York, New York. Competitive Considerations Fuji and Yasuda compete directly in the Metropolitan New York-New Jersey banking market. Consummation of the proposal would result in an increase of less than one point in the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index ("HHI") for the Metropolitan New York-New Jersey banking market, and the banking market would remain unconcentrated with numerous competitors operating in the market. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposal is not likely to result in any significantly adverse effects on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in the Metropolitan New York-New Jersey banking market or any other relevant banking market. Comprehensive Consolidated Supervision and Access to Information Under section 3 of the BHC Act, the Board may not approve an application involving a foreign bank unless the bank is "subject to comprehensive supervision or regulation on a consolidated basis by the appropriate authorities in the bank's home country." The Board recently determined in an application under the BHC Act that Fuji was subject to comprehensive supervision and regulation on a consolidated basis by its home country supervisor. In connection with this application, the Board also has reviewed the steps that the Japanese government and banking authorities have taken to enhance the supervision of Japanese banks since the Board's approval of Fuji's 1998 investment in Yasuda. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that Fuji continues to be subject to comprehensive supervision and regulation on a consolidated basis by its home country supervisor. The BHC Act also requires the Board to determine that the foreign bank has provided adequate assurances that it will make available to the Board such information on its operations and activities and those of its affiliates that the Board deems appropriate to determine and enforce compliance with the BHC Act and the International Banking Act ("IBA") (12 U.S.C. §3101 et seq. ). The Board has reviewed restrictions on disclosure in jurisdictions where Fuji has material operations and has communicated with relevant authorities concerning access to information. Fuji has committed that, to the extent not prohibited by applicable law, it will make available to the Board such information on the operations of Fuji and any of its affiliates that the Board deems necessary to determine and enforce compliance with the BHC Act, the IBA, and other applicable federal law. Fuji also has committed to cooperate with the Board to obtain any waivers or exemptions that may be necessary to enable Fuji to make any such information available to the Board. In light of these commitments and other facts of record, the Board has concluded that Fuji has provided adequate assurances of access to any appropriate information that the Board may request. For these reasons, and based on all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that the supervisory factors it is required to consider under section 3(c) of the BHC Act are consistent with approval. Financial, Managerial, and Other Supervisory Considerations The Board also has carefully considered the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of Fuji, Yasuda, and their respective subsidiaries, and the effect the proposal would have on these resources. The Board notes that the proposal is incidental to a corporate restructuring of Japanese banking organizations that is intended to enhance the overall financial strength and future prospects of the combined organization. Fuji's reported capital levels exceed the minimum levels that would be required under the Basle Capital Accord, and its capital levels are considered equivalent to the capital levels that would be required of a U.S. banking organization under similar circumstances. In addition, Fuji recently has taken a number of actions to enhance its capital position. Fuji also has submitted information indicating that the proposal would not affect the existing U.S. operations of Fuji or Yasuda, and would require no funding or other support from the U.S. operations of Fuji or Yasuda. The Board also has reviewed supervisory information from the home country authorities responsible for supervising Fuji and Yasuda concerning the proposal and the condition of the parties, confidential financial information from Fuji and Yasuda, and reports of examination from the appropriate federal and state supervisors of the affected organizations assessing the financial and managerial resources of the organizations. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has concluded that the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the organizations are consistent with approval, as are the other supervisory factors that the Board must consider under section 3 of the BHC Act. Considerations related to the convenience and needs of the communities to be served also are consistent with approval. Conclusion Based on the foregoing and all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the application should be, and hereby is, approved. The Board's approval is expressly conditioned on compliance by Fuji with all the commitments made in connection with the application. The commitments and conditions relied on by the Board in reaching its decision are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its finding and decision and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The transaction shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day after the effective date of this order, or later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective March 15, 1999. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Footnotes Fuji currently owns approximately 16.8 percent of Yasuda's voting shares. See The Fuji Bank, Limited , 84 Federal Reserve Bulletin 674 (1998) (" 1998 Fuji/Yasuda Order "). Asset and ranking data are as of March 31, 1998, and are based on exchange rates then applicable. The Metropolitan New York-New Jersey banking market includes New York City; Nassau, Orange, Putnam, Rockland, Suffolk, Sullivan, and Westchester Counties in New York; Bergen, Essex, Hudson, Hunterdon, Middlesex, Monmouth, Morris, Ocean, Passaic, Somerset, Sussex, Union, Warren, and a portion of Mercer Counties in New Jersey; Pike County in Pennsylvania; and portions of Fairfield and Litchfield Counties in Connecticut. Market share data are as of June 30, 1997. The HHI for the Metropolitan New York-New Jersey banking market would remain at 761 after consummation of the proposal. Under the revised Department of Justice Merger Guidelines, 49 Federal Register 26,823 (1984), a market in which the post-merger HHI is less than 1000 is considered to be unconcentrated. The Department of Justice has informed the Board that a bank merger or acquisition generally will not be challenged (in the absence of other factors indicating anticompetitive effects) unless the post-merger HHI is at least 1800 and the merger increases the HHI by more than 200 points. The Department of Justice has stated that the higher than normal HHI thresholds for screening bank mergers and acquisitions for anticompetitive effects implicitly recognize the competitive effects of limited-purpose lenders and other nondepository financial entities. 12 U.S.C. §1842(c)(3)(B). As provided in Regulation Y, the Board determines whether a foreign bank is subject to consolidated home country supervision under the standards set forth in Regulation K. See 12 C.F.R. 225.13(a)(4). Regulation K provides that a foreign bank may be considered subject to consolidated supervision if the Board determines that the bank is supervised or regulated in such a manner that its home country supervisor receives sufficient information on the worldwide operations of the foreign bank, including the relationship of the bank and its affiliates, to assess the foreign bank's overall financial condition and compliance with law and regulation. See 12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)(1)(ii). See 1998 Fuji/Yasuda Order. See 1998 Fuji/Yasuda Order. Among other things, in June 1998, the Financial Supervisory Agency was established and assumed from the Ministry of Finance primary responsibility for licensing, supervising, and examining private sector financial institutions in Japan, including banks. In addition, in October 1998, the Financial Revitalization Commission was established to assume responsibility for dealing with failures of financial institutions, managing financial crises, and inspecting and supervising financial institutions. The Financial Supervisory Agency is a subordinate agency of the Financial Revitalization Commission. The Bank of Japan retains its authority to examine banks, in coordination with the Financial Supervisory Agency. Voting for this action: Vice Chair Rivlin and Governors Kelley, Meyer, Ferguson, and Gramlich. Absent and not voting: Chairman Greenspan.
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan The farm economy At the Annual Convention of the Independent Bankers Association of America, San Francisco, California March 16, 1999 I am pleased to have the opportunity once again to address the annual convention of the Independent Bankers Association. For the U.S. economy, the past year has been turbulent in some respects but in the end, another year of impressive performance. Economic growth was robust again, and unemployment and inflation edged down further. This month marks the eighth anniversary of the last business cycle trough, and the expansion that has ensued now ranks as one of the longest. These accomplishments are doubtless partly the result of influences that may prove transitory, but a number of fundamental strengths imply more lasting benefits. Nonetheless, after eight years of economic expansion, the economy appears stretched in a number of dimensions, implying considerable upside and downside risks to the economic outlook. Some industries, for example, that are more exposed to international trade have been affected adversely by the severe problems of many foreign economies, which have led both to reductions in demand from abroad and to increased competition from imports. Agriculture has been one of the more notable soft spots, and I shall devote the bulk of my comments this morning to the situation in this sector, which has become a matter of increased concern to a good many community bankers from rural areas this past year. Farmers, rather than sharing in the general prosperity, have been experiencing disappointing exports and sharply falling prices. Overall, the prices received by farmers in February were about 5 percent below the level of a year earlier. In recent weeks, corn prices have been running around $2 a bushel in the Midwest, the lowest late-winter price for that crop in a number of years. Soybean prices, reflecting increasing world supplies and additional pressures from the Brazilian currency devaluation earlier this year, have dropped sharply to the low end of their range of the past quarter-century. Wheat prices also have come under renewed downward pressure, even though U.S. farmers appear to be cutting back sharply on planted acreage. Hog producers, who usually benefit from falling feed costs, instead have suffered big losses this past year, not so much from troubles on the export side as from sharply increased production; hog prices fell about two-thirds over the course of 1998, but that decline, at least, has been partially retraced in recent weeks. By contrast, dairy prices, which have been strong over the past year, now are weakening noticeably. The disappointing export developments and pressures on farm prices over the past few quarters can be traced to an important degree to the recession that began in Asia more than a year and a half ago and has since spread to other regions of the world. U.S. agricultural exports to Japan, which has been experiencing its most serious downturn in a half-century, fell by more than 20 percent in value terms from 1996 to 1998. Weakness in several other Asian economies, including Korea, Taiwan, Indonesia, and Malaysia, also engendered significant erosion in demand for U.S. farm products, and China has not proved to be the rapidly expanding market that U.S. producers had hoped to see. All told, falling shipments to the Asian countries accounted for more than 80 percent of the drop in the value of farm exports over the past two years. In addition, the worsening economic situation in Russia has led to reduced farm exports to that country--most notably of poultry, the exports of which previously had been growing rapidly. In this hemisphere, shipments to Canada and Mexico have continued to expand, but exports to South American countries have slowed. In addition to soft foreign economic activity, exchange rate effects have compounded the damping of farm exports. Weakness in Asia and other parts of the world has particularly lowered the prices of the commodities that Canada and Australia produce in quantity, and the currencies of those countries accordingly have declined against the dollar. Because Canada and Australia are such large factors in the international wheat market, their weakened currencies have put additional competitive pressure on some of our exporters. The volume of our grain exports has declined, and sharply lower prices have been required to move that volume. Meanwhile, the very strong growth of our domestic economy has contributed in only a limited way to the expansion of demand for farm products. Consumers, especially in affluent economies, do not boost spending on food to nearly the same degree that their incomes rise. In this country--for quite a number of years--real consumer expenditures for food have been trending up at a pace only a little faster than what might have occurred from population growth alone. This limited potential for expansion of domestic demand--even in an economy as strong as we have experienced over the past few years--explains why the farm sector is so critically dependent on demand from abroad. No one can predict with much confidence exactly when recoveries in demand will take hold in the troubled foreign economies. But clearly our farm sector stands to gain, perhaps appreciably, when more favorable economic conditions finally emerge. In the interim, farmers will likely be turning even more intensely to what has been, in the past, the one tried-and-true formula for maintaining profitability--reducing the costs of production to the bare bone. For those farms that are the hardest pressed during the current period of slack demand from abroad, small efficiencies can mean the difference between survival and failure. Farm businesses that are not so hard pressed can continue to forge ahead with modernizations that will leave them better positioned once demand begins to pick up. These changes not only will affect farm profitability over the near term but also will affect supply conditions in the industry over the longer term. I cannot stress too much the overwhelming importance of technical change as a primary force that will likely be reshaping farm supply conditions--as it has been doing for a long time. As a consequence of each producer's striving to become more efficient and thereby to contain costs, successive waves of innovation have swept through the farm sector over the decades. Crop producers, in stages, have implemented increased mechanization, heavier uses of fertilizers, new higher-yielding varieties of seeds, low-tillage methods of production that have enabled producers to economize on energy inputs, and heavier reliance on chemicals and pesticides to reduce crop losses. The payoff to these efforts is evident in gains in national average yields per acre of roughly 40 percent to 60 percent for our major field crops--corn, wheat, soybeans, and cotton--over the past three decades. Livestock productivity also has moved up: The nation has a smaller cattle herd than it did three decades ago, but beef production has risen more than 20 percent. The dairy herd is about three-fourths the size it was in the late 1960s, but output of milk has increased more than one-third. In the poultry business, the flock of hens has changed little, on net, but the poundage of broilers delivered to retail has risen spectacularly. Pork production in 1998 was up close to 50 percent from that of three decades ago, even though the inventory of hogs and pigs on the nation's farms was up only slightly. Over time, livestock producers have been able to exert greater control at all stages of production. Increased application of industrial methods has proved especially advantageous in several of these sectors. These technical advances have added up to a huge increase in the productivity of farmers and farm workers. Over the past thirty years, farm value-added per hour worked has grown at an average rate of more than 4-1/2 percent, roughly three times the rate of increase in output per hour in the nonfarm business sector of our economy. With the demand for farm output rising less than half as fast as productivity growth, the amount of labor input in agriculture has contracted dramatically. At the same time, the faster rate of farm productivity growth has led to a sustained decline in the prices of farm products relative to nonfarm business prices, at a compound average rate of roughly 3 percent per year over the past three decades. Still further technological advances appear to be coming on line in farming or are waiting closely in the wings. In agriculture, as everywhere else in our economy, the computer is coming into wider use, as are other new electronic and communications devices. Moreover, some promising applications of new technologies are more farm specific. Combinations of electronic sensors, computers, and communications equipment are starting to give producers more control over farming operations that have always been vulnerable to pests or subject to the whims of nature. Applications of biotechnology have taken hold already in some parts of farming, and numerous new possibilities seem to be opening up. To be sure, many of the applications of these or other new technologies are still either in their infancy or in an early stage of adoption into standard farming practices, and some have yet to prove their commercial viability. But the general direction of change is clearly toward more precision and control of farm production processes. Over time, those changes surely will lead to a further lowering of real production costs as well. For the most part, the successive waves of technical innovation have tended to give farmers who are able to reduce costs the most a leg up in expanding their operations. These low-cost farmers are the ones best positioned to acquire additional acreage or finance the investments that can foster still further reductions in unit costs. Over time, farms thereby become fewer in number but are larger and, in most cases, more efficient, with strengthened ties to nonfarm businesses that supply inputs that are essential to improved technologies. The new technologies seem destined to integrate farming operations still more tightly into our complex modern economy. This increased integration does not necessarily impinge on family farming as a way of life, but it does alter the image of the independent farmer that remains so deeply rooted in the American psyche, even as the percentage of our labor force that is engaged in farming has fallen from more than 35 percent a century ago to a little less than 2-1/2 percent today. Farm cost containment depends not only on technical efficiency but also on the prices of inputs, which farmers do not control. Fortunately, however, inflation is not a problem with which farmers have had to contend of late. This past year, in fact, farmers have benefited from declining input prices that have partly relieved the pressures imposed by declines in the prices of their output. Prices are lower for gasoline, diesel fuel, fertilizers, and farm chemicals. Prices of many other production inputs--including vehicles, farm machinery, and farm building materials--have either held steady or risen only modestly. Prices paid in February for all production inputs, including those purchased from other farmers, were about 3 percent below the level of a year earlier. The weakening of farm markets, while pressuring farm income and wealth, has not had effects as dramatic as the declines in market prices might seem to have implied. Partly because of increased government payments to farmers this past year, but also because of efficiency gains and real cost reductions that have been implemented over the past several years, net farm income and farm cash flow from operations are holding up considerably better than they otherwise would have. Indeed, an earlier string of prosperous years fostered a strengthening of farm balance sheets, and, despite the softening of land prices in some regions since the middle part of last year, aggregate farm debt remains quite low relative to farm assets. However, the range of financial circumstances across individual farming operations is considerable, and although producers in general appear to have remained profitable, some producers, plagued by higher costs or adverse weather, are having to make financial adjustments. The severity of those adjustments are compounded for producers who are more heavily dependent on debt. In some cases, farmers and farm lenders are reworking loan-repayment schedules or taking other steps to help producers get through what presumably is a transitory--though by no means abbreviated--period of softness in the demand for farm products. Even when export demand improves, some producers may find it a struggle to stay competitive with farmers whose real costs per unit of output are being pushed ever lower by technical advance and innovation. On the whole, commercial banks that are active in farm lending appear to have suffered little or no diminution of their profits this past year because of the increased difficulties in farming. For the most part, farmers seem to have been able to maintain repayment of their bank loans on a timely basis, and the charge-offs of farm loans by commercial banks have remained low relative to the total volume of farm loans at these institutions. These favorable readings, however, may be partly a reflection of the tendency for evidence of loan difficulties to lag behind the changes in farm market conditions, and some weakening of the financial indicators would not be altogether surprising as we move ahead. Nonetheless, the banks that are more heavily involved in farm lending are, by and large, well capitalized and seemingly better positioned to absorb financial adversities from the farm sector than was the case at the start of the 1980s, at the onset of that decade's farm financial crisis. The Farm Credit System, too, seems to be on sounder footing than it was at the start of the 1980s. Credit from these and other lenders appears to be available to most farm borrowers at present, although the terms and standards of loans may be tightening in some cases. Despite heightened anxieties about how long the present slack conditions in farm markets might persist, both farmers and lenders appear to retain a fair degree of optimism about the longer-run prospects for the sector, apparently owing to the expectations that technical change will create new markets for farm products and that further advances in productivity and cost reduction will help the lower-cost producers retain a competitive position in world markets. At the same time, however, the near-term may be challenging for farmers and their lenders, especially if farm prices remain depressed, and the technical changes that will be helping innovative producers may even add to the stresses being felt by higher-cost producers. The magnitude of the forces now at work--which bring major uncertainties for producers both from the demand side and the supply side--suggest that the financial situation in the sector may need to be monitored even more carefully than usual as we move ahead. Additionally, I would like to note that we at the Federal Reserve are often asked by representatives of troubled sectors of the economy whether their voices truly are heard in our policy proceedings. I can assure you that they are, most notably in the reports on regional economic conditions that are a regular part of the preparations for the meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee and in reports from Reserve Bank presidents that are a regular part of the policy discussions themselves. Monetary policy decisions, of course, must be directed toward what is deemed to be the best path for the economy as a whole. In today's integrated national markets, the Fed can no longer have different monetary policies for different Federal Reserve Districts as was the case in our very early years. Quite apart from the attention that various sectors of the economy get in our deliberations on monetary policy, the Federal Reserve's responsibility in monitoring the safety and soundness of the banking system requires us to seek better understanding of the regional and sectoral composition of changes in prices and activity and of their effects on finance. Among other things, we have devoted special attention over the years to the collection and interpretation of data from community banks that are heavily involved in agricultural lending, a sector of the economy in which these smaller banks still appear to have a strong comparative advantage. I might note, too, that just a few months ago the Federal Reserve System's commitment to better understanding of the economic and financial conditions in rural parts of the nation was reaffirmed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City's creation of a new research unit, the Center for the Study of Rural America. In closing let me say just a few words on financial modernization legislation now before the Congress. A broad consensus has finally arisen in this country that the vast changes in financial innovation currently in train necessitate a structure of supervision that will enable our financial institutions to progress in a safe and sound 21st century environment. A critical choice in building that new supervisory system rests on whether the new powers granted under H.R. 10 are required to be housed in an affiliate of a holding company or are allowed to function in a subsidiary of a commercial bank. This choice will have profound implications to the safety and soundness of American finance as we move forward. We at the Federal Reserve believe that the new powers should be housed in holding company affiliates and thereby be financed in the marketplace at competitive costs of capital, not in an op-sub inappropriately employing subsidized safety net equity capital. To fully empower an op-sub in our judgment would be to compromise safety and soundness of our future financial structure. There are numerous other potential provisions in the pending legislation that would affect safety and soundness, such as the so-called unitary thrift loophole. I am confident in the end, however, that a sensible, new, and hopefully less burdensome regulatory structure will evolve out of the current negotiations. This would be an outcome welcomed by our financial system as we move into the next millennium.
Remarks by Governor Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. At the National Black Business Council, Washington, D.C. March 16, 1999 Small Business Access to Capital: Current Status and Initiatives I am pleased to be here this evening and I wish to thank the National Black Business Council for inviting me to speak. I would like to focus my remarks on some recent research the Federal Reserve has sponsored on small business finances and on related efforts we make to help maintain small business access to capital and credit. The Role of Small Businesses in our Economy The Federal Reserve has long recognized the importance of small businesses and the access of small businesses to credit. In part, the Federal Reserve's ongoing interest in small business credit availability and its effects on economic growth stems from the fact that small firms play such a significant role in our dynamic economy. By some estimates, there are upwards of twenty-three million small businesses in the United States accounting for over 99 percent of all firms. Although a great number of these firms involve individuals who are self-employed or who have only a few employees, small businesses employ, collectively, more than half of the private sector work force. These firms also generate nearly half of the sales revenues of all U.S. firms. Even these statistics, impressive as they are, belie the importance of small businesses in our economy. Small firms provide the entry point into our nation's work force for about two-thirds of all workers, providing them opportunities to gain workplace skills and to learn about and apply new technologies. Small businesses also are often at the leading edge of technological innovation, both pushing and pulling our economy in new directions. According to the U.S. Small Business Administration (SBA), for example, small businesses account for a little more than half of all the innovations in our economy and provide for nearly 30 percent of the jobs in the increasingly important high technology sector. The current economic expansion has provided a favorable climate for small businesses generally and for minority-owned firms in particular. In 1996 alone, nearly a million new firms began operation. Moreover, in recent years, the number of minority-owned firms has been growing at a rate of three to four times that of other small businesses, though minority-owned firms still constitute only a small proportion of all small businesses. As of 1993, about 12 percent of all small businesses were minority-owned; about 3 percent were black-owned, 3.5 percent Asian-owned, 4 percent Hispanic-owned and 1 percent were owned by Native Americans. Given the importance of small businesses to our economy, and their heavy reliance on credit to facilitate growth, the Federal Reserve has taken a leading role in efforts to improve understanding of factors that bear on the availability of funds to support business activity. We do that in two primary ways: through an active, ongoing program of data collection and research designed to help us understand credit activity and its impacts on small business; and through a comprehensive program of educational, information and technical assistance activities to help banks and their communities understand and address credit availability issues. Research and Access to Capital and Credit Let me first address some of our data collection and research efforts. As in other areas, much of our involvement has focused on sponsoring special surveys of both businesses and creditors and supporting basic research. Just last week here in Washington, the Federal Reserve sponsored a major research conference on business access to capital and credit. Sixteen original research papers were presented, touching on many aspects of small business finance. These included the likely role newer developments such as credit scoring and securitization of business loans may have on small business lending in the future. Much of the research presented at the conference drew on the Federal Reserve's 1993 National Survey of Small Business Finances. This survey collected detailed information on the financial and other characteristics of a nationally representative sample of small businesses. To help us gain a better understanding of the nature and needs of minority-owned firms, the survey over-sampled the number of firms owned by various minority groups. I might note that we currently are well along in our preparations for another survey later this year, which will include interviews with some 6,000 small businesses. Three papers presented in the session on access to credit for minority- and female-owned businesses provide many insights, some of which I would like to share with you. This research documented many similarities, as well as important differences, in financial and nonfinancial characteristics between minority- and white-owned firms and between those owned by males and females. For example, black-owned firms tend to be smaller (whether measured by assets or employees), newer, and more likely to be located in an urban area than their non-minority counterparts. Black-owned businesses also tend to be owned by a person with fewer years of business experience and to have poorer credit histories, but they are also more likely to be owned by a person having at least some college education. Finally, black-owned businesses are more likely to be a sole proprietorship and in the services industry. Differences between other minority-owned firms and white-owned firms tend to be less pronounced, although differences are found. Clearly, there are many factors considered in credit decisions. Smaller businesses with limited equity capital, fewer assets to pledge as collateral, uncertain earnings streams, and high failure rates can reasonably be expected, on the whole, to experience greater difficulties in obtaining credit than larger firms. The personal creditworthiness of the business owner in sole proprietorships or small partnerships, as well as in small corporations, is also an important consideration. Creditor evaluations of risk, based on these and other legitimate economic factors, properly play a central role in credit decisions. According to the research, minority and women-owned firms differ from white and male-owned firms, not only on some important financial and nonfinancial dimensions, but also in some of their credit market experiences. The three papers, however, reached mixed conclusions regarding the nature and size of differences in credit market experiences. All three papers concluded that black-owned firms were more likely to be turned down for credit. Even in this regard results vary. For example, in urban markets, which accounted for the vast majority of firms in the study, differences in turndown rates are less pronounced than in rural areas. And when small retail establishments are considered separately, denial rates for black-owned and white-owned firms are similar. Clearly, additional research will be required to more fully understand these complexities. Determining whether and to what extent discrimination may play a role in explaining differences in the credit market experiences of small businesses owned by individuals from different demographic groups is difficult. Our small business survey is extremely useful because it allows for the documentation of differences in credit market experiences and provides clues regarding the reasons for these differences. However, these data can not identify all of the unique factors involved in the credit-granting decision. Discrimination, if it does exist in any creditor's decision, is disturbing. The moral and legal objections to discrimination are obvious. In addition, constraints on access to credit due to discrimination carry real costs and serious economic consequences. Such constraints inhibit economic opportunities by limiting the ability of victims to purchase homes, expand businesses, and accumulate wealth. At its heart, discrimination in granting credit artificially restricts the flow of capital. It means that viable economic activity goes unfunded and markets that should work do not. I can assure you that the Federal Reserve will remain vigilant to any indications that illegal discrimination is part of credit decisions. We, of course, continue to examine banks to measure and ensure their compliance with the Equal Credit Opportunity Act. And we will continue to sponsor research that bears on issues of credit availability and constraints, including those involving potential illegal discrimination. Information and Educational Programs In addition to our collection and analysis of data on small businesses, the Federal Reserve has also supported and supplemented its other functions with a proactive program to help banks meet key community credit needs. Through our Community Affairs programs at each of the twelve Federal Reserve Banks, we conduct ongoing outreach, educational, and hands-on technical assistance activities designed to help banks, their customers, and communities understand and address community credit needs, including those of small businesses. This is no small commitment. Combined, the Federal Reserve Board and the twelve Reserve Banks devote over 100 full-time staff persons to help institutions understand and participate in the community development process. To give you an idea of the scope of our activities, over the last three years, Federal Reserve Community Affairs staff have conducted over 4,600 outreach meetings throughout the country to discuss credit-related issues with a wide range of groups interested in community development and investment, including small businesses. During that same period, the twelve Federal Reserve Banks sponsored over 700 educational conferences, seminars, and workshops attended by over 35,000 people, including bankers, representatives of small businesses and community-based organizations, as well as public officials, focusing on credit and investment issues. Although some of this activity involves issues related to affordable housing and community development, over the past few years, our Community Affairs activities have increasingly focused on small business and economic development. Here are just a few examples that took place during this past year. The Federal Reserve Bank of Boston sponsored a major conference, entitled, "Making it in the Mainstream," which reviewed partnerships between minority enterprises and major corporations as a strategy for inner-city business development and job creation. To help bankers understand the financial techniques available to assist very small and start-up businesses, several educational programs were offered. The Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis sponsored a conference on small business incubation, while the Atlanta Reserve Bank conducted a workshop on issues affecting microenterprise lending. The Boston Reserve Bank developed a Microenterprise Training Curriculum , designed to provide lending and technical assistance training to organizations that offer services to micro-entrepreneurs. And the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond conducted a series of six conferences, in conjunction with the National Association of Women Business Owners, on the subject of "Access to Capital: Start to Finish," which focused on financing needs and resources for women-owned businesses. As an adjunct to their educational programs, the Reserve Banks provide direct technical assistance to bankers, business and community development organizations to help them identify and address capital and credit issues. Many of our Reserve Banks have helped bankers create multi-bank community development corporations (CDCs) and other consortium lending intermediaries, which focus on equity and debt financing for small and disadvantaged businesses. They also help banks deal with regulatory requirements that often must be addressed before investing in CDCs, Small Business Investment Companies, or multi-bank loan consortia. The Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, for example, worked with the Florida Black Business Investment Board and assisted banks interested in investing in regional Black Business Investment Corporations, which provide equity and loans to black-owned businesses in that state. Throughout the country, the Federal Reserve, through its Community Affairs program, regularly works with a wide variety of small business development groups, such as the SBA, small and minority business development centers, community development corporations, and small business associations to identify small business credit issues and convene meetings with bankers to help craft solutions. Access to Capital Initiative One promising approach is taking place in Cleveland. The Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland has joined forces with the Small Business Administration and the Greater Cleveland Growth Association's Council of Smaller Enterprises (COSE) to fund and coordinate a community-wide effort to improve capital access for the Northeast Ohio small businesses. The Initiative was created to help narrow the gap between the need for and the availability of start-up and expansion capital for new and growing businesses. Research had indicated that over a five-year period an average of 5,800 businesses failed each year in the eight-county region of Northeast Ohio, often for lack of sufficient capital at start-up and during key growth phases. To address capital availability issues, the Initiative's strategy was to engage broad participation from capital providers, business owners, small business support organizations, and legal and accounting professionals both to help identify and shape issues, and to develop solutions. A representative planning committee was formed to help guide the process. Its roles were to identify issues, select people to serve on work teams, review work team recommendations, and champion the new capital access system strategy that was to emerge. A meeting of over 175 bankers, representatives of small business finance intermediaries, venture capitalists, accountants, attorneys, public officials, and small business owners developed a series of recommendations and action plans. The process in Cleveland is continuing and the Federal Reserve continues to play a key role in helping convene meetings and move the process forward. In a related effort this past year, the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago began the initial phases of its "Small Business Credit Access Initiative" which will identify and address barriers to equity and debt capital for small enterprises in the Chicago metropolitan area, especially those businesses located in predominately minority and low-income communities. Conclusion Let me conclude by reemphasizing that the Federal Reserve employs many tools that help us understand credit markets, and address credit and capital availability issues confronting small businesses. Through effective monetary policy, our goal is to help maintain price stability and sustain conditions for growth that provide continuing opportunities for small businesses to flourish. Through our bank supervision functions, we continue to monitor the activities of financial institutions and their compliance with laws requiring them to offer credit on a fair and impartial basis. And we will continue to sponsor research on small business credit markets, and address issues that help foster credit availability for small and disadvantaged firms. Thank you.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice of Wachovia Corporation, Winston-Salem, North Carolina, to acquire Interstate/Johnson Lane, Inc., Charlotte, North Carolina, and thereby engage in underwriting and dealing, to a limited extent, in all types of debt and equity securities, and in certain other nonbanking activities. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Wachovia Corporation Winston-Salem, North Carolina Order Approving Notice to Engage in Underwriting and Dealing in All Types of Debt and Equity Securities on a Limited Basis Wachovia Corporation ("Wachovia"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. §1843(c)(8)) and section 225.24 of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.24) to acquire Interstate/Johnson Lane, Inc. ("IJL"), and thereby acquire control of its subsidiaries, including Interstate/Johnson Lane Corporation ("Company"), all in Charlotte, North Carolina. Wachovia would thereby engage in the following nonbanking activities: extending credit and servicing loans, in accordance with section 225.28(b)(1) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(1)); engaging in activities related to extending credit, in accordance with section 225.28(b)(2) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(2)); providing leasing services, in accordance with section 225.28(b)(3) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(3)); performing trust company functions, in accordance with section 225.28(b)(5) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(5)); providing financial and investment advisory services, in accordance with section 225.28(b)(6) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(6)); providing securities brokerage, riskless principal, private placement, futures commission merchant, and other agency transactional services, in accordance with section 225.28(b)(7) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(7)); underwriting and dealing in government obligations and money market instruments in which state member banks may underwrite and deal under 12 U.S.C. ï¿½§335 and 24(7) ("bank-eligible securities"), and engaging in investing and trading activities, in accordance with section 225.28(b)(8)(i) and (ii) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(8)(i) and (ii)); providing management consulting advice, in accordance with section 225.28(b)(9)(i) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(9)(i)); providing data processing and data transmission services, in accordance with section 225.28(b)(14) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(14)); underwriting and dealing in, to a limited extent, all types of debt and equity securities other than interests in open-end investment companies ("bank-ineligible securities"); and acting as the general partner of private investment limited partnerships that invest in assets in which a bank holding company is permitted to invest. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (64 Federal Register 4107 (1999)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the notice and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Wachovia, with total consolidated assets of approximately $65.6 billion, is the 17th largest banking organization in the United States. Wachovia operates subsidiary banks with branches in North Carolina, South Carolina, Florida, Georgia, and Virginia and engages through other subsidiaries in a broad range of permissible nonbanking activities. IJL, with total consolidated assets of $652.3 million, engages directly and indirectly in a broad range of securities underwriting and dealing, securities brokerage, investment advisory, and other activities. Wachovia proposes to acquire IJL by merging IJL with and into Wachovia, with Wachovia as the surviving corporation. Wachovia anticipates merging its existing section 20 subsidiary, Wachovia Capital Markets, Inc., Winston-Salem, North Carolina ("WCMI"), with and into Company immediately on consummation of the merger between Wachovia and IJL, with Company surviving the merger. After consummation of the proposal, Company would be renamed Wachovia Securities, Inc. Company is, and after consummation of the proposal will continue to be, registered as a broker-dealer with the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. §78a et seq. ), a member of the National Association of Securities Dealers, Inc. ("NASD"), and registered as a futures commission merchant with the Commodity Futures Trading Commission ("CFTC") under the Commodity Exchange Act (7 U.S.C. §2 et seq.). Accordingly, Company is, and will continue to be, subject to the record-keeping and reporting obligations, fiduciary standards, and other requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the Commodity Exchange Act, the SEC, the CFTC, and the NASD. Underwriting and Dealing in Bank-Ineligible Securities The Board has determined that, subject to the framework of prudential limitations established in previous decisions to address the potential for conflicts of interests, unsound banking practices, or other adverse effects, underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities is so closely related to banking as to be a proper incident thereto within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. The Board also has determined that underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities is consistent with section 20 of the Glass-Steagall Act (12 U.S.C. §377), provided that the company engaged in the activity derives no more than 25 percent of its gross revenues from underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible securities. Wachovia has committed that Company will conduct its underwriting and dealing activities using the methods and procedures and subject to the prudential limitations established by the Board in the Section 20 Orders. Wachovia also has committed that Company will conduct its bank-ineligible securities underwriting and dealing activities subject to the Board's revenue restriction. As a condition of this order, Wachovia is required to conduct the bank-ineligible securities activities of Company subject to the revenue restriction and Operating Standards established for section 20 subsidiaries ("Operating Standards"). Other Activities Approved by Regulation or Order The Board previously has determined by regulation that credit and credit-related activities; leasing activities; trust company functions; financial and investment advisory activities; securities brokerage, riskless principal, private placement, futures commission merchant, and other agency transactional activities; bank-eligible securities underwriting and dealing; investing and trading activities; management consulting activities; and data processing and transmission activities are closely related to banking within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. In addition, the Board previously has determined by order that private investment limited partnership activities are permissible for bank holding companies when conducted within certain limits. Wachovia has committed that it will conduct the activities of IJL and its subsidiaries, including Company, in accordance with the limitations set forth in Regulation Y and the Board's orders and interpretations relating to each of the proposed activities. Other Considerations In order to approve this notice, the Board also must determine that performance of the proposed activities is a proper incident to banking; that is, that the proposed activities "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public, such as greater convenience, increased competition, or gains in efficiency, that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices." As part of its review of these factors, the Board considers the financial and managerial resources of the notificant and its subsidiaries and the effect the transaction would have on such resources. In considering the financial resources of the notificant, the Board has reviewed the capitalization of Wachovia and Company in accordance with the standards set forth in the Section 20 Orders and has found the capitalization of each to be consistent with approval. This determination is based on all the facts of record, including Wachovia's projections of the volume of the bank-ineligible underwriting and dealing activities of Company. The Board also has reviewed the managerial resources of each of the entities involved in this proposal in light of examination reports and other supervisory information. In connection with the proposal, the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond ("Reserve Bank") has reviewed the policies and procedures of Company to ensure compliance with this order and the Section 20 Orders, including Company's operational and managerial infrastructure, computer, audit, and accounting systems, and internal risk management procedures and controls. On the basis of the Reserve Bank's review and all other facts of record, including the commitments provided in this case and the proposed managerial and risk management systems of Company, the Board has concluded that financial and managerial considerations are consistent with approval of the notice. In addition, the Board has carefully considered the competitive effects of the proposal. To the extent that IJL and its subsidiaries offer different types of products and services than Wachovia, the proposed acquisition would result in no loss of competition. In those markets where the product offerings of Wachovia's nonbanking subsidiaries overlap with the product offerings of IJL and its subsidiaries, such as securities brokerage, investment advisory activities, trust services, and insurance agency activities, there are numerous existing and potential competitors. Consummation of the proposal, therefore, would have a de minimis effect on competition in the market for these services, and the Board has concluded that the proposal would not have significantly adverse competitive effects in any relevant market. The Board expects that consummation of the proposal would provide added convenience to the customers of Wachovia and IJL. Wachovia has indicated that consummation of the proposal would expand the range of products and services available to its customers and those of IJL. Wachovia also has stated that the proposal would assist Wachovia to diversify its operations and, accordingly, would make it less vulnerable to possible downturns in individual business lines. In addition, there are public benefits to be derived from permitting capital markets to operate so that bank holding companies can make potentially profitable investments in nonbanking companies and from permitting banking organizations to allocate their resources in the manner they consider to be most efficient when such investments and actions are consistent, as in this case, with the relevant considerations under the BHC Act. Moreover, under the framework established in this order and the Section 20 Orders, consummation of the proposal is not likely to result in any significantly adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that performance of the proposed activities by Wachovia can reasonably be expected to produce public benefits that outweigh any potential adverse effects of the proposal. Accordingly, the Board has determined that the performance of the proposed activities by Wachovia is a proper incident to banking for purposes of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Conclusion On the basis of all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the notice should be, and hereby is, approved, subject to all the terms and conditions described in this order and the Section 20 Orders, as modified by the Modification Orders. The Board's approval of the proposal extends only to activities conducted within the limitations of this order, including the Board's reservation of authority to establish additional limitations to ensure that the activities of Company are consistent with safety and soundness, avoidance of conflicts of interests, and other relevant considerations under the BHC Act. Underwriting and dealing in any manner other than as approved in this order is not within the scope of the Board's approval and is not authorized for Company. The Board's determination also is subject to all the terms and conditions set forth in Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.25(c) (12 C.F.R. 225.7 and 225.25(c)), and to the Board's authority to require modification or termination of the activities of a bank holding company or any of its subsidiaries as the Board finds necessary to ensure compliance with, or to prevent evasion of, the provisions and purposes of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders issued thereunder. The Board's decision is specifically conditioned on compliance with all the commitments made in connection with the notice, including the commitments discussed in this order and the conditions set forth in this order and the Board regulations and orders noted above. The commitments and conditions are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision, and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. This proposal shall not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or the Reserve Bank, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective March 17, 1999. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Footnotes Wachovia also has requested the Board's approval to hold and exercise an option to acquire up to 19.9 percent of IJL's outstanding voting shares, if certain events occur. The option would expire on consummation of the proposal described above. IJL's other subsidiaries include Cap Trust Financial Advisors, LLC; IJL Capital Management, Inc.; and ISC Futures Corporation. Asset and ranking data are as of September 30, 1998. IJL currently engages in certain insurance activities and holds certain investments in real estate that are not permissible for bank holding companies. Wachovia has committed to conform, within two years of consummation of the proposal, all insurance activities of, and real estate investments held by, IJL and its subsidiaries to the requirements of section 4 of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and interpretations thereunder. Wachovia also has committed not to engage in any new real estate investment or development activities during the two-year conformance period. WCMI currently underwrites and deals in, to a limited extent, certain types of bank-ineligible securities. See Letter dated May 29, 1998, from Jennifer J. Johnson, Deputy Secretary of the Board, to John C. McLean, Jr. See J.P. Morgan & Co. Inc., et al. , 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 192 (1989), aff'd sub nom. Securities Industry Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System , 900 F.2d 360 (D.C. Cir. 1990); Citicorp , 73 Federal Reserve Bulletin 473 (1987), aff'd sub nom. Securities Industry Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System , 839 F.2d 47 (2d Cir.), cert. denied , 486 U.S. 1059 (1988), as modified by Review of Restrictions on Director, Officer and Employee Interlocks, Cross-Marketing Activities, and the Purchase and Sale of Financial Assets Between a Section 20 Subsidiary and an Affiliated Bank or Thrift , 61 Federal Register 57,679 (1996); Amendments to Restrictions in the Board's Section 20 Orders , 62 Federal Register 45,295 (1997); and Clarification to the Board's Section 20 Orders , 63 Federal Register 14,803 (1998) (collectively, "Section 20 Orders"). Compliance with the revenue limitation shall be calculated in accordance with the method stated in the Section 20 Orders, as modified by the Order Approving Modifications to the Section 20 Orders , 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 751 (1989); 10 Percent Revenue Limit on Bank-Ineligible Activities of Subsidiaries of Bank Holding Companies Engaged in Underwriting and Dealing in Securities , 61 Federal Register 48,953 (1996); and Revenue Limit on Bank-Ineligible Activities of Subsidiaries of Bank Holding Companies Engaged in Underwriting and Dealing in Securities , 61 Federal Register 68,750 (1996) (collectively, "Modification Orders"). In light of the fact that Wachovia proposes to acquire Company as a going concern, the Board believes that allowing Company to calculate compliance with the revenue limitation on an annualized basis during the first year after consummation of the proposal and thereafter on a rolling quarterly average basis would be consistent with the Section 20 Orders and the Glass-Steagall Act. See U.S. Bancorp , 84 Federal Reserve Bulletin 483 (1998); Dauphin Deposit Corporation , 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 672 (1991). Moreover, in view of the fact that Company is significantly larger than WCMI and will survive the merger with WCMI, the management structure of the proposed merged company, the activities of the merging companies and the proposed merged company, and the other aspects of this case, the Board believes the merger of WCMI and Company would not disqualify Company from calculating compliance with the revenue test in conformance with the annualized treatment described in this order. See KeyCorp , 84 Federal Reserve Bulletin 1075 (1998). 12 C.F.R. 225.200. Company may provide services that are necessary incidents to the proposed underwriting and dealing activities. Unless Company receives specific approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act to conduct the activities independently, any revenues from the incidental activities must be treated as ineligible revenues subject to the Board's revenue limitation. See 12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(1), (2), (3), (5), (6), (7), (8)(i) and (ii), (9)(i), and (14). See Dresdner Bank AG , 84 Federal Reserve Bulletin 361 (1998); Meridian Bancorp, Inc. , 80 Federal Reserve Bulletin 736 (1994). 12 U.S.C. §1843(c)(8). See 12 C.F.R. 225.26. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Meyer, Ferguson, and Gramlich.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the appointment of Stephen R. Malphrus as Staff Director for Management. His appointment is effective on June 1, 1999, when S. David Frost, the current Staff Director, will retire. The Staff Director for Management coordinates general management and administrative functions including human resources, planning and budgeting, information technology, and general logistic support. Mr. Malphrus joined the Board's staff in 1976. He was appointed an officer in 1983, and in 1988 he was promoted to Deputy Director of the Division of Information Resources Management (IRM). In 1991 he was promoted to the position of Director of IRM. In addition to his work in IRM, Mr. Malphrus has served as Assistant Staff Director for Management from 1983 to 1985 as well as on several details to other Board divisions. Mr. Malphrus holds a master's degree in management and attended the Stonier Graduate School of Banking.
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan Financial derivatives Before the Futures Industry Association, Boca Raton, Florida March 19, 1999 By far the most significant event in finance during the past decade has been the extraordinary development and expansion of financial derivatives. This morning I should like to evaluate the scope of these markets, the nature of the risks they entail, and some of the difficulties we encounter in managing those risks. At year-end, U.S. commercial banks, the leading players in global derivatives markets, reported outstanding derivatives contracts with a notional value of $33 trillion, a measure that has been growing at a compound annual rate of around 20 percent since 1990. Of the $33 trillion outstanding at year-end, only $4 trillion were exchange-traded derivatives; the remainder were off-exchange or over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives. The greater use of OTC derivatives doubtless reflects the attractiveness of customized over standardized products. But regulation is also a factor; the largest banks, in particular, seem to regard the regulation of exchange-traded derivatives, especially in the United States, as creating more burdens than benefits. As I have noted previously, the fact that the OTC markets function quite effectively without the benefits of the Commodity Exchange Act provides a strong argument for development of a less burdensome regime for exchange-traded financial derivatives. Of course, notional values are not meaningful measures of the risks associated with derivatives. Indeed, it makes no sense to talk about the market risk of derivatives; such risk can be measured meaningfully only on an overall portfolio basis, taking into account both derivatives and cash market positions, and the offsets between them. Clearly, the degree of counterparty credit risk on derivatives depends critically on the extent to which netting and margining procedures are employed to mitigate the risks. In the case of exchange-traded contracts, of course, daily variation settlements by clearing houses strictly limit, if not totally eliminate, such counterparty risks. In the case of OTC derivatives, counterparty credit exposures are far larger, though still a very small fraction of the notional amounts. On a loan equivalent basis, a reasonably good measure of such credit exposures, U.S. banks' counterparty exposures on such contracts are estimated to have totaled about $325 billion last December. This amounted to less than 6 percent of banks' total assets. Still, these credit exposures have been growing rapidly, more or less in line with the growth of the notional amounts. The leading role played by U.S. commercial and investment banks in the global OTC derivatives markets is documented in a Bank of International Settlements survey for last June. This survey estimated that size of the global OTC market at an aggregate notional value of $70 trillion, a figure that doubtless is closer to $80 trillion today. Once allowance is made for the double-counting of transactions between dealers, U.S. commercial banks' share of this global market was about 25 percent, and U.S. investment banks accounted for another 15 percent. While U.S. firms' 40 percent share exceeded that of dealers from any other country, the OTC markets are truly global markets, with significant market shares held by dealers in Canada, France, Germany, Japan, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom. Despite the world financial trauma of the past eighteen months, there is as yet no evidence of an overall slowdown in the pre-crisis derivative growth rates, either on or off exchanges. Indeed, the notional value of derivatives contracts outstanding at U.S. commercial banks grew more than 30 percent last year, the most rapid annual growth since 1994. Although episodes of extreme volatility have produced declines in the most highly leveraged contracts, the growth of the more "plain vanilla" products has continued apace or even accelerated. The reason that growth has continued despite adversity, or perhaps because of it, is that these new financial instruments are an increasingly important vehicle for unbundling risks. These instruments enhance the ability to differentiate risk and allocate it to those investors most able and willing to take it. This unbundling improves the ability of the market to engender a set of product and asset prices far more calibrated to the value preferences of consumers than was possible before derivative markets were developed. The product and asset price signals enable entrepreneurs to finely allocate real capital facilities to produce those goods and services most valued by consumers, a process that has undoubtedly improved national productivity growth and standards of living. Nonbank, as well as bank, users of these new financial instruments have increasingly embraced them as an integral part of their capital risk allocation and profit maximization. It should come as no surprise that the profitability of derivative products has been a major factor in the dramatic rise in large banks' noninterest earnings and doubtless is a factor in the significant gain in the overall finance industry's share of American corporate output during the past decade. In short, the value added of derivatives themselves derives from their ability to enhance the process of wealth creation. While the value of risk unbundling has been known for decades, the ability to create sophisticated instruments that could be effective in a dynamic market had to await the last decade's development of computer and telecommunications technologies. The ability to create and employ sophisticated financial products also galvanized the academic community to develop increasingly complex models of risk management. While recent history suggests that such models are useful, they are doubtless in need of much improvement--an issue to which I will return shortly. Yet beneath all of the evidence of the value of derivatives to a market economy, there remains a deep seated fear that while individual risks seem clearly to have been reduced through derivative facilitated diversification, systemic risk has become enlarged, as a consequence. Without question, derivatives facilitate the implementation of leveraged trading strategies, though the very technology that has made derivatives feasible has also improved the ability to leverage without derivatives. Nonetheless, the possibility of increased systemic risk does appear to be an issue that requires fuller understanding. We should point out, first, the obvious. Overall, derivatives are mainly a zero sum game: one counterparty's market loss is the other counterparty's market gain. Counterparty credit exposures on OTC derivatives are a different issue and the source of much of the systemic concerns. Such losses rose to record levels in the third quarter of 1998. Nonetheless, the rate of loss remained well below that on banks' loan portfolios. Moreover, the counterparty credit losses in the third quarter can be traced primarily to the extraordinary events in Russia, which produced many defaults on ruble forward contracts. In the fourth quarter such losses dropped sharply, albeit not to the very low pre-crisis rate. The bulk of the losses reported by the major derivative houses for the financially turbulent third quarter of last year reflected declines in the market values of their underlying trading positions, especially in equities, commodities, and emerging market debt. Derivative instruments were bystanders. They may well have intensified the losses in underlying markets, but they were scarcely the major players. Yet, through the past decades' phenomenal growth of the derivative market, there has not been a significant downturn in the economy overall that has tested the resilience of derivative markets. (I operate on the premise that neither human nature nor the business cycle has been rendered obsolete.) While nothing short of a major economic adjustment is likely to test the underlying robustness of the derivative markets, there are reasons to believe that there are some fundamental strengths in these markets. First, despite the growing use of more exotic over-the-counter instruments, the vast majority of trades are relatively straightforward interest rate and currency swaps. The market risk on such swaps is presumably less daunting to individual counterparties than their underlying exposures, or presumably the swaps would never have been initiated. Moreover, the credit risks are increasingly subject to comprehensive netting and margin requirements that, although they do not fully remove the risk, significantly ameliorate it. And so far as banks are concerned, capital requirements are applied to such risks as they are to loans that create credit risks quite similar to those of derivatives. Hence, although one may harbor concerns about the overall capital adequacy of banks and their degree of leverage, there is little to distinguish such concerns between risk adjusted on- and off-balance sheet claims. The one area of risk that needs more thought is so-called potential future exposure. At any particular point in time only a small fraction of the notional value of derivative contracts are in the money--that is, have a positive market value. Because prices will doubtless change in the future, those contracts with negative or even positive values have the potential of larger positive values and, hence, a potential credit loss on default. That future potential for loss upon counterparty default will differ by the nature of the contract. For purposes of supervisory risk-based capital requirements, potential future exposure (over and above the current market value of derivatives, if positive) is currently estimated by separating derivatives into categories based on the underlying instrument (interest rate, exchange rate, commodity, equity, etc.) and the remaining maturity. The capital requirement is then derived by applying fixed factors to each category that reflect differences in the price volatilities of the instruments and the structure of the contracts. Interest rate swaps (70 percent of the notional value of OTC derivatives) have limited long-term loss potential, primarily because the contracts do not provide for an exchange of principal and the exposure is effectively amortized as interest payments are exchanged over the life of the contract. Foreign exchange, commodity, and equity derivatives, of course, entail far greater exposures, either because principal amounts are exchanged or because the underlying's price is more volatile. This approach to regulatory capital requirements is not altogether satisfactory. The most sophisticated derivative dealers parse their derivatives book in more detail. And certainly a single point estimate cannot capture the range of losses that might reasonably be experienced. Hence, in evaluating derivatives risk, far more stress testing of the lower probability outcomes is a necessity. Even a one in 500 occurrence does happen once every 500 times, and if that occurrence could threaten the franchise value of the derivatives counterparty it is an important concern for risk aversion. But we have to be careful of how we view these ostensibly low probability events. They are low probability only if we presume that the reality from which these events derive is best represented by a single bell-shaped probability distribution, be it a normal distribution or even a fat-tailed one. Modern quantitative approaches to risk measurement and risk management take as their starting point historical experience with market price fluctuations, which is statistically summarized in probability distributions. We live in what is mostly a stable economic system in which market imbalances give rise to continuous and inevitable moves toward equilibrium resolutions. However, the violence of the responses to what seemed to be relatively mild imbalances in southeast Asia in 1997 and throughout the global economy in August and September of 1998 have raised the possibility of a discontinuous adjustment process. Almost all the time investors adopt strategies that seek profit only in a relatively long- term context, fostering the propensity for convergence toward equilibrium that ordinarily characterizes financial markets. But from time to time (and quite possibly with increasing frequency) the resulting propensity toward convergent equilibrium has given way as investors suffer an abrupt collapse of comprehension of, and confidence in, future economic events. Risk aversion accordingly rises dramatically and deliberative trading strategies are replaced by rising fear-induced disengagement. Yield spreads on relatively risky assets widen dramatically. In the more extreme manifestation, the inability to differentiate among degrees of risk drives trading strategies to ever more liquid instruments. Strategies become so tentative that traders want the capacity to reverse decisions at minimum cost. As a consequence, even among riskless assets, illiquidity premiums rise dramatically as investors seek the heavily traded "on-the-run" issues. History tells us that sharp reversals in confidence happen abruptly, most often with little advance notice. They are self-reinforcing processes that can compress into a very short time period. Panic market reactions are characterized by a dramatic shift to maximize short term value, and are an extension of human behavior that manifests itself in all forms of human interaction--a set of responses that does not seem to have changed over the generations. I defy anyone to distinguish a speculative price pattern for 1999 from one for 1899 if the charts specify neither the dates nor the levels of the prices. If this paradigm turns out to be the appropriate representation of the way our economy and our financial markets will work in the future, it has significant implications for risk management. Probability distributions estimated largely, or exclusively, over cycles excluding periods of panic will underestimate the probability of extreme price movements because they fail to capture a secondary peak at the extreme negative tail that reflects the probability of occurrence of a panic. Furthermore, joint distributions estimated over panicless periods will underestimate the degree of correlation between asset returns during panics when fear and disengagement by investors results in simultaneous declines (or, in rare instances, increases) in values as investors no longer adequately differentiate among degrees of risk and liquidity. Consequently, the benefits of portfolio diversification will tend to be significantly overestimated by current models. Such a view of the world would also have important implications for approaches to the prudential oversight of capital adequacy for banks and other financial institutions. Regulatory minimum capital requirements for banks' trading portfolios are now based on the banks' own internal risk measurement models. Furthermore, regulators are exploring the potential for using an internal models approach to credit risk in the banking book. Some may now argue that the periodic emergence of financial panics implies a need to abandon models-based approaches to regulatory capital and to return to traditional approaches based on regulatory risk measurement schemes. In my view, however, this would be a major mistake. Regulatory risk measurement schemes are simpler and much less accurate than banks' risk measurement models. Consequently, they provide banks with the motive and the opportunity to engage in regulatory arbitrage that seriously undermines the regulatory standard and frustrates the underlying safety and soundness objective. Specifically, they induce banks to reduce holdings of assets where risks and regulatory capital are overestimated by regulators and increase holdings of assets where risks are underestimated by regulators. It would be far better to provide incentives for banks to enhance their risk modeling procedures by taking account of the potential existence and implications of discontinuous episodes. Scenario analysis can highlight vulnerabilities to the kind of flights to quality and flights to liquidity that seem increasingly frequent. Stress testing of correlation assumptions can reveal the disappearance of apparent diversification benefits in such scenarios. Stress testing requirements already are part of the internal models approach to capital requirements for market risks in bank trading accounts. Stress testing of estimates of counterparty credit risks should also be required. The logic is the same as for market risk. The factors that are used to determine supervisory capital requirements for counterparty credit exposures are based on statistical analyses of non-panic periods. Moreover, during panic periods the usual assumption that potential future exposures are uncorrelated with default probabilities becomes invalid. For example, the collapse of emerging market currencies can greatly increase the probability of defaults by residents of those countries at the same time that exposures on swaps in which those residents are obligated to pay foreign currency are increasing dramatically. Supervisors should avoid any temptation to increase the supervisory factors for potential future exposure to address these crisis scenarios, which have vastly different implications for different combinations of contracts and counterparties. But they can and should review the requirements relating to the scenarios to be simulated by the bank and the incorporation of stress test results into the policies and limits set by the bank's management and board of directors. As we approach the twenty-first century, both banks and nonbanks will need to continually reassess whether their risk management practices have kept pace with their own evolving activities and with changes in financial market dynamics and readjust accordingly. Should they succeed I am quite confident that market participants will continue to increase their reliance on derivatives to unbundle risks and thereby enhance the process of wealth creation.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application of Bay Port Financial Corporation to acquire Bay Port State Bank, both of Bay Port, Michigan. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Bay Port Financial Corporation Bay Port, Michigan Order Approving Formation of a Bank Holding Company and Acquisition of a Bank Bay Port Financial Corporation ("Bay Port") has requested the Board's approval under section 3(a)(1) of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act") (12 U.S.C. § 1842(a)(1)) to become a bank holding company by acquiring Bay Port State Bank, Bay Port, Michigan ("Bank"). Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (64 Federal Register 4106 (1999)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the proposal and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 3 of the BHC Act. Bay Port is a nonoperating corporation created for the purpose of acquiring Bank. Bank is the 148th largest commercial banking organization in Michigan, controlling approximately $33.2 million in deposits, representing less than 1 percent of total deposits in commercial banking organizations in the state ("state deposits"). Consummation of this proposal would result in a change in the shareholdings of the current shareholders of Bank, and would result in one shareholder becoming the largest shareholder of the newly formed bank holding company by acquiring control of more than 25 percent of the voting shares of Bay Port. This individual is also the largest shareholder of another Michigan bank holding company, First of Huron Corporation, Bad Axe, Michigan ("FHC"). FHC is the 57th largest commercial banking organization in Michigan, controlling approximately $142.9 million in deposits, representing less than 1 percent of state deposits. If the two organizations were combined, the resulting organization would become the 44th largest commercial banking organization in Michigan, controlling approximately $176.1 million in deposits, representing less than 1 percent of state deposits. Bay Port and FHC compete in the Huron County, Michigan, banking market. In the Huron County banking market, Bay Port is the fifth largest commercial banking organization, controlling deposits of $33.2 million, representing 7.6 percent of total deposits in commercial banking organizations in the market ("market deposits"). FHC is the largest commercial banking organization in the market, controlling deposits of $120.4 million, representing 27.7 percent of market deposits. If the two organizations were combined, the resulting organization would be the largest commercial banking organization in the Huron County banking market, controlling deposits of $153.6 million, representing 35.3 percent of market deposits. The Herfindahl-Hirschman Index ("HHI") would increase by 422 points to 2052. The increase in the HHI would exceed the Department of Justice Merger Guidelines ("Merger Guidelines"). The Board notes, however, that the controlling shareholder of Bay Port owns only 14.4 percent of the voting shares of FHC. The shareholder, who has been a passive investor, has not been involved in the operations of either institution, and numerous other shareholders own significant percentages of FHC's voting shares. The Board also notes that even if the two organizations were combined, nine banking and thrift competitors would operate in the market, and three of these competitors, in addition to Bay Port and FHC, would each control more than 10 percent of market deposits. Finally, the market is reasonably attractive for entry and has experienced both de novo entry and entry by acquisition during the past two years. Based on these and all other facts of record, and for the reasons discussed in this order, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposal is not likely to result in any significantly adverse effects on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in the Huron County banking market or in any other relevant banking market. The BHC Act also requires the Board, in acting on an application, to consider the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the companies and banks involved in a proposal, the convenience and needs of the community to be served, and certain other supervisory factors. The Board has carefully considered the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of Bay Port and Bank, the structure of the proposed transaction, the resources of the combined organization, and other supervisory factors, in light of all the facts of record. As part of its consideration, the Board has reviewed relevant reports of examination and other supervisory information prepared by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ("FDIC"). The Board notes that Bay Port proposes to issue preferred stock as a part of the proposal and to provide additional capital to Bank. As a result of the additional capital after consummation of the proposal, Bank, which currently is undercapitalized, would become adequately capitalized. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that considerations relating to the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of Bay Port and Bank and the other supervisory factors that the Board must consider under section 3 of the BHC Act weigh in favor of approval of the proposal. In considering the convenience and needs factor, the Board has reviewed Bank's record under the Community Reinvestment Act ("CRA"), in light of examinations of the CRA performance record of Bank by the FDIC, the institution's appropriate federal financial supervisory agency. Bank received a "satisfactory" rating at its most recent examination of CRA performance. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that convenience and needs considerations, including the CRA performance record of Bank, are consistent with approval of the proposal. Based on the foregoing, and in light of all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the application should be, and hereby is, approved. Approval of the application is specifically conditioned on compliance by Bay Port and Bank with all the commitments made in connection with the proposal. For purposes of this transaction, the commitments and conditions referred to in this order shall be deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The proposal shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day after the effective date of this order, or later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective March 22, 1999. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Footnotes All banking data are as of June 30, 1998. The Board previously has determined that if an applicant's principal shareholder is associated with other one-bank holding companies, the proposed formation of a one-bank holding company is analyzed by the Board using the same standard that would be used for a multibank holding company acquisition. See Nebraska State Bank, 62 Federal Reserve Bulletin 638 (1976). The Huron County banking market is approximated by Huron County, Michigan, minus Sebewaing Township. See 49 Federal Register 26,823 (June 29, 1984). Under the Merger Guidelines, a market in which the post-merger HHI is more than 1800 is considered highly concentrated. The Department of Justice has informed the Board that a bank merger or acquisition generally will not be challenged (in the absence of other factors indicating anticompetitive effects) unless the post-merger HHI is at least 1800 and the merger increases the HHI by more than 200 points. The Department of Justice has stated that the higher than normal HHI thresholds for screening bank mergers for anticompetitive effects implicitly recognize the competitive effects of limited-purpose lenders and other nondepository financial entities. 12 U.S.C. § 2901 et seq. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Meyer, and Gramlich. Absent and not voting: Governor Ferguson.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced withdrawal of its proposed "Know Your Customer" regulation that was issued for public comment on December 7, 1998. The Board, acting along with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the Office of Thrift Supervision, withdrew the proposal in response to comments received. An interagency joint statement is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced final amendments to Regulation CC that will facilitate banks' efforts for Year 2000 readiness. The amendments will allow banks that consummate merger transactions on or after July 1, 1998, and before March 1, 2000, greater time to implement software changes related to the merger. The amendments allow these banks to be treated as separate banks until March 1, 2001. Beginning in March 2000, banks that merge will be subject to the normal one-year transition period. The Board's action recognizes that banks are currently dedicating their automation resources to addressing Year 2000 and leap year computer problems. The extension of the merger transition period will enable merged banks that were Year 2000 compliant to be treated as separate entities, and to delay merging their systems until after the key century rollover and leap year events of Year 2000. This will enable these banks to avoid reprogramming and retesting Year 2000 compliant systems prior to the spring of the Year 2000. The extension should also help ensure that banks have sufficient resources to address unanticipated Year 2000 problems that may arise at the turn of the century. The Board's notice is attached. |
Testimony of Governor Laurence H. Meyer Hedge funds Before the Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit, Committee on Banking and Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives March 24, 1999 I welcome this opportunity to discuss the Federal Reserve's supervisory actions in the aftermath of the near-collapse of Long Term Capital Management (LTCM). Today's hearings cover an important topic. The LTCM incident merits study to ensure that the lessons it provides are sufficiently understood and that constructive action is taken to effectively reduce the potential for similar events in the future, without compromising the efficiency of global capital markets. The primary issues raised by the LTCM incident appear to revolve around the broad theme of how to control the leverage and risk taking of unregulated financial institutions--in particular, hedge funds--so that they do not become a source of systemic risk or jeopardize taxpayer funds via the federal safety net. In our market-based economy, the discipline provided by creditors and counterparties is the primary mechanism for "regulating" this risk taking. In the case of LTCM, this discipline appears to have been compromised. Weaknesses in several key elements of the risk management processes at some creditors and counterparties were magnified by competitive pressures, resulting in risk exposures that may not have been fully understood or adequately managed. Less-than-robust risk management systems, evidenced by an over reliance on collateral, compromised both the assessment of counterparty creditworthiness and the measurement and control of risk exposures at several financial institutions. To be sure, the lessons stemming from this episode have not gone unlearned, and there is no lack of effort to identify and implement appropriate public policy and private sector responses to the potential risks posed by hedge funds. These efforts range from private industry and supervisory initiatives aimed at strengthening the credit risk management infrastructures at financial institutions, to consideration of enhanced disclosure by global financial institutions, to those evaluating the costs and benefits of direct regulation of hedge funds. Efforts to promote market discipline by strengthening the risk management systems of creditors and counterparties offer the most immediate and efficient way to accomplish the desired objective of minimizing the potential for systemic risk arising from the activities of hedge funds. Supervisory oversight of bank risk management practices, including the issuance of guidance on sound practices, reinforces the market discipline entailed in banks' assessment and surveillance of the risks taken by their counterparties. The recent guidance on sound risk management practices issued by the Basle Committee on Bank Supervision, the Federal Reserve, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) represent significant steps toward achieving the goal of enhancing market discipline. I commend the Subcommittee's efforts to advance public awareness of these efforts by holding today's hearings on this recent supervisory guidance. Of course, public sector work on promoting more effective market discipline on hedge funds and other entities that might employ leverage is by no means complete. The guidance and other supervisory efforts we are discussing here today target primarily commercial banking institutions. Work underway by the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) to issue similar guidance regarding securities firms' relationships with hedge funds is another important step. Although not directly focused on the issue of hedge funds, international efforts to enhance public disclosure of financial institution risk profiles may also provide meaningful input. In this context, the recent consultative paper "Recommendations for Public Disclosure of Trading and Derivatives Activities of Banks and Securities Firms," issued jointly last month by the Basle Committee on Bank Supervision and IOSCO, makes an important contribution to the discussion of possible public policy responses. In the United States, the President's Working Group on Financial Markets is considering a number of issues and policy responses regarding leveraged institutions and their relationships with their counterparties. Its report is expected in the near future. Despite these various public sector initiatives, the real key to effective market discipline lies in the players themselves--the private sector. The market has clearly learned from the LTCM incident and our supervisory staff has seen significant tightening of credit standards on hedge funds as well as improvements in the risk management processes at major banking institutions. Here, too, much work remains. Accordingly, we look forward to the recommendations of the Counterparty Risk Management Policy Group (CRMPG) regarding private sector initiatives for enhancing the credit risk management practices of creditors and their leveraged counterparties. Subcommittees of this private industry group, comprised of major international banks, securities firms, and hedge funds, are investigating avenues for improving measures of derivative exposures and the exchange of information between counterparties. The findings of the group will reinforce the efforts to promote enhancement of risk management systems at banking institutions and are expected to advance sound practices in key areas such as the type of information that can be exchanged between hedge funds and their counterparties without compromising hedge funds' proprietary information. Supervisory Efforts by the Federal Reserve in the Aftermath of LTCM In its role as a bank supervisor, the Federal Reserve's primary contribution to advancing market discipline lies in its responsibility to ensure that the risk management processes at individual banking organizations are commensurate with the size and complexity of their portfolios. We promote the adoption of sound risk management practices through on-site reviews and targeted examinations of banking organizations and by regularly issuing supervisory guidance to both banks and our supervisory staff. This morning I will briefly summarize recent Federal Reserve efforts in both of these areas and will explain how Federal Reserve supervisory guidance provides direction to banking institutions and examiners that supports, and is consistent with, that issued by the Basle Committee on Bank Supervision and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. President McDonough's testimony answers the Subcommittee's questions regarding the recent guidance on highly leveraged institutions issued by the Basle Committee on Bank Supervision and the regulation of hedge funds in other developed countries. Immediately following the LTCM episode, the Federal Reserve detailed staff from the Board of Governors and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to conduct special reviews at those state-member banks with significant hedge fund relationships to identify: the nature and magnitude of bank credit exposures to hedge funds; the comprehensiveness of banks' due diligence processes regarding hedge funds; the quantitative controls used in managing exposures to hedge funds; the adequacy of management information systems and internal controls with regard to hedge fund counterparties; and, the extent to which the LTCM relationship was an exception to banks' normal hedge fund relationships. Our review found that U.S. commercial banking exposures to hedge funds are primarily counterparty exposures arising from OTC derivatives contracts. Overall, direct unsecured loans to hedge funds have traditionally been a small portion of bank lending, even at the larger global institutions. As of the third quarter of 1998, direct, unsecured loans disbursed by all U.S. commercial banks to hedge funds were estimated at $1.7 billion, or approximately one percent of Tier 1 capital of those banking institutions with exposures to hedge funds. This amount represents only direct lending arrangements and includes $170 million in loans dispersed by U.S. banks to LTCM under a $900 million shared national credit facility (most of which was participated to foreign banking organizations). It does not include the $900 million of equity investments in LTCM made by three U.S. banking organizations in September of 1998. As of the third quarter of 1998, only five U.S. commercial banks had material OTC derivative exposures to hedge fund counterparties. Credit exposures arising from these relationships consisted of the current marked-to-market value of the derivative transactions as well as the potential exposure that might arise from future changes in these market values (the potential future exposure or PFE). All of the banking institutions mark their derivative positions to market on a daily basis and require any net current market value owed to them to be fully collateralized, generally with high quality securities, such as U.S. Treasuries or sovereign debt from G-10 countries. For those hedge funds judged to be of lower credit quality, banks generally require the posting of collateral or margin above current market values to protect against the potential future exposure of derivative contracts with these counterparties. With regard to LTCM, the review found that the fund was atypical among hedge fund counterparties in both the size of its positions and the amount of leverage it employed. While several hedge funds had larger net asset values (capital) than LTCM and a few funds may have employed the same or comparable book leverage, LTCM's combination of size and leverage was singular. Investigations of the management of the LTCM account at several institutions found that an over-reliance on the collateralization of the current market value of derivatives positions and the stature of LTCM's managers led to compromises in several key elements of the credit risk management process. In some cases, assessments of LTCM's creditworthiness was found to be less than adequate as a result of limited information on the fund's true risk profile and risk management capabilities. In particular, exposure measures and scenario analyses that could have identified potential losses under stress situations were found to be less than adequate. Importantly, while LTCM was found to be atypical among hedge fund counterparties, shortcomings in the risk management of hedge fund counterparty exposures appeared to extend beyond this one fund. In several cases, the review team found inadequate counterparty risk management policies and procedures. In others, while formal policies and procedures may have existed, gaps between policy and practices were identified. Specifically, the review team found that the due diligence and ongoing risk assessments of hedge funds were largely qualitative and lacked quantitative rigor. The review also found compromises in the limit systems and credit exposure measurement methodologies employed, including limited use of counterparty exposure stress testing. In particular, measures of the potential future exposures arising from derivative positions with hedge fund counterparties were found in need of significant enhancements at some banks. In general, banks placed undue reliance on the collateralization of current mark-to-market exposures and underestimated the potential exposure that could arise under difficult market conditions. The findings of this special review served as a primary source for the Basle Supervisory Committee's recent report, "Banks' Interactions with Highly Leveraged Institutions." Federal Reserve staff played a major role in shaping the scope of the Basle documents, drafted significant portions of early versions of the Basle Committee's main paper, and provided significant input into its sound practices paper. President McDonough's testimony discusses, at length, the content of the Basle documents including the sound practices they identify. The Board of Governors fully endorses both Basle documents. The Basle guidance has been incorporated in Federal Reserve guidance by direct reference in our recent Supervision and Regulation Letter, "Supervisory Guidance Regarding Counterparty Credit Risk Management" ( ). They have been transmitted by the appropriate Federal Reserve Banks to all state-member banks and holding companies with significant hedge fund exposures and to all Federal Reserve staff supervising those institutions. Moreover, the March 1999 update to the Federal Reserve's will incorporate the specific sound practices identified in the Basle documents in a special hedge fund subsection of its existing Counterparty Credit Risk Management section. The results of the targeted reviews conducted in the third and fourth quarter of 1998 have been shared with each institution reviewed, and supervisory plans tailored to each institution's particular circumstances have been developed. Supervisory staff is monitoring each bank's management of hedge fund counterparty exposures as well as the bank's efforts to address any identified risk management shortcomings. I understand that other G-10 bank supervisors have translated the Basle documents into the appropriate foreign language and transmitted them to industry associations and/or institutions with hedge fund relationships. In some cases, supervisors have taken steps to monitor bank hedge fund exposures and bank initiatives to enhance internal counterparty credit risk management systems. Private Sector Response in the Aftermath of LTCM As would be expected coming out of the LTCM event and other market difficulties in 1998, banking institutions, in their own self-interest, appear to be well underway in making enhancements to their credit risk management systems. With regard to the due diligence process, banks are requesting and receiving more information from their hedge fund counterparties, such as value-at-risk calculations, position concentrations, aggregate off-balance sheet positions, and the results of stress tests. Banks have also increased the rigor of the due diligence processes applied to hedge fund counterparties, including the use of their own quantitative risk management specialists to conduct on-site reviews of hedge fund risk management systems. Increasingly, hedge funds recognize that they need to provide their counterparties with more information. All parties are looking for remedies short of having funds disclose specific position information that they feel might compromise the integrity of their proprietary investment strategies. It is expected that a major contribution in this area will be made by the Counterparty Risk Management Policy Group. Banks are also moving to develop more realistic counterparty credit risk exposure measures including the development of various types of stress testing of their credit risk exposures to major counterparties. Some banks are reviewing their policies regarding how, when, and with what type of counterparties they will require collateralization of potential future exposures. In general, all of the banks reviewed last year have conducted their own internal assessments of lessons learned and, in their own self-interest, are reassessing their business strategies regarding hedge funds and moving forward to make necessary enhancements to their risk management processes. Federal Reserve Board Guidance on Counterparty Credit Risk Management Federal Reserve supervisory guidance that is particularly pertinent to issues surrounding bank relationships with hedge funds was first issued in the Federal Reserve's Trading Activities Manual (TAM), published in 1994. This manual discusses general sound practices for managing the market, credit, legal, liquidity and operating risks involved in bank trading and derivatives activities. The manual also provides guidance in other areas such as accounting, capital requirements, financial performance measurement, ethics and regulatory reporting and compliance. It also provides over 35 individual instrument profiles that describe the risks and supervisory issues involved in each product. Over the years, this manual has come to serve as a definitive industry resource on sound risk management practices as they relate to trading and derivative activities. Revision of the guidance in this manual is an ongoing process. The manual was substantively revised in 1998 and is updated each March and September. In 1994, the Federal Reserve also issued specific guidance focusing on hedge funds. Both this specific guidance and our manual emphasize the importance of sound financial analysis of counterparties that can quickly adjust their risk profiles. In reviewing the 1998 financial performance of large banking institutions, a number of general lessons on how, where, and why breakdowns in risk management processes can occur have been re-emphasized to both banks and bank supervisors. As has been the case in most instances of bank losses, competition, the pursuit of earnings, and the general press of business often result in the introduction of risk exposures for which existing risk management infrastructures may not be sufficient. Moreover, breakdowns in risk management most often arise in product, customer, and business lines that experience significant growth and above normal initial profitability. In an effort to emphasize the importance of some of the general lessons highlighted by events over the past two years and to advance the application of these lessons in the interests of avoiding future difficulties in other areas, the Federal Reserve issued its supervisory letter on counterparty credit risk management on February 1 of this year to provide general guidance. The guidance is aimed at providing supervisors and bank management insights on those elements of counterparty credit risk management systems at large complex banking organizations that may need special review and enhancement in light of the rapid changes taking place in banking and financial markets. The guidance is targeted at relationships with all types of bank counterparties, including hedge funds. It reiterates and expands upon fundamental principles of counterparty credit risk management that are covered in existing supervisory materials of the Federal Reserve and other regulators, and in established industry standards. It emphasizes areas that, while generally understood for several years, have become increasingly important given the global linkages of financial markets. In particular, the important inter-relationships between market and credit risks and their effect on the magnitude of derivative counterparty exposures, especially in times of stress, is an increasingly important area that merits the attention of all banks engaged in derivative activities. Accordingly, this issue is discussed at length in our recent guidance. From a broad perspective, the guidance advises banking institutions to focus sufficient resources on ensuring the adequacy of all elements of their counterparty credit risk management systems, especially for activities, business lines and products experiencing significant growth, above normal profitability or risk profiles, and large potential future exposures. Recognizing that strong internal controls and internal audit functions are the first line of defense in avoiding problems, the guidance also advises institutions to ensure that internal audit and independent risk management functions focus on growth, profitability and risk criteria in targeting their reviews. Institutions are also advised to calibrate their credit risk management policies and procedures to the risk profiles of specific types of counterparties and instruments. Too often, general policies and procedures developed to cover all types of counterparty exposures can lead to important gaps in the assessment of risks to specific types of counterparties. The guidance specifically addresses four basic elements of counterparty credit risk management systems: the assessment of counterparty creditworthiness; credit risk exposure measurement; the use of credit enhancements and contractual covenants; and credit risk exposure limit-setting and monitoring systems. With regard to the assessment of counterparty creditworthiness, the guidance points out the need for policies and procedures that are tailored to the risk profiles of counterparties and for internal controls that ensure actual practices conform with these policies. In complying with this guidance in the context of their hedge fund relationships, banks are expected to have specific policies for assessing the unique risk profiles of hedge funds, including the scope of due diligence analysis and ongoing monitoring to be conducted, the type of information required from hedge fund counterparties, and the nature of stress testing used in assessing credit exposures to hedge funds. As mentioned above, the Federal Reserve has adopted the Basle Committee's recent guidance on sound practices governing bank relationships with hedge funds and expects that banks' internal policies regarding their hedge fund relationships will be brought into compliance with those sound practices. In the area of exposure measurement, the Federal Reserve's guidance also points out that potential future exposure measures are becoming more important in managing the credit exposures of derivatives positions. Accordingly, institutions must ensure that potential future exposures for both secured and unsecured positions are measured realistically and are better incorporated into measurement and limit systems. It also advises institutions to step-up existing programs to enhance credit risk exposure measures by incorporating netting and portfolio effects. The need for better stress testing and scenario analysis of credit exposures that incorporates the interaction of credit and market risks is also identified. In essence, the guidance points to the need for a better balance between the qualitative and quantitative elements of exposure assessment and management for all types of counterparties. Conformance of Federal Reserve Supervisory Guidance with Other Supervisors The development of supervisory guidance on sound risk management, like industry practices, is an evolutionary process enhanced by experience. It could be argued that, to a large extent, the fundamental principles of assessing counterparty credit risks, the measuring and stress testing of the potential future exposures of derivative positions, and the dangers of over-reliance on collateral have been well documented in supervisory guidance for several years. However, given advances in technology and the increasing pace of financial innovation and market interdependency, the techniques and means used to implement these principles are under constant development and refinement. Accordingly, supervisors must endeavor to ensure that their guidance is as up-to-date as possible. As mentioned above, our most recent guidance both re-emphasizes and supplements existing Federal Reserve Board principles and guidelines. Although different supervisors start from different bases of existing guidance, we believe the current body of Federal Reserve guidance on the risk management of trading, derivatives, and other capital markets activities is entirely consistent with that issued over the years by the Basle Committee on Bank Supervision and by other U.S. bank regulators. The recent guidance released by the Basle Committee, "Sound Practices for Interactions with Highly Leveraged Institutions (HLIs)," covers the same material and provides the same direction to supervised institutions for a specific type of counterparty as that addressing all types of counterparties contained in existing Federal Reserve guidance. Moreover, as was mentioned above, the specific Basle guidance has been fully incorporated in the soon to be released updates to our Trading and Capital Markets Activities Manual. In addition, existing Federal Reserve guidance is also consistent with that issued by the OCC. In its most recent supplemental guidance to Banking Circular 277 and the Comptroller's Handbook for National Bank Examiners, the Comptroller identifies thirteen lessons learned from events over the past two years. Although Federal Reserve guidance on trading and derivative activities may use different formats, it conveys the same direction and sound practices to supervised institutions embodied in each of these thirteen lessons. For example, the Comptroller's recent guidance discusses the need for senior management and board of directors to understand the limits of their price risk measurement systems and goes on to emphasize the need for stress testing such exposures. Supervisory guidance of the Federal Reserve has long advised of the importance of stress testing market risks and the conveyance of these reports to senior management and the board of directors so that they can fully understand the institution's risk exposure and adjust risk tolerances accordingly. Our most recent guidance on the measurement of potential future exposures and stress testing supplements this prior guidance. Perhaps the most importance guidance emphasized by the Federal Reserve and the OCC is that which advises banks and examiners to ensure that sufficient risk management targeted at new, growing, and highly profitable activities. As mentioned above, such areas have been the source of most bank losses. In summary, the Federal Reserve believes that its existing supervisory guidance on trading and derivatives activities at state-member banks and bank holding companies is entirely consistent with, and complementary to, that of the Basle Committee on Bank Supervision and the OCC. Together, this supervisory guidance offers a clear set of sound practices that, when implemented appropriately, serves to enhance and support market discipline by strengthening the risk management processes of major creditors and counterparties. Supervisory Lessons Learned Events in developing and developed financial markets and the various types of losses posted by banking institutions over the past two years, including recent events surrounding bank hedge fund relationships, have also provided supervisors and examiners with important lessons. From one perspective, we would like to think that effective supervision contributed to the ability of U.S. institutions to weather the financial storms of the past two years. Our reviews indicated and the financial results illustrate that, while the LTCM incident and other episodes over the past two years may have significantly impacted earnings, they did not threaten the solvency of any U.S. commercial banking institution. Still, our review of our own performance suggests room for enhancements on our part. Within the context of the Federal Reserve's risk-focused approach to supervision, major counterparty exposures are generally reviewed during both regular and targeted reviews of banks' derivatives and counterparty credit risk systems. Our internal reviews found several cases where examiners, like banking institutions, may have placed too much emphasis on the full collateralization of current exposures. In the past, examiners have generally focused supervisory resources on assessing the risks entailed in unsecured credit exposures. Moving forward, our guidance instructs examiners to incorporate measures of potential future exposure in stratifying samples and selecting counterparties and transactions upon which to base targeted testing of practices and internal controls, regardless of the collateralization of current market value exposures. Examiners are also instructed to review the results and adequacy of an institution's stress testing and scenario analyses in assessing both the magnitude and management of credit exposure. The need to emphasize in-depth transaction testing is another important supervisory lesson learned (or relearned) in the LTCM case, and this is emphasized in our supervisory guidance. The increasing complexity of financial markets and banking activities places a premium on focusing supervisory resources at high risk areas and conducting sufficient transaction testing to identify variances between policy and practice. Increasingly this involves conducting transaction testing with highly qualified specialists. Targeting resources at retaining, recruiting and developing such specialists as well as providing them automated tools to enhance their efficiency and effectiveness is a top supervisory priority at the Federal Reserve. Closing In closing, I would like to emphasize the significant amount of attention that the LTCM incident, in particular, and bank relationships with hedge funds, in general, have received, and continue to receive, from both public and private venues. Although market discipline may not have worked in preventing the LTCM event in the first place, the marketplace has reacted appropriately and we have learned much to carry us forward. Banks and securities firms, in their own self-interest, have tightened their risk management processes as they relate to hedge funds. Hedge funds now face a new reality of tougher counterparty oversight. Supervisors are also enhancing their oversight of banks' hedge fund exposures. The supervisory guidance issued by the Basle Supervisors Committee, the OCC, and the Federal Reserve represent an effective, quick, and needed response to an important issue. This guidance effectively reinforces private sector initiatives to enhance counterparty credit risk management processes. As I mentioned at the outset, even more work needs to be done to ensure that the lessons we have learned over the past two years become engrained in standard practice and to ensure that effective market discipline is brought to bear on the risk taking of hedge funds and other entities that make use of significant financial leverage. In particular, we look forward to the reports and recommendations of the Counterparty Risk Management Policy Group that will provide additional practical tools for implementing both industry and supervisory sound practices in counterparty credit risk management.
Remarks by Governor Edward W. Kelley, Jr. Owens Distinguished Lecture Series, Owens Graduate School of Management, Vanderbilt University March 25, 1999 Thinking about Y2K I am delighted to be back on this campus again at the invitation of my old friend, Dr. Dewey Daane, who served before me as a governor of the Federal Reserve. These are challenging times for economic policymakers, and there are many issues currently facing our nation's central bank. But at the top of the list as a first priority is the Year 2000 computer problem, and that is our subject for today. Recently this topic has been receiving a great deal of attention and I'm sure that everyone here is familiar with the basic issue--specifically, that information generated by computers may be inaccurate, or that computers and electronic systems may malfunction because they cannot correctly process Year 2000 dates. With that stipulation, I will dwell no further on the nature of the problem itself, but rather attempt to focus on its likely economic impact. The economic stakes here are potentially very large and the spectrum of possible outcomes potentially very broad, ranging from minimal to very serious. For the truth of the matter is that this episode is unique: We really have had no previous experience with a challenge of this sort to give us reliable guideposts. Although the lack of a precedent may be unnerving, that certainly does not free us from the obligation to attempt to analyze how the millennium bug is affecting and will affect the economy. This economic puzzle has many complex pieces--some of them I fear quite inscrutable before the event--and my task today is to assemble for you as coherent as possible a picture of where the Y2K problem appears likely to take us. Please be forewarned that an assessment of this situation has a very short half-life, as conditions are evolving rapidly. The good news is that they are evolving favorably, the bad news is that the time remaining before the rollover date is passing by rapidly. Let me first turn to the reasons why Y2K has been so challenging. Then I shall discuss the actions that are being taken by both the public and private sectors to deal with the millennium bug and the effects these measures are having on economic activity at the present time. Finally, I shall turn--not without some trepidation, I might add--to an assessment of the spectrum of plausible outcomes for the millennium rollover as I see them. As you will shortly hear, I believe the Y2K alarmists have not fully recognized the attention that is being given to this challenge and to the significant progress that is being made towards meeting it. Given what we know today, I am cautiously but increasingly optimistic that the millennium bug will not cause major economic disruptions when it bites. And I am quite confident that the financial system will be well prepared. Why was it so difficult for so long for people to come to terms with the Year 2000 problem? At the most basic level of any organization--be it public or private, large or small--the Y2K problem was all too easy to ignore. It is a hidden threat, cloaked in the arcane language of computer programs and in embedded microchips. As such, it was difficult at first for senior management in both the private and public sectors to recognize the serious nature of the problem. This was compounded by the fact that the costs and benefits of the solution for an individual operation were neither very easily quantified nor very attractive. But after an initial period of denial, organization leaders in the United States have now recognized the problem and are taking aggressive action to correct it. Nonetheless, given the pervasiveness of the problems involved, I suspect that even the most thoroughly prepared organizations are concerned that something significant might be missed. Consequently, responsible and careful organizations are developing extensive contingency plans to work around any emerging problems as insurance against Y2K disruptions. Thus, insecurity about the comprehensiveness of Y2K remediation efforts is affecting corporate investment and production plans now and will do so into next year. The second feature of the millennium bug that makes it so difficult to analyze is the interrelated character of many computer systems. An individual company may be satisfied that it has done all it can to fix its own systems, but it may still feel vulnerable to the actions taken by its suppliers and customers. For example, what good would it do you to be perfectly ready if your electricity is off? Or if the train bringing in tomorrow's production materials is delayed? In an environment where "just-in-time" inventory systems and electronic data interchanges have linked economic activities very closely together, one firm's failure has the potential to ripple through significant segments of the chain of production, services, and distribution. Thus, coordination of Y2K remediation activities would have benefits for everyone. Of course, it is clearly impossible to coordinate the Y2K activities of millions of individual establishments. To help fill this void, numerous organizations have emerged as clearinghouses of information, and other institutions and consortiums are functioning as vehicles for system testing. The Federal Reserve, for instance, has established an extensive, separate and dedicated computer environment for the purpose of testing with its depository institution customers, and as we speak the securities industry is undergoing a five-week long series of tests to assess its ability to conduct business through its network of institutions. Bank supervisors, including the Federal Reserve, are holding their banks accountable for the effectiveness of their Y2K efforts, and I can assure you that there will be regulatory consequences for banks that do not fulfill their obligations. But many other organizations are on their own to test their critical systems with their key suppliers and customers. Because this situation is ubiquitous, complex, and fragmented, it is a very difficult task to quantify the aggregate costs of Y2K remediation. Similarly and perhaps more importantly, we also have no national scorecard on how effective our economy is being in our remediation efforts, and until quite recently very little national preparedness information at all. Under these circumstances, it is not hard to understand why the millennium bug is viewed as such as unpredictable phenomenon, and why it has attracted so much gloom and doom commentary. So, what is being done? The short answer is a great deal is being done. In January, the President's Commission on the Year 2000 issued the first of its promised quarterly assessments of the state of preparation in our country and internationally. More recently we have helpful assessments from the Congress and various security analysts. From these and other sources, let me review for you our understanding of the status of efforts by the private sector, government entities, and the world community to deal with the Year 2000 problem. As far as the private sector is concerned, efforts to deal with the millennium bug have been steadily intensifying and are now proceeding very rapidly. I think it is a good sign that in the last few days articles have been appearing in the business press that the numerous Y2K remediation boutiques which sprang up over the past two years are beginning to experience a slowdown in activity and are starting to look for other things to do. In Congressional testimony last spring, I suggested that the private sector might spend approximately $50 billion between 1998 and 2000 to tackle the Y2K problem. This figure was based on research done by Fed economists and while our estimate of a "$50 billion bug" still seems to be reasonable, I do expect this figure to move upward as we learn more throughout the year. I also perceive that the tools available to companies to address Y2K issues have increased substantially. Over the past months, most major computer hardware and software companies have released documentation of the Y2K readiness of their products on their web sites. Similarly, most of the major computer publications now have elaborate "how to" guides on their web pages that will aid consumers and small businesses in their efforts to make their systems compliant. Commercial software producers have also been busy, and new software products are available to aid programmers in repairing code. I hope and believe people are availing themselves of these new resources. As far as depository institutions are concerned, I am encouraged by the progress that has been made over the past year, and there is every reason to be confident that our banking system will be ready. Based on ongoing reviews of all depository institutions as completed by federal banking regulatory agencies, the vast majority is making satisfactory progress in their Y2K planning and readiness efforts. Only a small percentage has been rated "needs improvement" and well under one percent have been rated "unsatisfactory." In these cases, the agencies have initiated intensive supervisory follow up, including restrictions on expansionary activities by deficient organizations. For the rest of this year the agencies will be continually revisiting any institutions identified as having problems, as well as all those identified as being key to systemic health. While we can be confident institutions are addressing the problem, it is important to recognize that regulators cannot be responsible for ensuring or guaranteeing the Y2K readiness and viability of the banking organizations they supervise. Rather, the board of directors and senior management of banks and other financial institutions must be responsible for ensuring the institutions they manage are able to provide high quality and continuous service in January 2000. They have every motivation to do so--their survival is at stake. The Federal Reserve System has itself made great progress on Y2K issues, meeting the goals we have set for ourselves. In addition to completing two rounds of reviews of the Y2K readiness of all banks subject to our supervisory authority, we have renovated and tested virtually all of our own applications. As mentioned, we have opened our mission-critical systems to customers for testing with us and have progressed significantly in our contingency planning efforts. For the balance of this year, we will be focusing intensely on contingency planning, as we believe that is the best way to be ready to deal with any possible surprises. As in the private sector, activity to fix computer systems maintained by the federal government has been intensifying. Substantial progress has been made in many areas, but the President's Commission agrees that much more work still needs to be done. Its reviews of federal Y2K programs have highlighted needed areas of improvement, as well as many other areas getting their preparation under good control. The Commission's evaluation of every agency and department is publicly available in its quarterly summary, so I will not attempt to go through it chapter and verse. The current estimate of federal spending for all preparation is $6.8 billion. Last fall, legislation was enacted that facilitates the sharing of Y2K information among businesses and clarifies the legal liability of reporting it. All of these are positive developments. Far less is known about the effectiveness of the Y2K preparations by state and local governments. At the state level, a survey of web pages indicates that most states have extensive and impressive programs underway, but by recent count several states had no reference to Y2K preparedness at all and others were quite vague about what was going on under their control. We can identify $3.4 billion earmarked by states, but I am confident that number is low. While attention is often focused on high-profile systems such as the nation's air traffic control systems and its electric power grid, there are many smaller, yet quite critical, electronically driven systems maintained by counties and municipalities that are also vulnerable. This would include such services as water, police, traffic control, and health and welfare activities. And as any Washington or Nashville commuter knows, one or two malfunctioning traffic signals can cause serious congestion, confusion, and delay, and the breakdown of traffic management systems could cause near total gridlock. I hope that local media in every area will increasingly focus attention on Y2K preparation and hold local leaders accountable for preparations to the infrastructure in their areas of responsibility. On the international level, there is both good news and bad. The governments of various industrialized nations have stepped up their own internal Y2K programs over recent months, and international cooperation is intensifying through efforts such as the Joint Year 2000 Council, chaired by my colleague Federal Reserve Governor Roger Ferguson. Most large multinational corporations report that they are well along in their own preparations worldwide and many of them are pushing their numerous local suppliers to be prepared to maintain the flow of materials and services. That is a significant positive step. The recent conversion to the Euro was very smooth, thus proving that a job similar to the one we have at hand can be successfully accomplished. But that intense focus in Europe, along with other world financial troubles, has obviously been deflecting all too much attention away from Y2K issues. I worry that time will simply run out for some activities in some countries, particularly in the developing economies, and as a result risks exist for some level of disruption in various locales around the world. All of this has been affecting our economy in a variety of ways. On the positive side an important element in some Y2K programs is the accelerated replacement of aging computer systems with modern, state-of-the-art hardware and software. Such capital expenditures should raise the level of productivity in those enterprises, and addressing Y2K has increased the awareness of many senior executives of the complexity and importance of carefully managing their corporate information technology resources. The increased replacement demand also has contributed to the spectacular recent growth in this country's computer hardware and software industries. A reverse affect, which I believe will shortly become visible, is that many institutions will "freeze" their remediated and tested systems for the remainder of this year, effectively foregoing the installation of major new hardware and software systems. This moves some spending on technology forward from 1999 into 2000. So, ultimately, we are largely shifting the timing of these investment expenditures, rather than changing their total amounts very much. Another area in which uncertainty about Y2K readiness is likely to have noticeable effects in 1999 is in the management of inventories. As the millennium approaches, I expect businesses will want to hold larger inventories of goods as insurance against Y2K-related supply disruptions. Such a shift from "just-in-time" inventory management to a "just-in-case" posture is likely to prompt an increase in orders and production during late 1999, with these stocks subsequently being run off in the first half of 2000. We at the Fed, for example, will do precisely that in our management of the production of new currency. While Year 2000 preparation efforts may give a temporary boost to economic activity in some sectors, the probable net effect on the aggregate economy is slightly negative. Other than the obviously very valuable ability to maintain operations across the millennium, few quantifiable benefits accrue to most firms for their extensive remedial work. It is fair to think of Y2K as a huge one-time maintenance project, which is costly on balance and produces no additional product. Our estimates of the net effect of Y2K remediation efforts, on both our nation's overall labor productivity and on real gross domestic product, are that it will likely shave a tenth or two per year off our growth rate, but a more substantial effect is possible if some of the larger estimates of Y2K costs turn out to be accurate. Let's move on to the bottom line. Will every organization and everybody everywhere be fully prepared, so that everything will go off without a hitch? I seriously doubt it. As we have discussed, a great deal of work is already completed or planned to deal with the problem, but what if something does slip through the cracks, and we experience the failure of "mission critical" systems? How would a computer failure in one area of the economy affect the ability of others to continue to operate smoothly? How severe could be the consequences of Y2K problems emanating from abroad? The number of possible scenarios of this type are endless, and today no one can say with absolute confidence how severe any Y2K disruptions could be, or how a failure in one sector would influence operations in others. That said, let me now turn to a discussion of the spectrum of plausible outcomes for economic activity in the Year 2000. What will happen as the millennium rolls over? A few economists are suggesting that Y2K-related disruptions will induce a deep recession. That probably is a stretch, but it is unlikely we will escape unaffected. I anticipate that there will be isolated production problems and disruptions to commerce, and perhaps some public services, that could reduce the pace of economic activity early in 2000. As mentioned above, at least a mild inventory cycle seems very likely to develop. But, just like the shocks to our nation's physical infrastructure that occur periodically, I would expect the Y2K impact to our information and electronic control infrastructure is most likely to be short-lived and fully reversed. Most of us have experienced examples of how economic activity has been affected by disruptions to the physical infrastructure of some part of our country. Although the Y2K problem is clearly unique, and therefore the usefulness of any analogy is limited, analyzing some of these disruptions to our physical infrastructure may be useful in organizing our thinking about the consequences of short-lived interruptions in our information infrastructure. Many of us have experienced major bad weather episodes; a severe snow or ice storm, a flood, a tornado, or perhaps a hurricane. Commerce may grind to a halt for up to a week or so in an area, but activity bounces back rapidly once things are cleaned up. Although individual firms and households can be adversely affected by these disruptions, in the aggregate, the economy quickly recovers most of the output lost due to such storms. In these instances, the shock to our economic infrastructure is transitory in nature, and, critically, the recovery process is underway before any adverse "feedback" effects are produced. Another similar example might be the strike not long ago by workers at United Parcel Service. UPS is a major player in the package delivery industry in this country, and the strike disrupted the shipping patterns of many businesses. Some sales were indeed lost but--and this is a critical here--in most instances, alternate shipping services were found for high priority packages. Some businesses were hurt by the strike, but its effect on economic activity was small in the aggregate. In fairness it must be said that if disruptions that occur are not isolated events as I have assumed, but rather spread across key sectors of the economy by interacting with each other, then there could indeed be a more significant effect on aggregate activity in the first quarter of 2000. The more dire of the Y2K scenarios would involve, among other things, a perpetuation and intensification of these interactive effects and their subsequent feedback. Should this occur, production disruptions could turn out to be a national or international phenomenon and could spread from one industry to another. Under these circumstances, the decline in economic activity would prove to be longer lasting, and a recession could conceivably ensue. But let me quickly stress that I do not think that this recession scenario has a very high probability. It is possible, but a lot of things have to wrong for it to occur, and much is being done to prevent its occurrence. Now you might appropriately ask a Fed representative what monetary policy can do to offset any Y2K disruption. The truthful short answer is "not much." We can't plow the streets or deliver packages and we would be unable to reprogram the nation's computers for the year 2000. The Y2K problem is primarily an issue affecting the aggregate supply side of the economy, whereas the Federal Reserve's monetary policy works mainly on aggregate demand. We all understand how creating more money, and lowering the level of short-term interest rates, gives a boost to interest-sensitive sectors, such as homebuilding, but these tools are unlikely to be very effective in generating more Y2K remediation efforts or accelerating the recovery process if someone experiences some type of disruption. We will, of course, be ready if people want to hold more cash on New Year's Eve 1999, and we will be prepared to lend whatever sums may be needed to financial institutions through the discount window or to provide needed reserves to the banking system's open market operation. And, in the unlikely event a serious Y2K disruption should have significant feedback effects on aggregate demand, such as I outlined earlier, there obviously would be a role for the Federal Reserve to play in countering a downturn. But there is nothing monetary policy can do to offset the direct effects of a Y2K disruption. In summary, as I stated at the outset of my remarks, I am cautiously but increasingly optimistic that the United States will weather this storm without major disruptions to economic activity. Some of the more frightening scenarios are not without a certain plausibility, if this challenge were being ignored. But it is not being ignored, as indeed this meeting today clearly illustrates. An enormous amount of work is being done in anticipation of the rollover of the millennium. As the world's largest economy, the heaviest burden of preparation falls on the U. S. But it is truly a worldwide issue, and to the extent some are not adequately prepared and experience breakdowns of unforeseeable dimension, we could all be affected accordingly. We at the Federal Reserve intend to do our utmost, and we hope and trust others will do likewise.
Testimony of Governor Edward M. Gramlich On H. R. 3150, the Bankruptcy Reform Act of 1998 Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate March 25, 1999 I appreciate this opportunity to appear before the Committee to present the views of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System on currency collateral, financial netting, and consumer issues raised by the Conference Report on H. R. 3150, the Bankruptcy Reform Act of 1998. The Board strongly supports Section 1013 of the Conference Report relating to Federal Reserve collateral requirements and urges its inclusion in this year's legislation. The Board also strongly supports the financial contract provisions of Title X of the Conference Report. Our testimony also offers comments on the consumer provisions found in Sections 112, 113, 114, and 1128 of the Conference Report. Currency Collateral Section 16 of the Federal Reserve Act requires the Federal Reserve to collateralize Federal Reserve notes when they are issued. The list of eligible collateral includes Treasury and federal agency securities, gold certificates, Special Drawing Right certificates, and foreign currencies, the items in bold print on the left side of the balance sheet in . In addition, the legally eligible backing for currency includes discount window loans made under Section 13 of the Federal Reserve Act. Over the years sections have been added to the Act that permit lending by the Federal Reserve to depository institutions under provisions other than Section 13 and against a broader range of collateral than is allowed under Section 13. However, the currency collateralization requirement of Section 16 has not been similarly amended, thus limiting the types of loans the Federal Reserve can use to back the currency. To date, the Federal Reserve has always had more than enough collateral to back Federal Reserve notes. In recent years, however, the margin of excess currency collateral has been dwindling. The primary reason for the decline in excess currency collateral has been the development of retail sweep accounts. Retail sweep accounts are a technique used by banks to increase earnings by reducing their required reserves. Because of the growth of sweep accounts, required reserve balances have declined substantially over the past five years. Since reserve balances, unlike currency, do not have to be collateralized, they serve as a source of excess collateral for currency. To maintain a balance between the demand for and the supply of reserve balances that is consistent with the intended stance of monetary policy, the Federal Reserve has responded to the declining demand for reserves by accumulating a smaller volume of Treasury securities than it would have in the absence of retail sweep accounts. This means that the growth of retail sweep accounts has effectively diminished the margin of excess currency collateral. As additional sweep programs are implemented, the margin will tend to shrink further. One can trace the effects of declining reserve balances on excess currency collateral in the simplified Federal Reserve balance sheet in appendix A--excess currency collateral was down to about $20 billion by the end of 1998, and is likely to drop further. The small margin of available collateral poses a serious potential problem for the Federal Reserve. Although discount window borrowing has been very low in recent years, it could increase substantially in the future. For example, one or more banks could experience operational problems (perhaps owing to computer failures related to the century date change) that require a large volume of temporary funding from the discount window. These banks might not be able to tender the types of collateral that would qualify for loans under Section 13. Consequently, any such loans would need to be made under other provisions of the Act, and under current law they would not be eligible to back currency. If the aggregate need for such loans exceeded excess currency collateral, the Federal Reserve would be faced with an unpalatable choice. Were the Federal Reserve to extend the credit, it would not be able to absorb all of the resulting excess reserves by selling Treasury securities from its portfolio, because selling the necessary amount would cause a deficiency in currency collateral. The increase in excess reserves would reduce short-term interest rates, causing an unintended easing of monetary policy and perhaps risking inflation. The situation would persist until the loans were repaid. Were the Federal Reserve instead to refuse to make the discount loans in order to maintain the stance of monetary policy and continue to collateralize the currency, the depository institutions seeking credit would not be able to meet their obligations, with possible adverse implications for the financial system as well as the individual depository institutions. Thus the Federal Reserve would need to choose between two of its most fundamental policy objectives--protecting the value of the currency and preserving financial stability. The legislation in Section 1013 of the Conference Report would greatly reduce the likelihood of circumstances that would give rise to such difficulties. It would authorize the Federal Reserve to collateralize the currency with all types of discount window loans, not just those made under Section 13. By permitting all discount window loans to back the currency, the Federal Reserve would be able to collateralize currency fully--as the original framers of the Federal Reserve Act saw fit to require--in virtually all conceivable circumstances while conducting monetary policy in pursuit of the nation's macroeconomic objectives and making any and all discount window loans that are appropriate. I might note that Section 101 of S.576, the Senate regulatory relief bill, would also reduce the odds that the currency collateral requirement could inappropriately constrain Federal Reserve operations. If the Federal Reserve were permitted to pay interest on required reserve balances, as provided for in that proposal, the incentives that depository institutions face to generate new retail sweep arrangements would be greatly reduced, and some banks would probably even dismantle such arrangements. As a result, the level of reserve balances should rise, providing a modest additional source of funds to purchase collateral to back the currency. This step by itself would not be adequate to address the currency collateral issue, but it would help. More importantly, the prevention of further erosion in required reserve balances, and the possibility that they would rise, would assist the Federal Reserve in the implementation of monetary policy by forestalling the possibility that the volatility of overnight interest rates could rise substantially as a result of low reserve balances. The Federal Reserve strongly supports this section of S.576. Financial Netting The Federal Reserve commends the Committee for addressing Title X, Financial Contract Provisions, of H.R. 3150, Bankruptcy Reform Act of 1998, which was considered in the last Congress. Title X of H.R. 3150 included a number of proposed amendments to the Federal Deposit Insurance Act and the Bankruptcy Code as well as other statutes related to financial transactions. Most of these amendments incorporated or were based on amendments to these statutes that were endorsed by the President's Working Group on Financial Markets. As discussed more fully in , the Board supports enactment of the amendments recommended by the Working Group. The importance of improving the legal regime underpinning financial markets has been recognized by the finance ministers of the G7 countries. In this regard, the ability to terminate or close out and net contracts and to realize on collateral pledged in connection with these contracts is vital. Enactment of the provisions of Title X would reduce uncertainty in these areas. This reduced uncertainty should foster market efficiency and limit market disruptions in the event of an insolvency, limit risk to federally supervised financial market participants, including insured depository institutions, and limit systemic risk. Close out refers to the right to terminate a contract upon an event of default and to compute a termination value due to or due from the defaulting party, generally based on the market value of the contract at that time. By providing for termination of contracts on default, nondefaulting parties can remove uncertainty as to whether the contract will be performed, fix the value of the contract at that point, and proceed to rehedge themselves against market risk. The right to terminate or close out contracts is important to the stability of market participants and reduces the likelihood that a single insolvency will trigger other insolvencies due to their market risk. Further, absent termination and close out rights the inability of market participants to control their market risk is likely to lead them to reduce their market risk exposure, potentially drying up market liquidity and preventing the affected markets from serving their essential risk management, credit intermediation, and capital raising functions. Netting refers to the right to set off, or net, claims between parties to arrive at a single obligation between the parties. Netting can serve to reduce the credit exposure of counterparties to a failed debtor and thereby to limit systemic risks and to foster market liquidity. Finally credit exposure under financial market transactions is frequently collateralized. The right to liquidate collateral immediately is important for preserving the liquidity of financial market participants. Recognizing the importance of termination, or close out, netting, and collateral, in March of 1998 the Secretary of the Treasury, on behalf of the President's Working Group on Financial Markets, transmitted to Congress proposed legislation that would amend the banking laws and the Bankruptcy Code. As I noted previously, the provisions of Title X, Financial Market Contracts, of H.R. 3150 were largely based on the provisions that were endorsed by the Working Group. Additional language in Title X was designed to further the same ends that the Working Group sought to promote. Other provisions, such as section 1012 on Asset-Backed Securitizations, which was not included in the Working Group's recommendations, also may foster the efficiency of the financial markets by promoting certainty. I understand that there also have been concerns expressed over this provision. Although we believe that this provision is beneficial, we think the provisions endorsed by the Working Group are sufficiently important to be pursued by Congress even if the asset securitization provision is not included. Consumer Protection The Conference Report contains a number of provisions relating to consumer protection laws the Federal Reserve Board administers. Section 113 would direct the Board to study the adequacy of existing protections that limit consumers' liability for the unauthorized use of "dual use" debit cards. Commonly debit cards--such as those used at an automated teller machine (ATM)--can be used only if the consumer provides a personal identification number (PIN). However, some debit cards also can be used without a PIN; consumers sign a sales draft as they would for credit cards. Consumers' liability under the Truth in Lending Act (TILA) for the unauthorized use of a credit card is no more than $50; for debit cards, the potential loss under the Electronic Fund Transfer Act (EFTA) can be much higher. Depending on how timely the consumer is in reporting the unauthorized use, the consumer's liability in the latter case may be as much as $500, and may even be unlimited if the consumer does not notify the institution within 60 days of the sending of a periodic statement listing an unauthorized transaction. Some observers have expressed concern that consumers using debit cards in the same way that they use credit cards may not understand the difference in their potential risk of loss. The Conference Report requires the Board to study how well existing law protects consumers against unauthorized use of debit cards, whether the industry has enhanced the level of protection through voluntary rules, and whether additional amendments to the EFTA or the Board's regulations are necessary. The Board believes that market discipline is preferable to government-imposed regulations. As an example of how market discipline might work, both VISA and MasterCard have already voluntarily established rules for financial institutions offering non-PIN protected debit cards that generally limit a consumer's liability to $50 or less. Though these rules are not identical to those in the EFTA and the Board's Regulation E, which implements the EFTA, these voluntary rules bring consumers' liability for these debit cards more in line with the liability rules for credit cards. The voluntary rules govern all institutions offering these types of debit cards and thus diminish consumers' liability substantially. In this case we believe the private sector has already acted appropriately to address the liability issue. With regard to the possible need for additional disclosures that explain how non-PIN protected debit cards differ from other credit cards, the Board is studying this matter. We have the authority under the EFTA to adopt additional disclosures, but must weigh the value of additional consumer protection against the additional compliance costs that would be imposed. Because the industry has already established voluntary limits on liability and the Board is currently analyzing the need for additional disclosures, we believe the study mandated in Section 113(c) of the Conference Report may be unnecessary. Section 112 of the Conference Report would require the Board to study the adequacy of information consumers receive about the deductibility of interest paid on home-secured credit transactions. The Board is to consider whether additional disclosures are necessary when the total amount of the home-secured credit extended exceeds the fair market value of the dwelling. The Truth in Lending Act (TILA) and the Board's Regulation Z, which implements TILA, currently have limited disclosure requirements about the effect of the credit transaction on consumers' income tax liability. Creditors offering home-secured lines of credit must provide generic disclosures when an application is made, including a statement warning consumers to consult a tax advisor regarding the deductibility of interest and other charges connected with the line of credit. Creditors offering purchase-money mortages and other home-secured installment loans are not required to provide any tax-related disclosures. The Board recognizes that it is useful for consumers to be aware of the potential tax implications of home-secured credit transactions. But we have concerns about the study required by Section 112(a). The tax code is complex and its applicability to each consumer depends on personal financial information and additional analysis. Creditors often do not have all the information that would permit them to provide specific meaningful tax advice to consumers. We would be concerned that additional disclosures might give consumers the impression that a creditor has considered their individual circumstances and made a determination about the income tax consequences. In the end, the most meaningful disclosure a creditor could offer might be a generic statement advising the consumer to consult a tax advisor, or in the case of credit that exceeds a home's fair market value, a disclosure that the tax laws may not allow a deduction for all the interest paid on that loan. It will be very difficult to obtain the data necessary to do the study required by Section 112(a). Findings would likely be based on consumer surveys that ask consumers to relate their experiences in deducting interest associated with home-secured credit for income tax purposes. Taxpayers are notoriously private about their dealings with the Internal Revenue Service, and surveys about their dealings could result in unreliable information. The third Board study, required by Section 114(e) of the Conference Report, addresses the adequacy of the information consumers receive about certain borrowing practices that may result in financial problems. The focus of the study is consumers' practice of making only minimum payments on their credit card accounts or other revolving credit plans. The Board would be directed to use the results of the study to determine whether consumers need additional disclosures regarding minimum payment features beyond the minimum payment disclosures added by other provisions of the bill. The Board is again concerned that there would be difficulties in obtaining reliable data. For example, the Board is asked to consider the extent to which the availability of low minimum payments causes financial difficulties, and the impact of minimum payments on default rates. We believe these relationships are difficult, perhaps impossible, to estimate. The Board would be happy to work with the Congress to draft a more manageable alternative. Section 114 of the Conference Report would amend TILA to require creditors offering open-end credit plans, such as credit cards, to provide additional disclosures about minimum payments as well as arrangements where consumers may "skip payments" while interest continues to accrue on the unpaid balance. It would also require lenders to provide an example of how long it would take to pay off a $500 balance, if the consumer makes only the minimum payment and does not obtain additional credit. These disclosures would be provided when the account is opened, annually, and in the case of the minimum payment disclosure, on each periodic statement. Regarding these additional disclosures, the Board recognizes the value of ensuring that consumers better understand the implications of making minimum payments on open-end credit plans. But the Congress might ask whether providing similar disclosures repeatedly, as required by this legislation, may have the unintended effect of creating "information overload" for consumers receiving these disclosures. Here is where a study might be helpful. Section 1128 amends TILA to prohibit creditors from terminating open-end credit accounts solely because the consumer does not incur a finance charge on the account. (Typically, these cardholders are "convenience users" who pay their credit card balances in full each month.) Under the provision, creditors could terminate an account for inactivity of three months or more, but consumers who use their cards regularly and pay their balances in full could not have their accounts terminated for that reason. The Board generally does not favor federal laws that restrict creditors' ability to determine whether particular accounts or transactions are economically viable. We believe competition in the marketplace is the better approach for motivating creditors' activities, and the credit card market is certainly competitive. Moreover, we have concerns about the possible consequences of such a prohibition. We are not aware that the practice of terminating accounts is prevalent in the industry, but we presume that to the extent creditors do so, it is because the accounts are considered unprofitable. If creditors cannot terminate these accounts, they will likely seek to recover their costs by increasing fees on convenience cardholders, or for all their cardholders. In addition to these comments, the Board would also like to bring certain technical comments on the consumer provisions to the Committee's attention. Simplified Federal Reserve Balance Sheet Billions of dollars December 30, 1998 Gold and SDR certificates 20 Federal Reserve notes 490 Government securities 470 Reserve deposits 2 20 Section 13 discount loans 0 Other discount loans 0 Foreign currency 20 Other net assets 1 0 Excess currency collateral = 510 - 490 = 20 Note: All figures rounded to nearest $5 billion. Items in bold affect excess currency collateral. 1.Other assets minus other liabilities minus capital. 2.Includes required clearing balances. Two Examples 1. If reserve deposits were to drop $20 billion because of retail sweep activity, to prevent a surfeit of reserves the Federal Reserve would sell $20 billion of government securities, eliminating the excess currency collateral. In effect, this has been occurring over the past five years. 2. If non-section-13 loans were to increase $20 billion, to prevent a surfeit of reserves the Federal Reserve would need to sell $20 billion of government securities, again eliminating excess currency collateral. Any larger loan could not be made without altering the stance of monetary policy. Gold and SDR certificates 20 Federal Reserve notes 490 Government securities 470 Reserve deposits 2 20 Section 13 discount loans 0 Other discount loans 0 Foreign currency 20 Other net assets 1 0 Associate General Counsel, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System The proposed Bankruptcy Reform Act of 1999 Before the Subcommittee on Commercial and Administrative Law, Committee on the Judiciary, U.S. House of Representatives March 18, 1999
Remarks by Governor Edward W. Kelley, Jr. Owens Distinguished Lecture Series, Owens Graduate School of Management, Vanderbilt University March 25, 1999 Thinking about Y2K I am delighted to be back on this campus again at the invitation of my old friend, Dr. Dewey Daane, who served before me as a governor of the Federal Reserve. These are challenging times for economic policymakers, and there are many issues currently facing our nation's central bank. But at the top of the list as a first priority is the Year 2000 computer problem, and that is our subject for today. Recently this topic has been receiving a great deal of attention and I'm sure that everyone here is familiar with the basic issue--specifically, that information generated by computers may be inaccurate, or that computers and electronic systems may malfunction because they cannot correctly process Year 2000 dates. With that stipulation, I will dwell no further on the nature of the problem itself, but rather attempt to focus on its likely economic impact. The economic stakes here are potentially very large and the spectrum of possible outcomes potentially very broad, ranging from minimal to very serious. For the truth of the matter is that this episode is unique: We really have had no previous experience with a challenge of this sort to give us reliable guideposts. Although the lack of a precedent may be unnerving, that certainly does not free us from the obligation to attempt to analyze how the millennium bug is affecting and will affect the economy. This economic puzzle has many complex pieces--some of them I fear quite inscrutable before the event--and my task today is to assemble for you as coherent as possible a picture of where the Y2K problem appears likely to take us. Please be forewarned that an assessment of this situation has a very short half-life, as conditions are evolving rapidly. The good news is that they are evolving favorably, the bad news is that the time remaining before the rollover date is passing by rapidly. Let me first turn to the reasons why Y2K has been so challenging. Then I shall discuss the actions that are being taken by both the public and private sectors to deal with the millennium bug and the effects these measures are having on economic activity at the present time. Finally, I shall turn--not without some trepidation, I might add--to an assessment of the spectrum of plausible outcomes for the millennium rollover as I see them. As you will shortly hear, I believe the Y2K alarmists have not fully recognized the attention that is being given to this challenge and to the significant progress that is being made towards meeting it. Given what we know today, I am cautiously but increasingly optimistic that the millennium bug will not cause major economic disruptions when it bites. And I am quite confident that the financial system will be well prepared. Why was it so difficult for so long for people to come to terms with the Year 2000 problem? At the most basic level of any organization--be it public or private, large or small--the Y2K problem was all too easy to ignore. It is a hidden threat, cloaked in the arcane language of computer programs and in embedded microchips. As such, it was difficult at first for senior management in both the private and public sectors to recognize the serious nature of the problem. This was compounded by the fact that the costs and benefits of the solution for an individual operation were neither very easily quantified nor very attractive. But after an initial period of denial, organization leaders in the United States have now recognized the problem and are taking aggressive action to correct it. Nonetheless, given the pervasiveness of the problems involved, I suspect that even the most thoroughly prepared organizations are concerned that something significant might be missed. Consequently, responsible and careful organizations are developing extensive contingency plans to work around any emerging problems as insurance against Y2K disruptions. Thus, insecurity about the comprehensiveness of Y2K remediation efforts is affecting corporate investment and production plans now and will do so into next year. The second feature of the millennium bug that makes it so difficult to analyze is the interrelated character of many computer systems. An individual company may be satisfied that it has done all it can to fix its own systems, but it may still feel vulnerable to the actions taken by its suppliers and customers. For example, what good would it do you to be perfectly ready if your electricity is off? Or if the train bringing in tomorrow's production materials is delayed? In an environment where "just-in-time" inventory systems and electronic data interchanges have linked economic activities very closely together, one firm's failure has the potential to ripple through significant segments of the chain of production, services, and distribution. Thus, coordination of Y2K remediation activities would have benefits for everyone. Of course, it is clearly impossible to coordinate the Y2K activities of millions of individual establishments. To help fill this void, numerous organizations have emerged as clearinghouses of information, and other institutions and consortiums are functioning as vehicles for system testing. The Federal Reserve, for instance, has established an extensive, separate and dedicated computer environment for the purpose of testing with its depository institution customers, and as we speak the securities industry is undergoing a five-week long series of tests to assess its ability to conduct business through its network of institutions. Bank supervisors, including the Federal Reserve, are holding their banks accountable for the effectiveness of their Y2K efforts, and I can assure you that there will be regulatory consequences for banks that do not fulfill their obligations. But many other organizations are on their own to test their critical systems with their key suppliers and customers. Because this situation is ubiquitous, complex, and fragmented, it is a very difficult task to quantify the aggregate costs of Y2K remediation. Similarly and perhaps more importantly, we also have no national scorecard on how effective our economy is being in our remediation efforts, and until quite recently very little national preparedness information at all. Under these circumstances, it is not hard to understand why the millennium bug is viewed as such as unpredictable phenomenon, and why it has attracted so much gloom and doom commentary. So, what is being done? The short answer is a great deal is being done. In January, the President's Commission on the Year 2000 issued the first of its promised quarterly assessments of the state of preparation in our country and internationally. More recently we have helpful assessments from the Congress and various security analysts. From these and other sources, let me review for you our understanding of the status of efforts by the private sector, government entities, and the world community to deal with the Year 2000 problem. As far as the private sector is concerned, efforts to deal with the millennium bug have been steadily intensifying and are now proceeding very rapidly. I think it is a good sign that in the last few days articles have been appearing in the business press that the numerous Y2K remediation boutiques which sprang up over the past two years are beginning to experience a slowdown in activity and are starting to look for other things to do. In Congressional testimony last spring, I suggested that the private sector might spend approximately $50 billion between 1998 and 2000 to tackle the Y2K problem. This figure was based on research done by Fed economists and while our estimate of a "$50 billion bug" still seems to be reasonable, I do expect this figure to move upward as we learn more throughout the year. I also perceive that the tools available to companies to address Y2K issues have increased substantially. Over the past months, most major computer hardware and software companies have released documentation of the Y2K readiness of their products on their web sites. Similarly, most of the major computer publications now have elaborate "how to" guides on their web pages that will aid consumers and small businesses in their efforts to make their systems compliant. Commercial software producers have also been busy, and new software products are available to aid programmers in repairing code. I hope and believe people are availing themselves of these new resources. As far as depository institutions are concerned, I am encouraged by the progress that has been made over the past year, and there is every reason to be confident that our banking system will be ready. Based on ongoing reviews of all depository institutions as completed by federal banking regulatory agencies, the vast majority is making satisfactory progress in their Y2K planning and readiness efforts. Only a small percentage has been rated "needs improvement" and well under one percent have been rated "unsatisfactory." In these cases, the agencies have initiated intensive supervisory follow up, including restrictions on expansionary activities by deficient organizations. For the rest of this year the agencies will be continually revisiting any institutions identified as having problems, as well as all those identified as being key to systemic health. While we can be confident institutions are addressing the problem, it is important to recognize that regulators cannot be responsible for ensuring or guaranteeing the Y2K readiness and viability of the banking organizations they supervise. Rather, the board of directors and senior management of banks and other financial institutions must be responsible for ensuring the institutions they manage are able to provide high quality and continuous service in January 2000. They have every motivation to do so--their survival is at stake. The Federal Reserve System has itself made great progress on Y2K issues, meeting the goals we have set for ourselves. In addition to completing two rounds of reviews of the Y2K readiness of all banks subject to our supervisory authority, we have renovated and tested virtually all of our own applications. As mentioned, we have opened our mission-critical systems to customers for testing with us and have progressed significantly in our contingency planning efforts. For the balance of this year, we will be focusing intensely on contingency planning, as we believe that is the best way to be ready to deal with any possible surprises. As in the private sector, activity to fix computer systems maintained by the federal government has been intensifying. Substantial progress has been made in many areas, but the President's Commission agrees that much more work still needs to be done. Its reviews of federal Y2K programs have highlighted needed areas of improvement, as well as many other areas getting their preparation under good control. The Commission's evaluation of every agency and department is publicly available in its quarterly summary, so I will not attempt to go through it chapter and verse. The current estimate of federal spending for all preparation is $6.8 billion. Last fall, legislation was enacted that facilitates the sharing of Y2K information among businesses and clarifies the legal liability of reporting it. All of these are positive developments. Far less is known about the effectiveness of the Y2K preparations by state and local governments. At the state level, a survey of web pages indicates that most states have extensive and impressive programs underway, but by recent count several states had no reference to Y2K preparedness at all and others were quite vague about what was going on under their control. We can identify $3.4 billion earmarked by states, but I am confident that number is low. While attention is often focused on high-profile systems such as the nation's air traffic control systems and its electric power grid, there are many smaller, yet quite critical, electronically driven systems maintained by counties and municipalities that are also vulnerable. This would include such services as water, police, traffic control, and health and welfare activities. And as any Washington or Nashville commuter knows, one or two malfunctioning traffic signals can cause serious congestion, confusion, and delay, and the breakdown of traffic management systems could cause near total gridlock. I hope that local media in every area will increasingly focus attention on Y2K preparation and hold local leaders accountable for preparations to the infrastructure in their areas of responsibility. On the international level, there is both good news and bad. The governments of various industrialized nations have stepped up their own internal Y2K programs over recent months, and international cooperation is intensifying through efforts such as the Joint Year 2000 Council, chaired by my colleague Federal Reserve Governor Roger Ferguson. Most large multinational corporations report that they are well along in their own preparations worldwide and many of them are pushing their numerous local suppliers to be prepared to maintain the flow of materials and services. That is a significant positive step. The recent conversion to the Euro was very smooth, thus proving that a job similar to the one we have at hand can be successfully accomplished. But that intense focus in Europe, along with other world financial troubles, has obviously been deflecting all too much attention away from Y2K issues. I worry that time will simply run out for some activities in some countries, particularly in the developing economies, and as a result risks exist for some level of disruption in various locales around the world. All of this has been affecting our economy in a variety of ways. On the positive side an important element in some Y2K programs is the accelerated replacement of aging computer systems with modern, state-of-the-art hardware and software. Such capital expenditures should raise the level of productivity in those enterprises, and addressing Y2K has increased the awareness of many senior executives of the complexity and importance of carefully managing their corporate information technology resources. The increased replacement demand also has contributed to the spectacular recent growth in this country's computer hardware and software industries. A reverse affect, which I believe will shortly become visible, is that many institutions will "freeze" their remediated and tested systems for the remainder of this year, effectively foregoing the installation of major new hardware and software systems. This moves some spending on technology forward from 1999 into 2000. So, ultimately, we are largely shifting the timing of these investment expenditures, rather than changing their total amounts very much. Another area in which uncertainty about Y2K readiness is likely to have noticeable effects in 1999 is in the management of inventories. As the millennium approaches, I expect businesses will want to hold larger inventories of goods as insurance against Y2K-related supply disruptions. Such a shift from "just-in-time" inventory management to a "just-in-case" posture is likely to prompt an increase in orders and production during late 1999, with these stocks subsequently being run off in the first half of 2000. We at the Fed, for example, will do precisely that in our management of the production of new currency. While Year 2000 preparation efforts may give a temporary boost to economic activity in some sectors, the probable net effect on the aggregate economy is slightly negative. Other than the obviously very valuable ability to maintain operations across the millennium, few quantifiable benefits accrue to most firms for their extensive remedial work. It is fair to think of Y2K as a huge one-time maintenance project, which is costly on balance and produces no additional product. Our estimates of the net effect of Y2K remediation efforts, on both our nation's overall labor productivity and on real gross domestic product, are that it will likely shave a tenth or two per year off our growth rate, but a more substantial effect is possible if some of the larger estimates of Y2K costs turn out to be accurate. Let's move on to the bottom line. Will every organization and everybody everywhere be fully prepared, so that everything will go off without a hitch? I seriously doubt it. As we have discussed, a great deal of work is already completed or planned to deal with the problem, but what if something does slip through the cracks, and we experience the failure of "mission critical" systems? How would a computer failure in one area of the economy affect the ability of others to continue to operate smoothly? How severe could be the consequences of Y2K problems emanating from abroad? The number of possible scenarios of this type are endless, and today no one can say with absolute confidence how severe any Y2K disruptions could be, or how a failure in one sector would influence operations in others. That said, let me now turn to a discussion of the spectrum of plausible outcomes for economic activity in the Year 2000. What will happen as the millennium rolls over? A few economists are suggesting that Y2K-related disruptions will induce a deep recession. That probably is a stretch, but it is unlikely we will escape unaffected. I anticipate that there will be isolated production problems and disruptions to commerce, and perhaps some public services, that could reduce the pace of economic activity early in 2000. As mentioned above, at least a mild inventory cycle seems very likely to develop. But, just like the shocks to our nation's physical infrastructure that occur periodically, I would expect the Y2K impact to our information and electronic control infrastructure is most likely to be short-lived and fully reversed. Most of us have experienced examples of how economic activity has been affected by disruptions to the physical infrastructure of some part of our country. Although the Y2K problem is clearly unique, and therefore the usefulness of any analogy is limited, analyzing some of these disruptions to our physical infrastructure may be useful in organizing our thinking about the consequences of short-lived interruptions in our information infrastructure. Many of us have experienced major bad weather episodes; a severe snow or ice storm, a flood, a tornado, or perhaps a hurricane. Commerce may grind to a halt for up to a week or so in an area, but activity bounces back rapidly once things are cleaned up. Although individual firms and households can be adversely affected by these disruptions, in the aggregate, the economy quickly recovers most of the output lost due to such storms. In these instances, the shock to our economic infrastructure is transitory in nature, and, critically, the recovery process is underway before any adverse "feedback" effects are produced. Another similar example might be the strike not long ago by workers at United Parcel Service. UPS is a major player in the package delivery industry in this country, and the strike disrupted the shipping patterns of many businesses. Some sales were indeed lost but--and this is a critical here--in most instances, alternate shipping services were found for high priority packages. Some businesses were hurt by the strike, but its effect on economic activity was small in the aggregate. In fairness it must be said that if disruptions that occur are not isolated events as I have assumed, but rather spread across key sectors of the economy by interacting with each other, then there could indeed be a more significant effect on aggregate activity in the first quarter of 2000. The more dire of the Y2K scenarios would involve, among other things, a perpetuation and intensification of these interactive effects and their subsequent feedback. Should this occur, production disruptions could turn out to be a national or international phenomenon and could spread from one industry to another. Under these circumstances, the decline in economic activity would prove to be longer lasting, and a recession could conceivably ensue. But let me quickly stress that I do not think that this recession scenario has a very high probability. It is possible, but a lot of things have to wrong for it to occur, and much is being done to prevent its occurrence. Now you might appropriately ask a Fed representative what monetary policy can do to offset any Y2K disruption. The truthful short answer is "not much." We can't plow the streets or deliver packages and we would be unable to reprogram the nation's computers for the year 2000. The Y2K problem is primarily an issue affecting the aggregate supply side of the economy, whereas the Federal Reserve's monetary policy works mainly on aggregate demand. We all understand how creating more money, and lowering the level of short-term interest rates, gives a boost to interest-sensitive sectors, such as homebuilding, but these tools are unlikely to be very effective in generating more Y2K remediation efforts or accelerating the recovery process if someone experiences some type of disruption. We will, of course, be ready if people want to hold more cash on New Year's Eve 1999, and we will be prepared to lend whatever sums may be needed to financial institutions through the discount window or to provide needed reserves to the banking system's open market operation. And, in the unlikely event a serious Y2K disruption should have significant feedback effects on aggregate demand, such as I outlined earlier, there obviously would be a role for the Federal Reserve to play in countering a downturn. But there is nothing monetary policy can do to offset the direct effects of a Y2K disruption. In summary, as I stated at the outset of my remarks, I am cautiously but increasingly optimistic that the United States will weather this storm without major disruptions to economic activity. Some of the more frightening scenarios are not without a certain plausibility, if this challenge were being ignored. But it is not being ignored, as indeed this meeting today clearly illustrates. An enormous amount of work is being done in anticipation of the rollover of the millennium. As the world's largest economy, the heaviest burden of preparation falls on the U. S. But it is truly a worldwide issue, and to the extent some are not adequately prepared and experience breakdowns of unforeseeable dimension, we could all be affected accordingly. We at the Federal Reserve intend to do our utmost, and we hope and trust others will do likewise.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application of C-B-G, Inc., Wilton, Iowa, to acquire Peoples National Corporation, Columbus Junction, Iowa, and thereby acquire its banking subsidiary, Community Bank, Muscatine, Iowa. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. C-B-G, Inc. Wilton, Iowa Order Approving the Acquisition of a Bank Holding Company C-B-G, Inc. ("C-B-G"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 3 of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1842) to acquire up to 100 percent of the voting shares of Peoples National Corporation, Columbus Junction, Iowa ("Peoples"), and thereby acquire Peoples' subsidiary bank, Community Bank, Muscatine, Iowa ("Bank"). Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (64 Federal Register 5807 and 11,473 (1999)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the application and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 3 of the BHC Act. C-B-G, with total consolidated assets of approximately $61.1 million, is the 174th largest commercial banking organization in Iowa, controlling deposits of approximately $46.5 million, representing less than 1 percent of total deposits in commercial banking organizations in the state ("state deposits"). Peoples, with total consolidated assets of approximately $93.8 million, is the 103d largest commercial banking organization in Iowa, controlling deposits of approximately $75.3 million, also representing less than 1 percent of state deposits. On consummation of the proposal, C-B-G would become the 51st largest commercial banking organization in Iowa, controlling deposits of approximately $121.8 million, representing less than 1 percent of state deposits. Competitive Considerations Section 3 of the BHC Act prohibits the Board from approving a proposal that would result in a monopoly in any relevant banking market. That section also prohibits the Board from approving a proposal that may substantially lessen competition in any relevant banking market, unless the anticompetitive effects of the proposal are clearly outweighed in the public interest by the probable effect of the proposal in meeting the convenience and needs of the community to be served. C-B-G and Peoples compete in the Muscatine, Iowa, banking market. C-B-G is the fourth largest depository institution in the market, controlling deposits of approximately $46.5 million, representing 8.4 percent of all deposits held by depository institutions in the market ("market deposits"). Peoples is the fifth largest commercial banking organization in the market, controlling deposits of approximately $42.2 million, representing 7.7 percent of market deposits. On consummation of the proposal, C-B-G would become the third largest depository institution in the Muscatine banking market, controlling deposits of approximately $88.7 million, representing 16.1 percent of market deposits. The change in market concentration, as measured by the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index ("HHI"), would not exceed the threshold level set in the Department of Justice Merger Guidelines ("DOJ Guidelines"). The Department of Justice has reviewed the proposal and advised the Board that consummation of the proposal would not likely have any significantly adverse competitive effects in the Muscatine banking market or any other relevant banking market. The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation also has not objected to the proposal. Based on all the facts of record, and for the reasons discussed above, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposal would not result in a monopoly or have a significantly adverse effect on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in the Muscatine banking market or any other relevant banking market. Financial, Managerial, and Other Considerations The BHC Act also requires the Board to consider the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the companies and banks involved in a proposal, the convenience and needs of the community, and certain other supervisory factors. The Board has carefully considered these factors in light of all the facts of record, including comments from a minority shareholder of Peoples ("Protestant"), who questioned whether C-B-G has sufficient financial resources to complete the proposed transaction. C-B-G is well capitalized under the Board's Capital Adequacy Guidelines and would remain well capitalized after consummation of the proposal. In addition, C-B-G appears to be able to service the debt it would incur under the proposal. The facts of record, including reports of examination by the appropriate federal banking agencies for the institutions involved, also indicate that C-B-G, Peoples and their respective subsidiary banks have long been operated by current management in a safe and sound manner and support a finding that managerial resources are satisfactory. The Board has carefully considered Protestant's comments and all other facts of record, including the response by C-B-G and the appropriate reports of examination, in light of the statutory factors specified in the BHC Act. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the institutions involved are consistent with approval. Considerations relating to the convenience and needs of the community and other supervisory factors also are consistent with approval. Conclusion Based on the foregoing, and in light of all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the application should be, and hereby is, approved. The Board's approval is specifically conditioned on compliance by C-B-G with all the commitments made in connection with the application. For the purposes of this action, the commitments and conditions relied on by the Board in reaching its decision are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The proposed acquisition shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day after the effective date of this order, or later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective March 29, 1999. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Footnotes C-B-G has entered into an agreement with certain shareholders of Peoples to acquire 24.4 percent of the voting shares of Peoples, and has indicated that it intends to make a tender offer for all the remaining outstanding voting shares owned by Peoples' shareholders at the same price per share as in the agreement. C-B-G also would make a tender offer for 4.4 percent of the voting shares of Bank that are not owned by Peoples. Asset and deposit data are as of June 30, 1997. 12 U.S.C. § 1842(c)(1). The Muscatine banking market consists of Muscatine County, Iowa. In this context, depository institutions include commercial banks and thrift institutions. Market share data are based on calculations in which the deposits of thrift institutions are included at 50 percent. The Board previously has indicated that thrift institutions have become, or have the potential to become, significant competitors of commercial banks. See Midwest Financial Group, 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 386 (1989); National City Corporation, 70 Federal Reserve Bulletin 743 (1984). Thus, the Board has regularly included thrift deposits in the calculation of market shares on a 50-percent weighted basis. See, e.g., First Hawaiian, Inc., 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 52 (1991). See 49 Federal Register 26,823 (June 29, 1984). On consummation of the proposal, the HHI would increase by 130 points to 2560. Under the DOJ Guidelines, a market in which the post-merger HHI is above 1800 is considered to be highly concentrated. The Department of Justice has informed the Board that a bank merger or acquisition generally will not be challenged (in the absence of other factors indicating anticompetitive effects) unless the post-merger HHI is at least 1800 and the merger increases the HHI by more than 200 points. The Department of Justice has stated that the higher than normal HHI thresholds for screening bank mergers for anticompetitive effects implicitly recognize the competitive effects of limited-purpose lenders and other nondepository financial entities. C-B-G has committed to the Board that it will seek prior approval from the Federal Reserve System before purchasing any shares of Peoples or Bank if the purchase would cause C-B-G to be less than well capitalized. Protestant also expressed concern that the directors and officers of Peoples may not have properly discharged their fiduciary duties to shareholders of Peoples in considering the proposal and alleged that the management of Peoples had engaged in improper self-dealing activity. As noted, C-B-G stated that it intends to purchase shares from all Peoples' shareholders at the same price per share, and that there are no additional agreements or understandings to compensate the directors or officers of Peoples. The Board notes that the courts have concluded that the limited jurisdiction to review applications under the BHC Act does not authorize the Board to consider matters relating only to corporate governance and the proper compensation of shareholders. See Western Bancshares, Inc. v. Board of Governors, 480 F.2d 749 (10th Cir. 1973). These are matters of state and federal securities law and of state corporate law and may be raised before a court with the authority to provide Protestant with adequate relief, if deemed appropriate. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Meyer, Ferguson, and Gramlich.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation National Credit Union Administration Office of the Comptroller of the Currency Office of Thrift Supervision For immediate release FINANCIAL AGENCIES. FIRST DATA AGREE ON Y2K READINESS DEADLINES WASHINGTON, D.C., March 30,1999 - The federal financial institution regulators and First Data Corporation reached agreement today that the provider of data processing services to banks, thrift institutions and credit unions will complete Year 2000 testing of the last of six merchant processing systems that serve banking and credit union clients by June 30, 1999, and fully implement the system in a Y2K production mode by July 11, 1999. The Agreement covers a single credit card processing platform at the Nashville (Tennessee) Data Center of First Data Merchant Services, a subsidiary of the corporation. Within 15 days, First Data will submit to the agencies and its financial institution clients a written report of how it will fulfill the agreement and then update progress regularly. On this system, which is known as the Envoy processing system, First Data services more than 200 banks, thrifts and credit unions. First Data committed to the federal agencies that it will have ample time to make the necessary adjustments to the Envoy system and to carry out appropriate testing. The Agreement covers only the Envoy system, which, according to First Data, represents approximately 2 percent of its entire Y2K remediation effort. An on-site examination by an interagency team of examiners found that the Envoy system was lagging in meeting testing and implementation milestones, which are part of the interagency guidance. This is the second time regulators have taken action against a service provider. The agencies will continue to monitor financial institutions and service providers for compliance with Year 2000 guidelines. A copy of the Agreement between the agencies and First Data is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced revisions to its Regulation M (Consumer Leasing) official staff commentary, which applies and interprets the requirements of the regulation. The revisions are effective immediately. Compliance is optional until March 31, 2000. The revisions provide guidance on disclosures for lease renegotiations and extensions, official fees and taxes, multiple-item leases, and advertisements. The Board's notice is attached. |
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced revisions to its Regulation Z (Truth in Lending) official staff commentary, which applies and interprets the requirements of the regulation. The revisions are effective immediately. Compliance is optional until March 31, 2000. The revisions provide guidance on the prohibition against the issuance of unsolicited credit cards and on calculating payment schedules involving private mortgage insurance. In addition, the update discusses credit sale transactions where downpayments include cash and property used as a trade-in, and adopts several technical amendments. The Board's notice is attached. |