For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today published proposed revisions to Regulation B, which implements the Equal Credit Opportunity Act. Comment is requested by November 10, 1999 . The proposed revisions would: remove the general prohibition against creditors noting characteristics such as race, sex and national origin of applicants for nonmortgage credit. require creditors to retain certain records for preapproved credit solicitations. expand from 12 to 25 months the record retention period for most business credit applications. The Board also is proposing revisions to the official staff commentary on Regulation B. The Equal Credit Opportunity Act makes it unlawful for creditors to discriminate against an applicant on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, marital status, sex, age and other specified bases. Although the Board is proposing amendments only to certain sections, the entire text of the regulation and official staff commentary are being republished to assist the public in reviewing the changes. The Board's notice is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve System today published on the Internet the proceedings of a research conference, Business Access to Capital and Credit, held March 8-9, 1999, in Arlington, Va. Economists and scholars presented papers at the conference, which was sponsored by the System's Community Affairs officers. Topics included access to credit for minority-owned businesses, microenterprise lending, and credit scoring and securitization of small-business loans. Federal Reserve Board Chairman Alan Greenspan presented the keynote address and Edward M. Gramlich, a member of the Board of Governors, delivered a luncheon address. The conference proceedings -- including a summary, final versions of fifteen working papers and commentary -- are available through the Web sites of the Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago at, respectively, and The next research conference, Changing Financial Markets and Community Development, will be held in Spring 2001 in Washington, D.C. A call for papers is planned for Fall 1999.
For immediate release Announcement by President Clinton of his intention to nominate Roger W. Ferguson, Jr., to serve as Vice Chairman of the Board Chairman Alan Greenspan of the Federal Reserve Board today issued the following statement: "In selecting Roger Ferguson for the position of Vice Chairman, President Clinton has chosen a person highly respected by his colleagues. "Governor Ferguson is an outstanding public servant, with broad experience and sound judgment. I look forward to working with him in this new role upon his confirmation by the Senate." Federal Reserve Board member Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. today issued the following statement: "I am delighted to have been nominated by the President to serve as Vice Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board. During my tenure at the Board, I have been engaged in a wide range of policy matters and enjoyed immensely working with Chairman Greenspan and our colleagues. I welcome this opportunity to expand my role in this vital institution." Federal Reserve Board member Edward W. Kelley, Jr. today issued the following statement on the nomination of Governor Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. as Vice Chairman: "I strongly support the nomination of Roger Ferguson to be Vice Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board. We have worked together very closely since his arrival here. He has made important contributions to all of the various components of our activities and his contributions will be enhanced when he becomes Vice Chairman." Governor Kelley, appointed in 1987, is the longest-serving member of the Board.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of an Order of Prohibition and Order to Cease and Desist against Craig J. Fahrner, a former institution-affiliated party of the Hinsbrook Bank and Trust, Willowbrook, Illinois. Mr. Fahrner, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the Order due to his alleged embezzlement of bank funds. A copy of the Order is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Belmont Bancorp, Bridgeport, Ohio, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today it has ordered nine billion currency notes, with a face value of $67 billion, for Fiscal Year 2000. The order, sent to the Treasury Department's Bureau of Engraving and Printing, represents a return to historical ordering patterns. Last year, the Board ordered eleven billion notes worth $267 billion to meet normal business needs and to prepare for the possibility of increased demand around the Year 2000 rollover. The face value of the new order is considerably smaller than the previous year because the Board decided not to print additional $50 and $100 notes. The inventory of larger notes is sufficient to meet anticipated demand over the next federal fiscal year, which begins October 1. In last year's order, the Board aimed for an increase in inventory because, even though it expects the full variety of payment options to work during the rollover, it wants the public to have confidence in the availability of cash. "Because of increasing confidence in the readiness of the financial infrastructure, we do not anticipate extraordinary demand for cash. Nevertheless, we have taken all the appropriate steps to make sure it is available if the public wants it," said Governor Edward W. Kelley, Jr. While currency inventory levels depend on flows into and out of Reserve Banks from the nation's depository institutions and on the destruction rate of worn-out bills, the Board expects by year-end to have well over $200 billion in Reserve Bank vaults. That's more than enough to replace all of the approximately $170 billion in currency circulating in the United States. The Board expects inventory levels to decrease gradually next year as replacement currency enters circulation and the Bureau of Engraving and Printing delivers fewer notes.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application of Manufacturers and Traders Trust Company, Buffalo, New York, to acquire 32 branches of The Chase Manhattan Bank, New York, New York. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM Manufacturers and Traders Trust Company Buffalo, New York Order Approving the Acquisition of Branches and Establishment of Bank Branches Manufacturers and Traders Trust Company ("M&T"), a state member bank, has applied under section 18(c) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1828(c)) ("Bank Merger Act") to acquire 32 branches of The Chase Manhattan Bank, New York, New York ("Chase"). M&T also has applied under section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act ("FRA") (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 321) to establish branches at the locations of the branches to be acquired, as described in Appendix A. Notice of the applications, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been given in accordance with the Bank Merger Act and the Board's Rules of Procedure (12 C.F.R. 262.3(b)). As required by the Bank Merger Act, reports on the competitive effects of the merger were requested from the United States Attorney General and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ("FDIC"). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the applications and all the facts of record in light of the factors set forth in the Bank Merger Act and section 9 of the FRA. M&T is the 7th largest commercial banking organization in New York, controlling deposits of $14.2 billion, representing 3.4 percent of total deposits in commercial banking organizations in the state. Chase is the largest commercial banking organization in New York, controlling deposits of $95.3 billion, representing 22.4 percent of total deposits in commercial banking organizations in the state. This proposal involves the acquisition by M&T of 32 branches of Chase that are located primarily in banking markets in upstate New York. Chase would continue to operate 389 branches throughout New York State following the transaction. On consummation of this proposal, M&T would remain the 7th largest commercial banking organization in New York, and would control deposits of $14.8 billion, representing 3.6 percent of total deposits in commercial banking organizations in the state. The Bank Merger Act prohibits the Board from approving an application if the proposal would result in a monopoly or would be in furtherance of any attempt to monopolize the business of banking. The Bank Merger Act also prohibits the Board from approving a proposal that would substantially lessen competition or tend to create a monopoly in any relevant market, unless the Board finds that the anticompetitive effects of the proposed transaction are clearly outweighed in the public interest by the probable effects of the transaction in meeting the convenience and needs of the community to be served. The Board has carefully considered the competitive effects of the proposal as required by the Bank Merger Act. M&T and Chase currently compete in the Albany, Binghamton, Buffalo, Elmira-Corning, and Jamestown banking markets in New York. The Board has carefully reviewed the competitive effects of the proposal in each of these markets in light of all the facts of record, including the characteristics of the markets and the projected increase in the concentration of total deposits in insured depository institutions in these markets ("market deposits") as measured by the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index ("HHI") under the Department of Justice Merger Guidelines ("DOJ Guidelines"). The Board also has carefully examined the number of competitors that would remain in each of the banking markets after consummation of the proposal. Consummation of the proposal would be consistent with the DOJ Guidelines and prior Board decisions in the Albany, Binghamton, Buffalo, and Elmira-Corning banking markets. The proposal would exceed the DOJ guidelines in the Jamestown banking market. Jamestown Banking Market . M&T is the fifth largest depository institution in the Jamestown banking market, controlling $93.1 million in deposits, representing 8.6 percent of market deposits. Chase is the third largest depository institution in the Jamestown banking market, controlling $201.2 million in deposits, representing 18.7 percent of market deposits. On consummation of this proposal, M&T would become the largest depository institution in the market, controlling $294.3 million in deposits, representing 27.3 percent of market deposits. The HHI would increase by 324 to 1952. As the Board has indicated in previous cases, in a market in which the competitive effects of a proposal exceed the DOJ Guidelines, the Board will consider whether other factors tend to mitigate the competitive effects of the proposal. The number and strength of factors necessary to mitigate the competitive effects of a proposal depend on the level of market concentration and size of the increase in market concentration. In this case, nine depository institutions, including M&T, would remain in the Jamestown banking market after consummation of the proposal. Three of the largest competitors in the market, excluding M&T, are multistate banking organizations. In addition, three competitors will have market shares exceeding 10 percent, including two competitors with market shares exceeding 20 percent. The Jamestown market also appears to be reasonably attractive for entry. The unemployment rate in the market has fallen from 7.2 percent to 5 percent over the past five years, personal income grew by 24 percent and nonagricultural employment grew by 4.1 percent in that time. Furthermore, two depository institutions have entered the Jamestown market in the last several years. A de novo savings bank opened in 1995, and a community bank entered the market in 1997 by acquiring 4 branches in the market. Since 1994 the HHI for the Jamestown market has steadily declined, from 1975 to 1628 at present. The Board believes that these factors indicate that the likely effect of consummation of this proposal on competition in the Jamestown banking market would not be significantly adverse. Views of the Department of Justice and Conclusions. The Department of Justice has advised the Board that consummation of the proposal would not likely have a significantly adverse effect on competition in any relevant market. After carefully reviewing all the facts of record and for the reasons discussed in this order and its appendices, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposal would not have any significantly adverse effects on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in any of the five banking markets in which M&T and Chase compete or in any other relevant banking market. Accordingly, the Board has determined that competitive factors are consistent with approval of the proposal. Other factors under the Bank Merger Act The Bank Merger Act also requires the Board, in acting on an application, to take into consideration the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the existing and proposed institutions, and the convenience and needs of the community to be served. A. Financial, Managerial, and Future Prospects The Board has carefully considered the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of M&T, and the effect of its acquisition of the Chase branches on those resources and prospects in light of all the facts of record. As part of its consideration, the Board has reviewed relevant reports of examination and other supervisory information prepared by the Reserve Banks and other federal agencies. Based on these and other facts of record, the Board concludes that considerations relating to the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of M&T and the Chase branches are consistent with approval of the proposal. B. Convenience and Needs Considerations In acting on this proposal, the Board also must consider the convenience and needs of the communities to be served and take into account the records of the relevant depository institutions under the Community Reinvestment Act (12 U.S.C ï¿½ 2901 et seq .) ("CRA"). The CRA requires the federal financial supervisory agencies to encourage financial institutions to help meet the credit needs of local communities in which they operate, consistent with their safe and sound operation, and requires the appropriate federal supervisory authority to take into account an institution's record of meeting the credit needs of its entire community, including low- and moderate-income ("LMI") neighborhoods, in evaluating bank expansion proposals. The Board has carefully considered the convenience and needs factor and the CRA performance record of M&T in light of all the facts of record, including public comments on the proposal. As provided in the CRA, the Board has evaluated the convenience and needs factor in light of evaluations by the appropriate federal supervisors of the CRA performance records of the relevant institution. An institution's most recent CRA performance evaluation is a particularly important consideration in the applications process because it represents a detailed on-site evaluation of the institution's overall record of performance under the CRA by the appropriate federal financial supervisory agency. M&T received an "outstanding" rating in the most recent examination of its CRA performance by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, as of May 1998 ("1998 Examination"). The examination found no evidence of any credit practices that violated the substantive provisions of antidiscrimination laws and regulations. Examiners found that M&T responded to the credit needs of its assessment areas by originating 95 percent of its home purchase and home improvement loans and refinancings ("HMDA-related loans"), small farm and small business loans, and community development loans within its assessment areas. The geographic distribution of these loans was deemed excellent. The percentage of M&T's HMDA-related loans to low-income borrowers was found to be lower than the percentage of low-income families in all assessment areas. Examiners noted, however, that this also was true of M&T's peer institutions and appeared to be primarily due to the high cost of housing compared with family income throughout New York State. Examiners noted, moreover, that when the number of HMDA-related loans in an assessment area was compared with the number of owner-occupied housing units in that area, M&T's proportion of loans was greater in LMI communities than in non-LMI communities. Examiners also found that M&T demonstrated a good record of lending to small businesses of different sizes. The 1998 Examination deemed M&T's record of meeting the credit needs of its communities through community development lending to be excellent. Examiners found that M&T had total community development lending of $103.9 million, $69.5 million of which represented loans or lines of credit originated or increased during the examination period. Examiners also cited M&T's use of a variety of innovative or flexible lending practices that address the credit needs of LMI individuals and geographies. These practices include a program that provides borrowers with low-interest loans to help them meet closing costs on other loans, and a "$500 down" program that allows borrowers in certain cities with household incomes below 80 percent of the median to purchase a home with a $500 down payment. During the examination period, M&T made 64 loans for $2.7 million under the $500 down program. M&T also participates in the State of New York Mortgage Association ("SONYMA") low interest rate and new construction incentive program, which provides low-interest, high loan-to-value mortgage loans to first-time homebuyers with incomes below a ceiling set by SONYMA. M&T made 940 of these loans totaling $73 million during the examination period. Examiners rated M&T's CRA-related investment performance to be "high satisfactory," and found that M&T has made a significant level of qualified investments not routinely provided by other banks and private investors. M&T's qualified investments totaled $9.3 million, and supported community services, revitalization and stabilization projects, affordable housing, and economic development projects. Examiners also found that M&T made good use of innovative and complex investments to support community development initiatives, and that overall M&T's investments demonstrated a good level of responsiveness to credit and community development needs. Examiners rated M&T's record of providing banking services in its assessment areas as "outstanding," and found that M&T's banking services and delivery systems were accessible to virtually all geographies and individuals within those areas. At the time of the 1998 Examination of M&T's 155 branches, at least one was in each of its assessment areas, and M&T also had 138 automatic teller machines ("ATMs"), including ten ATMs in low-income geographies that offered check-cashing services. Examiners also noted that M&T also offers 24-hour telephone and personal computer banking services. From July 1996 through December 1997, M&T opened 39 branches, closed five, relocated two and consolidated one. Examiners found that the branch openings had improved the accessibility of M&T's services in LMI and other communities. Four of the 39 new branches were in LMI communities, and no branches were closed in LMI communities. While M&T has not indicated that any branches will be closed or consolidated at the time of the transaction, any subsequent closures or consolidations of the branches acquired in this transaction would be reviewed by the Federal Reserve System in the course of the examination process. This record would be taken into account in assessing the CRA performance of M&T, in accordance with the Joint Interagency Policy Statement Regarding Branch Closings ("Interagency Statement"), and in reviewing future applications involving M&T. Examiners described M&T as a leader in providing community development services that focus on LMI individuals in its assessment areas. This included sponsoring seminars and similar events concerning affordable housing and personal financial management, as well as small business seminars and workshops. Examiners found that M&T provided financial technical assistance to community development, housing, educational, and charitable organizations that benefit LMI individuals, and that M&T employees also serve on the boards of these groups. One Protestant criticized the lending record of M&T's subsidiary, M&T Mortgage Corporation, in the New York City Metropolitan Statistical Area ("MSA"), the Buffalo, New York MSA, and the Syracuse, New York MSA. Specifically, the Protestant asserted that a significant disparity in denial rates existed between African Americans and whites in M&T Mortgage Corporation's lending in the New York City MSA and in the Buffalo MSA. Protestant asserted that, in the Syracuse MSA, M&T Mortgage Corporation made no conventional home purchase loans to either African Americans or Latinos. The Board is concerned when an institution's record indicates disparities in lending to minority applicants, and believes that all banks are obligated to ensure that their lending practices are based on criteria that assure not only safe and sound lending, but also equal access to credit by credit applicants regardless of race. The Board recognizes, however, that HMDA data alone provide an incomplete measure of an institution's lending in its community. The Board also recognizes that HMDA data have limitations that make the data an inadequate basis, absent other information, for conclusively determining that an institution has engaged in illegal discrimination in making lending decisions. In light of the limitations of HMDA data, the Board considers the results of fair lending examinations and other sources of information in evaluating allegations that a banking organization has violated fair lending. In this case, the CRA performance examination of M&T indicates that examiners did not find evidence of discrimination or other illegal credit practices. The examination also stated that directors and senior management of M&T have developed policies, procedures and training programs to ensure that the bank does not illegally discourage or prescreen applicants. Also, as noted above, M&T was found to have an excellent geographic distribution of loans throughout its assessment areas, including LMI and minority communities, and to offer a wide variety of loan products. The Board has carefully considered the entire record, including public comments in this case, in reviewing the convenience and needs factors under the relevant banking statutes. Based on a review of the entire record of performance, including information provided by Protestants, relevant reports of examination, and other supervisory information, the Board concludes that the convenience and needs considerations, including the CRA performance record of M&T, are consistent with approval of these applications. Conclusion Based on the foregoing and all the facts of record, the Board has determined that these applications should be, and hereby are, approved. The Board's approval of this proposal is conditioned on compliance by M&T with the commitments made in connection with these applications. For purposes of this action, the commitments and conditions relied on in reaching this decision are conditions imposed in writing by the Board and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The acquisition of the Chase branches may not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day after the effective date of this order, and this proposal may not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective August 16, 1999. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Secretary of the Board Appendix A Branches of Chase Manhattan to be established by M&T Bank (All in New York) 1. 23 Main Street, Bemus Point. 2. 2 Court Street, Binghamton. 3. 33 West State Street, Binghamton. 4. 904 Broadway, Buffalo. 5. 307 Conklin Avenue, Binghamton. 6. 2-8 East Market Street, Corning. 7. 6348 Transit Road, Depew. 8. 149-153 Robinson Street, Binghamton. 9. 295 Main Street, Buffalo. 10. 1310 North Street, Endicott. 11. 20 West Main Street, Falconer. 12. 181 Clinton Street, Binghamton. 13. 19 East Main Street, Frewsburg. 14. 1085 Chenango Street, Town of Fenton. 15. One West Sixth Street, Jamestown. 16. 2-8 East Third Street, Jamestown. 17. 737 Foote Avenue, Jamestown. 18. 1635 West Third Street, Jamestown. 19. 20 Jenison Avenue, Johnson City. 20. 5 Mile Point Shopping Center, Crescent Drive, Kirkwood. 21. 281 East Fairmount Avenue, Lakewood. 22. 76 South Erie Street, Mayville. 23. 5 Niagara Square, Buffalo. 24. 58 East Pulteney Street, Corning. 25. Oakdale Mall, Store 17, Reynolds Road & Harry L. Drive, Johnson City. 26. 6532-34 East Quaker Road, Orchard Park. 27. 195 Front Street, Owego. 28. 1766 Union Street, Niskayuna. 29. 2225 Colvin Boulevard, Town of Tonawanda. 30. 4481 Vestal Parkway East, Vestal. 31. Main Street & 119th Street, Whitney Point. 32. 5930 Main Street, Williamsville. Appendix B Banking Markets in New York in which M&T and Chase Compete 1. The Albany banking market is approximated by Albany, Columbia, Fulton, Greene, Hamilton, Montgomery, Rensselaer, Saratoga, Schenectady, Schoharie, Warren, and Washington Counties, all in New York. 2. The Binghamton banking market is approximated by Broome and Tioga Counties, plus the municipalities of Alton, Coventry, Greene, and Smithville in Chenango County, all in New York, and Susquehanna County, Pennsylvania. 3. The Buffalo banking market is approximated by Erie and Niagara Counties, plus portions of Cattaraugus, Orleans, and Wyoming Counties, all in New York. 4. The Elmira-Corning banking market is approximated by Chemung County, the municipalities of Alfred, Andover, and Independence in Allegany County, the municipalities of Catharine, Cayuta, Dix, Orange, Montour, Reading, and Tyrone in Schuyler, and the municipalities of Addison, Bath, Bradford, Cameron, Campbell, Canisteo, Caton, Erwin, Greenwood, Hartsville, Hornby, Jasper, Lindley, Rathbone, Thurston, Troupsbury, Wayne, West Union, Woodhull, Urbana, and the city and town of Corning in Steuben County, all in New York. 5. The Jamestown banking market is approximated by Chautauqua County, New York, plus the Allegheny Indian Reservation and the towns of Cold Springs, Conewango, Leon, Napoli, New Albion (less the village of Cattaraugus), Randolph, and South Valley in Cattaraugus County, New York Appendix C Banking Markets in which Consummation of the Proposal Would Not Exceed the DOJ Guidelines Albany: After consummation of the proposal, M&T would control 2.5 percent of market deposits and would remain the 10th largest of 31 depository institutions in the market. The HHI would decrease 1 point to 1063. Binghamton: After consummation of the proposal, M&T would control 18.1 percent of market deposits and would become the 2d largest of 13 depository institutions in the market. The HHI would increase 96 points to 2409. Buffalo: After consummation of the proposal, M&T would control 37.7 percent of market deposits and would remain the largest of 16 depository institutions in the market. The HHI would increase 46 points to 2521. Elmira-Corning: After consummation of the proposal, M&T would control 7.5 percent of market deposits and would become the 4th largest of 15 depository institutions in the market. The HHI would increase 11 points to 1507.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application of Bank Iowa, Red Oak, Iowa, to acquire the Red Oak branch of U.S. Bank, N.A., Minneapolis, Minnesota. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM Bank Iowa Red Oak, Iowa Order Approving Acquisition of a Branch Bank Iowa, a state member bank, has applied under section 18(c) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1828(c)) (the "Bank Merger Act") to acquire the branch of U.S. Bank, N.A., Minneapolis, Minnesota ("U.S. Bank"), located at 802 Broadway, Red Oak, Iowa ("Branch"). Bank Iowa proposes to merge Branch into a nearby Bank Iowa branch on consummation of this proposal. Notice of the application, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been given in accordance with the Bank Merger Act and the Board's Rules of Procedure (12 C.F.R. 262.3(b)). As required by the Bank Merger Act, reports on the competitive effects of the merger were requested from the United States Attorney General and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the application and all the facts of record in light of the factors set forth in the Bank Merger Act. Bank Iowa controls $72.6 million in deposits, representing less than one percent of total deposits in depository institutions in Iowa. Branch controls $17.8 million in deposits, and, on consummation of this proposal, Bank Iowa would control deposits of $92.4 million, representing less than one percent of total deposits in depository institutions in the state. The Bank Merger Act prohibits the Board from approving an application if the proposal would result in a monopoly or would be in furtherance of any attempt to monopolize the business of banking. The Bank Merger Act also prohibits the Board from approving a proposal that would substantially lessen competition or tend to create a monopoly in any relevant market, unless the Board finds that the anticompetitive effects of the proposed transaction are clearly outweighed in the public interest by the probable effects of the transaction in meeting the convenience and needs of the community to be served. The Board has carefully considered the competitive effects of the proposal as required by the Bank Merger Act. Bank Iowa and Branch compete in the Montgomery County, Iowa, banking market. The Board has reviewed the competitive effects of the proposal in this market in light of all the facts of record, including the characteristics of the market and the projected increase in the concentration of total deposits in insured depository institutions in this market ("market deposits") as measured by the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index ("HHI") under the Department of Justice Merger Guidelines ("DOJ Guidelines"). Bank Iowa is the fourth largest depository institution in the market, controlling $21.9 million in deposits, representing 11.5 percent of market deposits. Branch represents the fifth largest depository institution in the market, controlling $17.8 million in deposits, representing 9.4 percent of market share. On consummation of this proposal, Bank Iowa would become the second largest depository institution in the market, controlling deposits of $39.7 million, representing 20.9 percent of market deposits. The HHI would increase by 216 points to 2941. As the Board has indicated in previous cases, in a market in which the competitive effects of a proposal exceed the DOJ Guidelines, the Board will consider whether other factors tend to mitigate the competitive effects of the proposal. The number and strength of factors necessary to mitigate the competitive effects of a proposal depend on the level of market concentration and size of the increase in market concentration. In this case, the structural effect of the proposed transaction would marginally exceed the DOJ Guidelines. Several factors, including the structure of the Montgomery County banking market, indicate that the likely effect of consummation of this proposal on competition in the market would not be significantly adverse. Five depository institutions, including Bank Iowa, would operate in the market after consummation of this proposal. The largest competitor in the market controls approximately 45 percent of market deposits and two additional competitors (other than Bank Iowa) control approximately 17 percent and 16 percent of market deposits. Furthermore, Branch does not appear to be a strong competitor in the market. U.S. Bancorp entered the market through the acquisition of Branch in 1997, and Branch has lost market share in the past two years. The Department of Justice has advised the Board that consummation of the proposal would not likely have a significantly adverse effect on competition in any relevant market. After carefully reviewing all the facts of record, and for the reasons discussed in this order, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposal would not have any significantly adverse effects on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in the Montgomery County banking market or in any other relevant banking market. Accordingly, based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that competitive factors are consistent with approval of the proposal. Financial, Managerial and Other Considerations The Bank Merger Act also requires the Board to consider the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the companies and banks involved in the proposal, and the convenience and needs of the communities to be served. The Board has reviewed carefully these factors in light of all the factors of record, including supervisory reports of examination assessing the financial and managerial resources of the organizations. Based on these and all the facts of record, the Board concludes that the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of Bank Iowa are consistent with approval. In considering the convenience and needs factor, the Board has reviewed the record of Bank Iowa under the Community Reinvestment Act ("CRA"). The Board notes that Bank Iowa received a "satisfactory" rating at its last CRA performance examination by the OCC, as of December 1, 1997. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that convenience and needs considerations, including the CRA performance record of Bank Iowa, are consistent with approval of the proposal. Based on the foregoing and all the facts of record, the Board has determined that this application should be, and hereby is, approved. The Board's approval of this proposal is conditioned on compliance by Bank Iowa with the commitments made in connection with this application. For purposes of this action, the commitments and conditions relied on in reaching this decision are conditions imposed in writing by the Board and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The acquisition of Branch may not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day after the effective date of this order, and this proposal may not be consummated later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective August 18, 1999. (signed) Jennifer J. Johnson Secretary of the Board Footnotes Bank Iowa would acquire Branch from Liberty Bank, FSB, Arnolds Park, Iowa, which acquired eight Iowa branches from U.S. Bank in May 1999. In this context, depository institutions include commercial banks, savings banks, and savings associations. All state banking data are as of December 31, 1998. 12 U.S.C. ' 1828(c)(5)(A). 12 U.S.C. ' 1828(c)(5)(B). The Montgomery County banking market is defined as Montgomery County, plus Indian Creek township in Mills County, all in Iowa. All market data are as of June 30, 1998. Market share data are based on calculations that include the deposits of thrift institutions weighted at 50 percent. The Board previously has indicated that thrift institutions have become, or have the potential to become, significant competitors of commercial banks. See, e.g., Midwest Financial Group, 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 386 (1989); National City Corporation, 70 Federal Reserve Bulletin 743 (1984). Thus, the Board regularly has included thrift deposits in the calculation of market share on a 50-percent weighted basis. See, e.g., First Hawaiian Inc., 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 42 (1991). Under the DOJ Guidelines, 49 Federal Register 26,823 (1984), a market in which the post-merger HHI is above 1800 is considered to be highly concentrated. The Department of Justice has informed the Board that a bank merger or acquisition generally will not be challenged (in the absence of other factors indicating anticompetitive effects) unless the post-merger HHI is at least 1800 and the merger or acquisition increases the HHI by at least 200 points. The Department of Justice has stated that the higher than normal HHI thresholds for screening bank mergers or acquisitions for anticompetitive effects implicitly recognize the competitive effects of limited-purpose lenders and other nondepository financial institutions. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan and Governors Kelley, Meyer, Ferguson and Gramlich.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the release of Consejos para arrendar un vehículo - Guía del consumidor , a Spanish-language version of the popular Keys to Vehicle Leasing - A Consumer Guide. Since 1997, nearly 750,000 copies of the English version of this brochure have been distributed. The brochure provides consumers with an overview of the most common type of vehicle lease used by the automotive industry, a closed-end lease. It provides four key messages for consumers: Leasing is different from buying (Arrendar un vehículo es distinto a comprarlo) Consider beginning, middle, and end-of-lease costs (Considere los costos al inicio, durante y al final del contrato de arrendamiento) Compare different lease offers and negotiate terms (Puede comparar distintas ofertas de arrendamiento y negociar algunas de las condiciones) Know your rights and responsibilities (Conozca sus derechos y responsabilidades) A sample consumer leasing form (muestra del formulario de arrendamiento para el consumidor) is included in the brochure so consumers can become more familiar with the document. Copies of both the English and Spanish versions of the brochure are available by contacting the Federal Reserve Board's Publications Services, Mail Stop 127, Washington, DC 20551 (202-452-3245). The first 100 copies are free of charge. Additional information on leasing is available on the Board's public website at
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of a consent Order to Cease and Desist against the American Bank, Wichita, Kansas, a state member bank. The Order was issued jointly with the State of Kansas Office of the State Bank Commissioner. A copy of the Order is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the proposal of Texas Regional Bancshares, McAllen, Texas ("Texas Regional"), to merge with Harlingen Bancshares, Inc., and thereby to acquire Harlingen's wholly owned subsidiary, HN Bancshares of Delaware, Inc., which in turn owns Harlingen National Bank, all in Harlingen, Texas. The Board also approved the applications of Texas Regional's lead bank, Texas State Bank, McAllen, Texas, to merge with Harlingen National Bank, and to establish branch offices at the six current offices of Harlingen National Bank. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM Texas Regional Bancshares, Inc. McAllen, Texas Texas State Bank McAllen, Texas Order Approving Merger of Bank Holding Companies, Merger of Banks and Establishment of Branches Texas Regional Bancshares, Inc. ("Texas Regional"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 3 of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1842) to merge with Harlingen Bancshares, Inc. ("Harlingen"), and thereby to acquire Harlingen's wholly owned subsidiary, HN Bancshares of Delaware, Inc., which in turn owns Harlingen National Bank ("Harlingen National"), all in Harlingen, Texas. Texas Regional's lead bank, Texas State Bank, McAllen, Texas, also has requested the Board's approval under section 18(c) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (the "Bank Merger Act") (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1828(c)) to merge with Harlingen National, and approval under section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act ("FRA") (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 321) to establish branches at the six current offices of Harlingen National, all in Texas, listed in the Appendix. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (64 Federal Register 36,017 (1999)) in accordance with the Board's Rules of Procedure (12 C.F.R. 262.3(b)). As required by the Bank Merger Act, notice of the proposal also has been published in relevant newspapers, and reports on the competitive effects of the bank mergers have been requested from the United States Attorney General, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency ("OCC"), and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ("FDIC"). The time for filing comments has expired and the Board has considered the proposal and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in the BHC Act, the Bank Merger Act, and the FRA. Texas Regional is the 12th largest banking organization in Texas, controlling $1.5 billion in deposits, representing less than 1 percent of total deposits in insured depository institutions in the state ("state deposits"). Harlingen Bancshares is the 95th largest banking organization in Texas, controlling $194 million in deposits representing less than 1 percent of state deposits. On consummation of the proposal, Texas Regional would become the 10th largest banking organization in Texas, controlling deposits of $1.7 billion, representing less than 1 percent of state deposits. Competitive Considerations The BHC Act and the Bank Merger Act prohibit the Board from approving a proposal if it would result in, or be in the furtherance of a monopoly. These acts also prohibit the Board from approving a proposal if the effect of the proposal may be substantially to lessen competition in any relevant market unless the Board finds that the anticompetitive effects of the proposed transaction are clearly outweighed in the public interest by the probable effect of the transaction in meeting the convenience and needs of the community to be served. Texas Regional and Harlingen Bancshares compete directly in two Texas banking markets, the McAllen-Edinburg-Mission banking market (the "McAllen banking market") and the Brownsville-Harlingen-San Benito banking market (the "Brownsville banking market"). Consummation of the proposal would be consistent with the Department of Justice Merger Guidelines ("DOJ Guidelines") and prior Board precedent in the McAllen banking market. On consummation of the proposal, Texas Regional would remain the largest banking organization in the McAllen banking market and control $1.1 billion in deposits, representing 27.4 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in the market ("market deposits"). The HHI would increase 17 points to 1441. In the Brownsville banking market, consummation of the proposal would increase the level of market concentration, as measured by the HHI, to levels that exceed the DOJ Guidelines. Texas Regional is the fourth largest of 12 banking organizations in the Brownsville banking market, and controls deposits of $287.6 million, representing approximately 13.8 percent of market deposits. Harlingen Bancshares is the sixth largest banking organization in the market, and controls deposits of $180.8 million, representing approximately 8.6 percent of market deposits. On consummation of the proposal, Texas Regional would become the second largest banking organization in the market with deposits of $468 million, representing approximately 22.4 percent of market deposits. The HHI would increase 238 points to 1940. In reviewing the competitive effects of this proposal, the Board has considered that several factors appear to mitigate the likely effect of the proposal on competition in the Brownsville banking market. In particular, one thrift operating in the Brownsville banking market has been an active commercial lender. In addition, 11 competitors would remain in the Brownsville banking market following the merger, and five of those competitors would each have market shares of more than 5 percent. The Brownsville banking market is attractive for entry. The Brownsville banking market recently had the tenth largest increase in population for Metropolitan Statistical Areas in the United States. Since June 1996, four banking organizations have entered the market de novo . The Justice Department reviewed the proposal and advised the Board that consummation of the proposal would not likely have any significantly adverse competitive effects in the Brownsville banking market or any other relevant banking market. The FDIC and OCC have not objected to the proposal. Based on all the facts of record, and for the reasons discussed in this order, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposal is not likely to result in any significantly adverse effects on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in the McAllen and Brownsville banking markets or any other relevant market. On this basis, the competitive factors are consistent with approval of this proposal. Other Considerations The BHC Act and the Bank Merger Act require the Board, in acting on an application, to consider the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the companies and banks involved, the convenience and needs of the communities to be served, and certain supervisory factors. The Board has reviewed these factors in light of the record, including supervisory reports of examination assessing the financial and managerial resources of the organizations and financial information provided by Texas Regional. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that the financial and managerial resources and the future prospects of Texas Regional, Harlingen Bancshares, and their respective subsidiary banks are consistent with approval, as are the other supervisory factors the Board must consider under section 3 of the BHC Act. In addition, considerations related to the convenience and needs of the communities to be served, including the records of performance of the institutions under the Community Reinvestment Act, are consistent with approval of the proposal. The Board also has considered the factors it is required to consider when reviewing applications for establishment of branches under section 9 of the FRA, including the permissibility of the branch locations under state law. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that these factors are consistent with approval of Texas State Bank's application to establish branches listed in the Appendix. Conclusion Based on the foregoing, and in light of all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the applications and notices in this case should be, and hereby are, approved. The Board's approval is specifically conditioned on compliance by Texas Regional with all the commitments made in connection with these applications and notices. For the purpose of this action, the commitments and conditions relied on by the Board in reaching its decisions are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The acquisition of the bank shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day following the effective date of this order, or three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective August 23, 1999. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Footnotes State deposit data are as of June 30, 1998. In this context, depository institutions include commercial banks, savings banks, and savings associations. 12 U.S.C. ï¿½ï¿½ 1842(c)(1)(B) and 1828(c)(5)(B). The McAllen banking market is defined as Hidalgo, Starr, and Willacy Counties, all in Texas. The Brownsville banking market is defined as Cameron County, Texas. Under the revised DOJ Guidelines, 49 Federal Register 26,823 (June 29, 1984), a market in which the post-merger Herfindahl-Hirschman Index ("HHI") is above 1800 is considered highly concentrated. The Department of Justice has informed the Board that a bank merger or acquisition generally will not be challenged (in the absence of other factors indicating anticompetitive effects) unless the post-merger HHI is at least 1800 and the merger increases the HHI by more than 200 points. The Department of Justice has stated that the higher than normal HHI thresholds for screening bank mergers for anticompetitive effects implicitly recognize the competitive effect of limited-purpose lenders and other nondepository financial entities. Market share data are as of June 30, 1998. These data are based on calculations in which the deposits of thrift institutions are included at 50 percent. The Board previously has indicated that thrift institutions have become, or have the potential to become, significant competitors of commercial banks. See Midwest Financial Group, 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 386 (1989); National City Corporation, 70 Federal Reserve Bulletin 743 (1984). Thus the Board has regularly included thrift deposits in the calculation of market share on a 50-percent weighted basis. See, e.g., First Hawaiian, Inc., 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 52 (1991). The thrift, Coastal Banc, has 5.9 percent of its total loan portfolio in nonmortgage commercial loans, and provides a variety of consumer and mortgage loans and other banking products and services. Accordingly, competition from Coastal Banc more closely approximates competition from a commercial bank. The Board previously has indicated that it may consider the competitiveness of a thrift institution at a level greater than 50 percent of the thrift's deposits when appropriate. See Banknorth Group, Inc., 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 703 (1989). Accounting for the deposits of the thrift at 100 percent, consummation of the proposal would increase the HHI in the Brownsville banking market by 211 points to 1822, and Texas Regional would have a post-merger market share of approximately 21.1 percent. Three competitors, excluding Texas Regional, would have market shares of 30, 16 and 15 percent, respectively. See Tex. Fin. Code Ann. ï¿½ 32.203 (West 1997). Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan and Governors Kelley, Meyer, Ferguson, and Gramlich. Appendix Branches of Texas State Bank to be established at Harlingen National's current offices in Texas. 1. 115 East Van Buren Street, Harlingen. 2. 2302 South 77 Sunshine Strip, Harlingen. 3. 1902 West Tyler Street, Harlingen. 4. 1200 North Stuart Place Road, Harlingen. 5. 101 North Main Street, La Feria. 6. 201 Starr Street, Mercedes.
For immediate release The Federal Open Market Committee today voted to raise its target for the federal funds rate by 25 basis points to 5-1/4 percent. In a related action, the Board of Governors approved a 25 basis point increase in the discount rate to 4-3/4 percent. With financial markets functioning more normally, and with persistent strength in domestic demand, foreign economies firming and labor markets remaining very tight, the degree of monetary ease required to address the global financial market turmoil of last fall is no longer consistent with sustained, noninflationary, economic expansion. Today's increase in the federal funds rate, together with the policy action in June and the firming of conditions more generally in U.S. financial markets over recent months, should markedly diminish the risk of rising inflation going forward. As a consequence, the directive the Federal Open Market Committee adopted is symmetrical with regard to the outlook for policy over the near term. In taking the discount rate action, the Federal Reserve Board approved requests submitted by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, St. Louis, Kansas City, and San Francisco. The discount rate is the interest rate that is charged depository institutions when they borrow from their district Federal Reserve Banks.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation National Credit Union Administration Office of the Comptroller of the Currency Office of Thrift Supervision For immediate release Contact: William Fulwider 202/906-6913 FEDERAL FINANCIAL REGULATORS LIFT YEAR 2000 AGREEMENT WITH FIRST DATA Federal banking and credit union regulators announced today the termination of the March 30, 1999, agreement with First Data Corporation on Year 2000 compliance. The regulators said that the service provider to more than 200 banks, thrifts and credit unions has complied with the terms of the agreement. A copy of the Termination Order is attached.
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan New challenges for monetary policy Before a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City in Jackson Hole, Wyoming August 27, 1999 I should like as a backdrop to this conference on the challenges confronting monetary policy to focus on certain aspects of one of the issues that will be more broadly discussed later this morning: asset pricing and macroeconomic performance. As the value of assets and liabilities have risen relative to income, we have been confronted with the potential for our economies to exhibit larger and perhaps more abrupt responses to changes in factors affecting the balance sheets of households and businesses. As a result, our analytic tools are going to have to increasingly focus on changes in asset values and resulting balance sheet variations if we are to understand these important economic forces. Central bankers, in particular, are going to have to be able to ascertain how changes in the balance sheets of economic actors influence real economic activity and, hence, affect appropriate macroeconomic policies. At root, all asset values rest on perceptions of the future. A motor vehicle assembly plant is a pile of junk if no participants in a market economy perceive it capable of turning out cars and trucks of use to consumers and profit to producers. Likewise, the scrap value at the end of the plant's service life will be positive only if it is convertible into usable products. The value ascribed to any asset is a discounted value of future expected returns, even if no market participant consciously makes that calculation. In principle, forward discounting lies behind the valuation of all assets, from an apple that is about to be consumed to a hydroelectric plant with a hundred-year life expectancy. On such judgments of value rest much of our economic system. Doubtless, valuations are shaped in part, perhaps in large part, by the economic process itself. But history suggests that they also reflect waves of optimism and pessimism that can be touched off by seemingly small exogenous events. This morning, I plan to address some of the problems that arise in evaluating the prices of equities. I should like to first focus on some significant difficulties of profit accounting that impede judgments about prospective earnings. In particular, there are some difficulties that have become more severe as a consequence of the recent acceleration of technologies, which, in turn, are markedly altering patterns of economic organization and production. And then I will discuss a different set of forces that mold the development of discount factors which, together with earnings projections, produce estimates of market value. First, the rapid shift in the composition of gross domestic product toward idea-based value added is muddying our measures of current earnings and, hence, our projections of future earnings. The key definitional question that must be confronted is, What is a capital outlay? Conversely, What is an expense that, by definition, is consumed in the process of production and deemed an intermediate product? This issue is most immediately evident in accounting for software outlays, but it is rapidly expanding to a much broader range of activities. Software that is embedded in capital equipment, and some that is stand-alone, is currently being capitalized and consequently amortized against current and future earnings. But a substantial portion of software spending is expensed, even though the equity prices of the purchasing companies are clearly valuing the software outlays as contributing to earnings over their useful economic lives--the relevant criterion for capitalizing an asset. There has always been a fuzzy dividing line between what is expensed and what is capitalized. This has historically bedeviled the accounting for research and development, for example. But the major technological advances of recent years have exposed a wide swath of rapidly growing outlays that, arguably, should be capitalized so that the returns they produce would be more accurately reflected as earnings over time. Indeed, there is even an argument for capitalizing new ideas, such as different ways of organizing production, that enhance the value of a firm without any associated outlays. Some analysts judge the size of undercapitalized outlays as quite large. The important point, however, is that decisions about which items to expense will have important consequences for reported earnings. In general, if the trend of expensed items that should be capitalized is rising faster than reported earnings, switching to capitalizing these items will almost always accelerate the growth in earnings. The reverse, of course, is also true. But the newer technologies, and the productivity and bull stock market they have fostered, are also accentuating some accounting difficulties that tend to bias up reported earnings. One is the apparent overestimate of earnings that occurs as a result of the distortion in the accounting for stock options. The combination of not charging their fair value against income, and the practice of periodically repricing those options that fall significantly out of the money , serves to understate ongoing labor compensation charges against corporate earnings. This distortion, all else equal, has overstated growth of reported profits according to Fed staff calculations by one to two percentage points annually during the past five years. Similarly, the rise in stock prices, which reduces corporate contributions to pension funds is also augmenting reported profits. These upward adjustments in reported earnings, of course, are a consequence of rising stock prices and, hence, may not be of the same dimension in the future. Nonetheless, it is reasonable to surmise that undercapitalized expenses have been rising sufficiently faster than reported earnings to have more than offset the factors that have temporarily augmented reported earnings. It does not seem likely, however, even should all of the appropriate accounting adjustments to earnings be made, that such adjustments can be the central explanation of the extraordinary increase in stock prices over the past five years. However we calculate profits and capital, shifts in the stock market value of firms will doubtless continue to remain important influences on our economies. It is thus incumbent on us to improve our understanding of the process by which projections of future earnings are translated into asset market value. Even our most sophisticated analytic techniques have difficulty dealing with the interactions among time preference, risk aversion, and uncertainty and with the implications of these interactions for the risk premiums that are embedded in asset prices. It is our failure to anticipate changes in this discounting process that much of our inability to accurately forecast economic events lies. For example, the dramatic changes in information technology that have enabled businesses to embrace the techniques of just-in-time inventory management appear to have reduced that part of the business cycle that is attributable to inventory fluctuations and, accordingly, may well have been a factor in the apparent decline in equity premiums that has characterized the latter part of the 1990s. Whether the decline in these premiums themselves may foster activities that could result in wider business cycles, as some maintain, is an open question. As model builders know, all economic channels of influence are not of equal power to engender growth or contraction. Of crucial importance, and still most elusive, is arguably the behavior of asset markets. More broadly, there is an increasing need to integrate into our macro models more complete descriptions of the responses of households and businesses to risk--behaviors that are generally modeled separately under the rubric of portfolio risk management. The translation of value judgments into market prices is, of course, rooted in how people discount uncertain future outcomes. An individual's degree of risk aversion may vary through time and possibly be subject to herd instincts. Nonetheless, certain stable magnitudes are inferable from the process of discounting of future claims and values. One of the most enduring is that interest rates, as far back as we can measure, appear trendless, despite vast changes in technology, life expectancy, and economic organization. British long-term government interest rates, for example, mostly ranged between three percent and six percent from the early eighteenth century to the early twentieth century, and are around five percent today. Indeed, scattered evidence dating back to ancient Rome and before reflects the same order of interest rate magnitude, not a one percent interest rate nor 200 percent. This suggests that the rate of time preference underlying interest rates, like so many other aspects of human nature, has not materially changed over the generations. But while time preference may appear to be relatively stable over history, perceptions of risk and uncertainty, which couple with time preference to create discount factors, obviously vary widely, as does liquidity preference, itself a function of uncertainty. The impact of increasing uncertainty and risk aversion was no more evident than in the crisis that gripped financial markets last autumn, following the Russian default. That episode of investor fright has largely dissipated. But left unanswered is the question of why such episodes erupt in the first place. It has become evident time and again that when events are unexpected, more complex, and move more rapidly than is the norm, human beings become less able to cope. The failure to be able to comprehend external events almost invariably induces fear and, hence, disengagement from an activity, whether it be entering a dark room or taking positions in markets. And attempts to disengage from markets that are net long--the most general case--means bids are hit and prices fall. Modern quantitative approaches to risk measurement and risk management take as their starting point historical experience with market price fluctuations, which is statistically summarized in probability distributions. We live in what is, for the most part, a stable economic system, where market imbalances that produce unusual outcomes almost always give rise to continuous and inevitable moves back toward longer-run equilibrium. However, the violence of the responses to what seemed to be relatively mild imbalances in Southeast Asia in 1997 and throughout the global economy in August and September of 1998 has illustrated yet again that the adjustments in asset markets can be discontinuous, especially when investors hold highly leveraged positions and when views about long-term equilibria are not firmly held. Enough investors usually adopt strategies that take account of longer-run tendencies to foster the propensity for convergence toward equilibrium. But from time to time, this process has broken down as investors suffer an abrupt collapse of comprehension of, and confidence in, future economic events. It is almost as though, like a dam under mounting water pressure, confidence appears normal until the moment it is breached. Risk aversion in such an instance rises dramatically, and deliberate trading strategies are replaced by rising fear-induced disengagement. Yield spreads on relatively risky assets widen dramatically. In the more extreme manifestation, the inability to differentiate among degrees of risk drives trading strategies to ever-more-liquid instruments so investors can immediately reverse decisions at minimum cost should that be required. As a consequence, even among riskless assets, such as U.S. Treasury securities, liquidity premiums rise sharply as investors seek the heavily traded "on-the-run" issues--a behavior that was so evident last fall. History tells us that sharp reversals in confidence happen abruptly, most often with little advance notice. These reversals can be self-reinforcing processes that can compress sizable adjustments into a very short time period. Panic market reactions are characterized by dramatic shifts in behavior to minimize short-term losses. Claims on far-distant future values are discounted to insignificance. What is so intriguing is that this type of behavior has characterized human interaction with little appreciable difference over the generations. Whether Dutch tulip bulbs or Russian equities, the market price patterns remain much the same. We can readily describe this process, but, to date, economists have been unable to anticipate sharp reversals in confidence. Collapsing confidence is generally described as a bursting bubble, an event incontrovertibly evident only in retrospect. To anticipate a bubble about to burst requires the forecast of a plunge in the prices of assets previously set by the judgments of millions of investors, many of whom are highly knowledgeable about the prospects for the specific companies that make up our broad stock price indexes. If episodic recurrences of ruptured confidence are integral to the way our economy and our financial markets work now and in the future, it has significant implications for risk management and, by implication, macroeconomic modeling and monetary policy. Probability distributions that are estimated largely, or exclusively, over cycles excluding periods of panic will underestimate the probability of extreme price movements because they fail to capture a secondary peak at the extreme negative tail that reflects the probability of occurrence of a panic. Furthermore, joint distributions estimated over periods without panics will misestimate the degree of correlation between asset returns during panics. Under these circumstances, fear and disengagement by investors often result in simultaneous declines in the values of private obligations, as investors no longer realistically differentiate among degrees of risk and liquidity, and increases in the values of riskless government securities. Consequently, the benefits of portfolio diversification will tend to be overestimated when the rare panic periods are not taken into account. As we make progress, hopefully, toward understanding asset-pricing mechanisms, we need also to upgrade our insights into the effect of changing asset values on GDP--the so-called wealth effect. Although many aspects of this issue deserve attention, let me cite a few open questions of particular importance. Efforts to differentiate between realized and unrealized gains, and the propensity to leverage both, may afford a deeper understanding of the consequences of asset price change. And differentiating between gains that arise from enhanced profitability and those that reflect changes in discount factors may also be useful. The former may be more likely to be sustained, given the tendencies of discount factors to revert back to historic norms. Moreover, it is evident that borrowings against capital gains on homes influence consumer outlays beyond the effects of gains from financial assets. Preliminary work at the Federal Reserve suggests that the extraction of equity from housing has played an important role in recent years. However, stock market values and capital gains on homes are correlated and, hence, their separate effects are difficult to identify. This is an area that clearly warrants further examination. Finally, in the business sector, questions remain about the influence of equity prices on investment spending. In particular, Do all equity price movements--whether related to fundamentals or not--have the same effect on investment spending? In conclusion, the issues that I have touched on this morning are of increasing importance for monetary policy. We no longer have the luxury to look primarily to the flow of goods and services, as conventionally estimated, when evaluating the macroeconomic environment in which monetary policy must function. There are important--but extremely difficult--questions surrounding the behavior of asset prices and the implications of this behavior for the decisions of households and businesses. Accordingly, we have little choice but to confront the challenges posed by these questions if we are to understand better the effect of changes in balance sheets on the economy and, hence, indirectly, on monetary policy. Footnotes For example, Erik Brynjolfsson and Shinkyu Yang, "The Intangible Costs and Benefits of Computer Investments: Evidence from the Financial Markets," MIT Sloan School, mimeo, April 1999. The Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) will require that the cost of repricing of options be charged against income starting later this year.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the proposal of AmSouth Bancorporation, Birmingham, Alabama, to merge with First American Corporation, Nashville, Tennessee, and thereby acquire its subsidiary bank, First American National Bank, and its nonbank subsidiaries, including First American Federal Savings Bank, all in Nashville, Tennessee.