For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board has begun the 1998 Survey of Small Business Finances in an effort to better understand how economic and regulatory changes have affected small firms' access to credit. From now through the end of 1999, the National Opinion Research Center at the University of Chicago, on behalf of the Board, will interview, by telephone, 6,000 executives at businesses with fewer than 500 employees. Participants were randomly selected from all 50 states and the District of Columbia using scientific sampling methods. They will be asked about their use of credit and other financial services and their experience in obtaining credit during 1998. Information will be collected about firms' assets, liabilities, income and expenses. The names and addresses of participants and any other identifying information will be held in the strictest confidence. Participation is voluntary but a broad sample will help policymakers more clearly understand the impact of their actions on small businesses. "The Federal Reserve is concerned with how economic and regulatory changes affect small businesses," Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan said. "Such changes can, in turn, have important implications for economic policy making." This is the third time the survey has been conducted since 1988. The last survey examined small business finances in 1993. The Board will publish the new study after all the data has been collected and analyzed. More information is available on the and on the .
For immediate release The Federal Reserve today issued a supervisory letter which emphasizes the growing need for large and complex banking organizations to maintain strong internal processes to assure that their capital is fully sufficient to support the underlying risks they face as well as to meet minimum regulatory standards. Capital adequacy is a critical element of a bank's safety and soundness. With the growing scope and complexity of business activities and ongoing financial innovation, simple ratios - including risk-based capital ratios - and traditional rules of thumb no longer suffice in assessing the overall capital adequacy of many banking organizations. The supervisory letter directs examiners to evaluate internal capital management processes to judge whether they meaningfully tie the identification, monitoring, and evaluation of risk to the determination of the institution's capital needs. To support that evaluation, this letter describes the fundamental elements of a sound and comprehensive internal capital adequacy analysis and the key areas of risk it should encompass. This letter grows in part from a recent supervisory review of internal capital management processes at several large complex banking organizations. This review suggests that these processes could be significantly improved, in particular to become better integrated with internal risk measurement and analysis. In providing guidance to examiners and supervisors, this supervisory letter is also intended to encourage such banking organizations to strengthen their risk measurement capabilities as well as to integrate these capabilities more fully in evaluating their own capital adequacy. The practices described in this letter extend in some cases beyond those currently followed by most large banking organizations. Examiners should generally expect these institutions to make steady and meaningful progress towards implementation of a comprehensive internal process for assessing capital adequacy in relation to risk, rather than immediate and full implementation. However, examiners should expect those banking organizations actively involved in complex securitizations or other similar transfers of risk to have in place or immediately implement a comprehensive internal capital analysis that fully reflects all risks. Supervisory letters are the primary means by which the Federal Reserve communicates key policy directives to its examiners, supervisory staff, and the banking industry. The long-term goal of this supervisory letter is to encourage broader adoption of sound practices in internal analysis of capital adequacy, to promote further innovation and enhancements by the industry in this area, and to integrate better such internal analysis into the supervisory process. The supervisory letter is .
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the proposal of Stockman Financial Corporation, Miles City, Montana, to acquire all the voting shares of Terry Bancshares, Inc., and thereby acquire its subsidiary bank, State Bank of Terry, both in Terry, Montana. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Stockman Financial Corporation Miles City, Montana Order Approving the Acquisition of a Bank Holding Company Stockman Financial Corporation ("Stockman Financial"), a bank holding company within the meaning of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 3 of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1842) to acquire all the voting shares of Terry Bancshares, Inc. ("Terry Bancshares"), and thereby acquire its subsidiary bank, State Bank of Terry, both of Terry, Montana. Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (64 Federal Register 25,042 (1999)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the proposal in light of the factors set forth in section 3 of the BHC Act. Stockman Financial is the sixth largest depository institution in Montana, controlling $302.8 million in deposits, representing 3.4 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in the state. Terry Bancshares is the 49th largest depository institution in Montana, controlling $31.8 million in deposits, representing less than 1 percent of the total deposits in depository institutions in the state. On consummation of this proposal, Stockman Financial would remain the sixth largest depository institution in Montana, controlling deposits of $334.6 million, representing 3.8 percent of the total deposits in depository institutions in the state. Competitive Considerations The BHC Act prohibits the Board from approving an application under section 3 of the BHC Act if the proposal would result in a monopoly or would be in furtherance of any attempt to monopolize the business of banking. The BHC Act also prohibits the Board from approving a proposed combination that would substantially lessen competition or tend to create a monopoly in any relevant banking market, unless the Board finds that the anticompetitive effects of the proposal are clearly outweighed in the public interest by the probable effect of the proposal in meeting the convenience and needs of the community to be served. Stockman Financial and Terry Bancshares compete directly in the Miles City, Montana, banking market. Stockman Financial is the largest depository institution in the Miles City banking market, controlling deposits of $117.1 million, representing 27.5 percent of the total deposits in depository institutions in the market ("market deposits"). Terry Bancshares is the fifth largest depository institution in the market, controlling market deposits of $31.8 million, representing 7.5 percent of market deposits. On consummation of this proposal, Stockman Financial would control market deposits of $148.9 million, representing 35 percent of market deposits. Concentration in the market, as measured by the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index ("HHI"), would increase by 411 points to 1808. In evaluating the competitive effects of the proposal in the Miles City banking market, the Board has considered several factors. The Miles City banking market is a relatively small rural market in southeastern Montana and ten competitors of Stockman Financial would remain in the market after consummation of the proposal, including three large multistate bank holding companies. Five of the ten depository institutions that would compete with Stockman Financial after consummation would each have a market share of more than 5 percent. The Department of Justice has reviewed the proposal and advised the Board that consummation of the proposal would not likely have any significantly adverse competitive effects in the Miles City banking market or any other relevant banking market. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that consummation of the proposal would not result in any significantly adverse effects on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in the Miles City banking market or any other relevant market. Other Factors The BHC Act also requires the Board to consider the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the companies and banks involved in the proposal, the convenience and needs of the communities to be served, and certain supervisory factors. The facts of record include supervisory reports of examination assessing the financial information provided by Stockman Financial. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that the financial and managerial resources and the future prospects of Stockman Financial, Terry Bancshares, and their respective subsidiary banks, are consistent with approval, as are the other supervisory factors the Board must consider under section 3 of the BHC Act. In addition, considerations relating to the convenience and needs of the communities to be served, including the records of performance of the institutions involved under the Community Reinvestment Act (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 2901 et seq. ), are consistent with approval of the application. Conclusion Based on the foregoing, and in light of all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the application should be, and hereby is, approved. The Board's approval is specifically conditioned on compliance by Stockman Financial with all the commitments made in connection with this application. For purposes of this action, the commitments and conditions relied on by the Board in reaching its decision are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The acquisition of Terry Bancshares shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day following the effective date of this order, or later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective July 2, 1999. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Footnotes Deposit data are as of June 30, 1998. In this context, depository institutions include commercial banks, savings banks, and savings associations. 12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1842(c)(1). The Miles City banking market is defined as Carter, Custer, Fallon, Garfield, Powder River, Prairie, and Rosebud Counties, all in Montana. Market share data are as of June 30, 1998. Market share data are based on calculations that include the deposits of thrift institutions weighted at 50 percent. The Board previously has indicated that thrift institutions have become, or have the potential to become, significant competitors of commercial banks. See, e.g., Midwest Financial Group , 75 Federal Reserve Bulletin 386 (1989); National City Corporation , 70 Federal Reserve Bulletin 743 (1984). Thus, the Board regularly has included thrift deposits in the calculation of market share on a 50-percent weighted basis. See, e.g., First Hawaiian Inc. , 77 Federal Reserve Bulletin 52 (1991). Under the Merger Guidelines of the Department of Justice, 49 Federal Register 26,923 (June 29, 1984), a market in which the post-merger HHI is more than 1800 is considered to be highly concentrated. The Department of Justice has informed the Board that a bank merger or acquisition generally will not be challenged (in the absence of other factors indicating anticompetitive effects) unless the post-merger HHI is at least 1800 and the merger increases the HHI by more than 200 points. The Department of Justice has stated that the higher than normal HHI thresholds for screening bank mergers for anticompetitive effects implicitly recognize the competitive effects of limited-purpose lenders and other nondepository financial institutions. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chair Rivlin, and Governors Kelley, Meyer, and Gramlich. Absent and not voting: Governor Ferguson.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of a Combined Order to Cease and Desist and Order of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty against John Riesmeyer, a former foreign exchange trader and institution-affiliated party of the New York Branch of Barclays Bank PLC, London, England. Mr. Riesmeyer, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order based on his alleged falsification of trading records of the New York Branch of Barclays Bank PLC. Mr. Riesmeyer paid a fine of $15,000. A copy of the Order is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve today decided not to propose specific changes to Regulation CC at this time to reduce the maximum holds banks may place on nonlocal checks. The Board concluded that return times do not support shortening the permissible holds on nonlocal checks and that the costs and potential risks of shortening holds on all or some nonlocal checks would outweigh the likely benefits. This decision was based on an analysis of issues raised by commenters in response to an advance notice of proposed rulemaking issued in December 1998 that requested comment on the potential benefits and drawbacks of shortening the maximum hold for nonlocal checks. The Board's notice is attached. |
Securities and Exchange Commission Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Federal Reserve Board Office of the Comptroller of the Currency Office of Thrift Supervision The Securities and Exchange Commission, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Federal Reserve Board, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and Office of Thrift Supervision have jointly issued the attached letter to financial institutions on the allowance for loan losses. JOINT INTERAGENCY LETTER TO FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS Over the past several months, the banking regulators and the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") (jointly as the "Agencies") have worked together to provide a consistent message on the allowance for loan losses. In a March 10, 1999 Joint Interagency Letter to Financial Institutions, the Agencies stated, "We recognize that today instability in certain global markets, for example, is likely to increase loss inherent in affected institutions' portfolios and consequently require higher allowances for credit losses than were appropriate in more stable times." On May 19, 1999, SEC Chairman Arthur Levitt reiterated this message and added, "Some have interpreted our efforts on bank reserves to suggest that the SEC thinks reserves are too high and should be lowered. That couldn't be further from the truth. . . I want to emphasize -- it is not our policy that institutions artificially lower reserves or ever have inadequate reserves." As announced in the March 10, 1999 joint letter, efforts are ongoing to provide the banking industry and accounting profession with enhanced guidance on appropriate methodologies, disclosures, and supporting documentation for loan loss allowances. The Agencies have agreed to support and encourage the FASB process and the AICPA Allowance for Loan Losses Task Force in clarifying certain aspects of generally accepted accounting principles ("GAAP") related to loan loss allowances. In this regard, FASB Emerging Issues Task Force Topic D-80 includes guidance on certain loan loss accounting issues. In addition, the Joint Working Group of the Agencies (as described in the March 10, 1999 joint letter) is seeking input and guidance from the banking industry and accounting profession in providing additional disclosure and documentation guidance. This interagency letter, building on the prior interagency joint statements, is intended to reaffirm fundamental principles concerning the loan loss allowance and to highlight the future work of the Agencies in this area. The Agencies have agreed on the following important aspects of loan loss allowance practices: Arriving at an appropriate allowance involves a high degree of management judgment and results in a range of estimated losses; Prudent, conservative, but not excessive, loan loss allowances that fall within an acceptable range of estimated losses are appropriate. In accordance with GAAP, an institution should record its best estimate within the range of credit losses, including when management's best estimate is at the high end of the range; Determining the allowance for loan losses is inevitably imprecise, and an appropriate allowance falls within a range of estimated losses; An "unallocated" loan loss allowance is appropriate when it reflects an estimate of probable losses, determined in accordance with GAAP, and is properly supported; Allowance estimates should be based on a comprehensive, well-documented, and consistently applied analysis of the loan portfolio; and The loan loss allowance should take into consideration all available information existing as of the financial statement date, including environmental factors such as industry, geographical, economic, and political factors. The Agencies will continue to cooperate and communicate with respect to significant issues of policy through their Chief Accountants' meetings. In addition, the SEC staff will consult with the appropriate banking regulators as part of the SEC's process in determining whether to take a significant action in their review of the accounting for a financial institution's loan loss allowance. As set forth in the March 10, 1999 joint letter, the Agencies agreed to provide by March 2000 additional guidance regarding documentation and disclosure issues. In addition, as indicated in that joint letter, certain other accounting issues will be addressed over the next two years through the efforts of the AICPA Allowance for Loan Losses Task Force. While this guidance is under development, financial institutions should follow GAAP, including the concepts set forth herein and the guidance included with Topic D-80, as they establish their loan loss allowances for financial reporting purposes.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application of Civitas Bank, St. Joseph, Michigan, to acquire five branches of First Indiana Bank, a federal savings bank, Indianapolis, Indiana. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
For immediate release Because of the approaching century date change, the Federal Reserve Board announced today that this year it would not require some depository institutions to shift to more frequent and detailed reporting of their deposits in September. Normally, institutions may be required to switch to a new reporting category each September, depending on growth in their level of deposits and reservable liabilities. The Federal Reserve collects deposit data--either weekly, quarterly, or annually--in order to administer reserve requirements and measure the money supply. In general, the larger the institution, the more detailed and more frequent is its reporting. This year, in effect, deposit reporting requirements for most institutions will be frozen, thus reducing the need for depository institutions to modify their data processing systems as the century change approaches. The Board and other supervisory agencies required institutions to have their data processing systems ready for the century change by June 30 and to manage any subsequent changes in their systems with great care. One exception to the freeze in changes to the deposit-reporting schedule applies to institutions that will become subject to reserve requirements this year because of growth in their reservable liabilities. Those institutions will be required to report quarterly on form FR 2900. (For some of these institutions, deposit growth normally would require weekly reporting.) This exception is necessary because of the Board's responsibility to administer reserve requirements. In addition, institutions that usually would have been required to shift from annual to quarterly reporting (for institutions exempt from reserve requirements) and from quarterly to weekly reporting (for institutions subject to reserve requirements) can instead remain in the less-frequent reporting category for the coming year. Finally, depository institutions that qualify to shift to a less burdensome reporting category may do so. Such downshifts are never compulsory. In September 2000, the procedures for adjusting institutions' deposit-reporting schedules will revert to the usual practice. Affected depository institutions will be notified by their Federal Reserve Bank. The Board's notice is attached. |
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of a Notice of Intent to Prohibit against Bruce Jeffrey Kingdon, Kenneth Goglia, and Harvey Plante, former officers of the Bankers Trust Company, New York, New York. The Notice seeks the issuance of orders permanently barring Messrs. Kingdon, Goglia and Plante from participating in the banking industry. The Notice alleges that Messrs. Kingdon, Goglia, and Plante engaged in violations of law, unsafe and unsound banking practices, and acts that constitute breaches of their fiduciary duties in connection with Bankers Trustï¿½s Client Processing Services Business between late 1993 and March 1996. It is further alleged that Messrs. Kingdon, Goglia, and Plante transferred funds to Bankers Trust that were the property of the bankï¿½s customers or their beneficiaries, or that were subject to escheatment to state authorities, to fraudulently enhance revenues and offset expenses incurred by Bankers Trustï¿½s Client Processing Services Business. The Notice alleges that in carrying out these activities, Messrs. Kingdon, Goglia, and Plante caused false entries to be made in the books and records of the bank. The Boardï¿½s actions against Messrs. Kingdon, Goglia, and Plante have been coordinated with the U.S. Attorneyï¿½s Office for the Southern District of New York, which is today announcing criminal indictments against the three individuals. In March 1999, Bankers Trust pled guilty to three felony counts and agreed to pay a $60 million fine to the United States in connection with the operations of the bankï¿½s Client Processing Services Business. A copy of the Boardï¿½s Notice of Intent to Prohibit is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Grimes County Capital Corporation, Houston, Texas, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application of The Sumitomo Bank, Limited, Osaka, Japan, to retain its indirect interest in Daiwa SB Investments (USA) Ltd., New York, New York. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. The Sumitomo Bank, Limited Osaka, Japan Order Approving Notice to Engage in Nonbanking Activities The Sumitomo Bank, Limited ("Bank"), a foreign banking organization subject to the provisions of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act"), has requested the Board's approval under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8)) and section 225.24 of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.24) to retain its indirect interest in Daiwa SB Investments (USA) Ltd., New York, New York ("Company"), and thereby engage in financial and investment advisory activities pursuant to section 225.28(b)(6) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(6)). Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (64 Federal Register 29,646 (1999)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the proposal and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Bank, with total consolidated assets of approximately $456 billion, is the third largest banking organization in Japan. In the United States, Bank operates branches in New York, New York; San Francisco and Los Angeles, California; and Chicago, Illinois. Company has under management approximately $1.1 billion in assets. Bank acquired an indirect interest in Company in connection with the reorganization of Daiwa Securities Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan, ("Daiwa Securities"). As a result of this transaction, Bank and its affiliates received a 44 percent interest in Daiwa Securities' Japanese investment management subsidiary, Daiwa International Capital Management Co., Ltd. ("DICAM"), while Daiwa Securities retained a 44 percent interest. DICAM was renamed Daiwa SB Investments Ltd., and Company was formed by renaming DICAM's wholly owned U.S. investment management subsidiary, Daiwa International Capital Management Corp. (USA), a registered investment advisor. Company continues to be an investment advisor registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") under the Investment Advisers Act of 1940 ("1940 Act") (15 U.S.C. § 80b-1 et seq. ). Accordingly, Company is, and will remain, subject to the recordkeeping and reporting obligations, fiduciary standards, and other requirements of the 1940 Act and the SEC. The Board previously has determined by regulation that financial and investment advisory activities are closely related to banking within the meaning of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Bank has committed that it will conduct the activities of Company in accordance with the limitations set forth in Regulation Y and the Board's orders and interpretations relating to the activities. In order to approve the proposal, the Board also must determine that the proposed activity is a proper incident to banking, that is, that the proposed transaction "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public . . . that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices." As a part of its evaluation of these factors, the Board considers the financial condition and managerial resources of the notificant and its subsidiaries and the effect the transaction would have on those resources. The retention of Company would not require additional financial or managerial resources from Bank. The nature and size of Company's activities would not involve significant risk, nor would the proposal represent a significant expansion of Bank's U.S. operations. The most recently reported capital ratios of Bank exceed the relevant risk-based capital standards established under the Basle Accord, and the inclusion of Company would have no material effect on the capital ratios. The Board has also considered recent financial statements, including pro forma financial statements and other available information, and the condition of the U.S. operations of Bank. Based on these and other facts of record, including relevant supervisory information, the Board has determined that financial and managerial considerations are consistent with approval. There is no evidence in the record indicating that consummation of this proposal is likely to result in significantly adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interests, or unsound banking practices. There are numerous existing and potential competitors in the market for investment advisory services. This acquisition, therefore, would have a de minimis effect on competition in the market for these services. The Board expects that the acquisition would provide public benefits by giving Company access to the resources and experience of Bank and its affiliates. In addition, there are public benefits to be derived from permitting capital markets to operate so that bank holding companies can make potentially profitable investments in nonbanking companies and from permitting banking organizations to allocate their resources in the manner they consider to be most efficient when such investments are consistent, as in this case, with the relevant considerations under the BHC Act. The Board has determined, therefore, that the performance of the proposed activities by Company can reasonably be expected to produce public benefits that outweigh possible adverse effects under the proper incident to banking standard of section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act. Based on the foregoing and all the facts of record, including the commitments made by Bank in connection with the notice, and subject to the terms and conditions set forth in this order, the Board has determined that the notice should be, and hereby is, approved. The Board's determination is subject to all the conditions set forth in the Board's Regulation Y, including those in sections 225.7 and 225.25(c) (12 C.F.R. 225.7 and 225.25(c)), and to the Board's authority to require modification or termination of the activities of a bank holding company or any of its subsidiaries as the Board finds necessary to assure compliance with, or to prevent evasion of, the provisions and purposes of the BHC Act and the Board's regulations and orders issued thereunder. The Board's decision is specifically conditioned on compliance with all the commitments made in the notice, including the commitments and conditions discussed in this order. The commitments and conditions relied on in reaching this decision shall be deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. By order of the Board of Governors, effective July 20, 1999. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Footnotes Asset and ranking data are as of March 31, 1999, and use exchange rates then in effect. See 12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(6). See 12 U.S.C. § 1843(c)(8). See 12 C.F.R. 225.26. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan and Governors Kelley, Meyer, Ferguson, and Gramlich.
Testimony of Governor Edward M. Gramlich Financial privacy issues Before the Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit of the Committee on Banking and Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives July 21, 1999 Thank you, Madame Chairwoman. You and the Subcommittee are to be commended for efforts to resolve the issue of customer financial privacy. This is a vitally important issue in our increasingly information-dependent economy. Information about individuals' needs and preferences is the cornerstone of any system that allocates goods and services within an economy. The more information about needs and preferences that is available, the more accurately and efficiently will the economy meet these needs and preferences. But though the availability of information promotes economic efficiency, there is also a long-recognized value in permitting individuals to maintain a zone of privacy. This value must be weighed against the benefits of economic efficiency that accrue from a broad dissemination of information. To date, this issue has been largely handled in the marketplace, where the competitive value to companies of the use of customer information has been traded off against the competitive value of providing customer privacy, but there could be a public dimension as well. The growth of information-sharing technology has raised some important public policy issues that must be dealt with by the Congress. The collision between economic interests in the value of customer information and individual privacy interests is an inevitable consequence of the growth in information technology. As information technology increases the flexibility of production processes to meet changes in product demands, the value of information about existing and probable demands also increases. Increases in productivity will contribute most efficiently to increases in standards of living when that productivity is focused on the goods and services consumers desire most. In order to identify existing customers' preferences, as well as potential customers and their preferences, firms will seek information about the tastes of their own customers. The current debate over the privacy of customer financial information concerns information that banking and other financial institutions derive from their relationships with their customers. This information may include information submitted by a customer to a bank in order to obtain a loan or deposit service; information concerning transactions between a customer and a bank, such as individual deposits, check payments or payments on loans; as well as information obtained by the bank from third parties, such as information from a credit report. The economic value of this customer financial information to the bank in unquestionable. It is necessary to the conduct of transactions and also helps the bank evaluate the credit risk of its customers. This information also has value to others who may wish to sell goods or services to the bank's customers, and therefore has value to the bank as a marketable asset. In the area of financial information, however, it is clear that many consumers believe that an implicit contract exists between the financial institution and the customer that requires the financial institution to keep certain transactional information confidential. Control of information about ourselves is one of the fundamental means by which we, as individuals, manage our relationships with each other. The feeling that financial information should be private has deep historic roots, and bankers and bank customers have long viewed their business relationship as involving a high degree of trust. The maintenance of this trust is essential to ensuring the confidence in our financial institutions that is so essential to their operations. As market processes evolve, there is evidence that consumers have come to value both economic efficiency and privacy. On one side, individual consumers often overcome their reluctance to share particular items of information with third parties if they benefit from the sharing of that information. Many consumers participate in programs that assist retailers in collecting detailed information about their own purchases in exchange for modest price discounts. Similarly, the sharing of credit histories for certain purposes is so widely accepted that sometimes creditors have been criticized by customers for failing to share information that would help these customers improve their credit histories. At the same time, proposals or programs for using information about individuals have been abruptly dropped because of public responses. In Washington, D.C., two sellers of prescription medications stopped sharing prescription data with a third party. Several states backed away from programs of sharing driver's' license photographs with a private company. Federal banking regulators dropped a proposal to require banks to establish "Know Your Customer" programs. In each of these cases, the strength of individual privacy preferences was underestimated, and public reaction forced a response more consistent with these preferences. It is also possible that the increased ease of collecting and sharing information is allowing the practices of information users to evolve more rapidly than individuals' ability to respond. Given the rapid evolution of current market practice and the paucity of public information about these practices, the ability of individual bank customers to influence these developments through their market choices may not be adequate. Already our judicial system is reaching for the appropriate balance between the economic value of customer financial information and the customer's privacy interest. The judicial system has long recognized the value of customer information: the courts have considered customer lists to be intellectual property protectable as trade secrets for most of this century. This suggests that customer account information may also be considered to be the intellectual property of the bank. In a related context, the Supreme Court has flatly characterized documents relating to a customer's account as "the business records of banks" to which the customer "can assert neither ownership nor possession." Although ownership of property, including intellectual property, ordinarily includes the power to use or transfer the property, a number of state courts have limited banks' ownership rights in customer information, recognizing the value of the privacy of financial transactions to individuals. Despite the fact that most banking relationships are based on a debtor-creditor relationship, which entails considerably less responsibility for the counterparty's interests than a fiduciary relationship, these courts have found an implied contractual duty on the part of banks to maintain the confidentiality of customer information. This environment presents the Congress with a series of important questions. Are banking practices involving customer information developing so quickly that customers will be unable to respond to those practices effectively? If so, can market processes be made more efficient without materially lessening privacy protection? If not, must the Congress itself strike the appropriate balance between these competing interests? The Congress has already deemed it necessary to address specifically the uses of consumer financial information in the Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA). This Act governs the exchange of customer data by and with consumer reporting agencies. In connection with the enactment and amendment of the FCRA, the Congress grappled with some of the issues related to sharing customer information between affiliates. After significant debate, the Congress balanced the issues of consumer privacy and economic efficiency by allowing institutions to share information related solely to the institution's transactions or experiences with the customer, but to require that each customer be provided with the right to "opt-out" of sharing between affiliates of any other type of customer information. In addition, the Electronic Fund Transfer Act requires a financial institution holding certain accounts to inform consumers of the circumstances under which information will be made available to affiliates and third parties. Similarly, several states have construed constitutional provisions or enacted general or industry-specific statutes to establish financial privacy rights. Moreover, the Congress has given the banking agencies powers that may be exercised to address abuses in this area. These include the banking agencies' general enforcement powers over unsafe and unsound practices under the Federal Deposit Insurance Act and the Federal Reserve's ability to adopt rules addressing unfair or deceptive acts or practices under the Federal Trade Commission Improvement Act. Although we believe that information sharing between banks and third parties is fairly common, to date we have received relatively few complaints and have not found the need to institute any enforcement actions on privacy grounds. The Congress is now considering whether to place additional limitations on banks and other financial institutions' disclosures of customer information, as would be done by the privacy provisions of H. R. 10. By adding these additional limitations--such as providing customers the right to "opt-out" and thereby limiting the sharing of the institution's own experiences and other transactional information with third parties--it would be placing an increased value on privacy protections for bank customers. In making this decision, it is important that the tradeoff between economic efficiency and privacy be addressed with the fullest possible understanding of the competing interests. In particular, there should be recognition of the importance of consistency across markets--to ensure that any limitations imposed on one industry, such as financial services, do not place that industry at a competitive disadvantage. If the Congress were to enact the privacy provisions of Sections 501 through 510 of H.R. 10 as drafted, we believe that the exceptions would permit routine payment transactions and supervisory activities to continue. However, the Committee may wish to consult others as to the efficacy of other exceptions to the disclosure limitations. There may be some room to clarify the drafting, and we would be happy to offer suggestions to that end. In addition, the time period for adopting or implementing regulations is ambitious. Thought might be given to extending the implementation period to at least a year. Finally, your letter of invitation raised issues with respect to the Board's own privacy policy and to our experience with the Right to Financial Privacy Act and the Privacy Act. Significantly, these questions relate to governmental, as opposed to private, access to data about individuals. The Board's privacy policy statement was adopted in June and can be accessed from the Board's "home page" and several other locations on the Board's web site ( ). At its web site, the Board collects information concerning the frequency and volume of visits to the site. It does not collect information that identifies individuals, nor does it use "cookies" (i.e., entries placed in the individual's computer to allow monitoring of the individual's use of a web site). The Board does not see an obvious need for revision of the Right to Financial Privacy Act at this time, though there is a need for its continued review. We would want to make a more thorough study of the issue before recommending any specific changes.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today its approval of the application of Banco de la Ciudad de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina, to establish a representative office in New York, New York. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
For immediate release The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision has issued four papers providing guidance to banks and banking supervisors on various aspects of credit risk in banking. These papers form part of an ongoing effort by the Committee to strengthen procedures for risk management in banks. They can be obtained from the BIS Web site at The four papers are: Sound Practices for Loan Accounting and Disclosure Principles for the Management of Credit Risk Best Practices for Credit Risk Disclosure Supervisory Guidance for Managing Settlement Risk in Foreign Exchange Transactions Sound Practices for Loan Accounting and Disclosure is final. The paper addresses issues facing banks and bank supervisors in accounting for loans and loan losses. It is a revised version of a consultative paper issued in October 1998. The Basel Committee invites comments, by November 30, 1999, on the other three papers from all interested parties including bankers, rating agencies, analysts, industry groups, standard-setters and supervisors. They may be submitted to the Committee's Web site or mailed to: Basel Committee on Banking Supervision Attention: Mr. William Coen Bank for International Settlements CH-4002 Basel, Switzerland Principles for the Management of Credit Risk encourages banking supervisors globally to promote sound practices for managing credit risk. The paper identifies sound practices that banks should use in managing the credit risk in all of their activities, both banking and trading. Best Practices for Credit Risk Disclosure identifies the credit risk information that market participants and supervisors need to make a meaningful assessment of banking organizations. It encourages such institutions in all countries to provide that information to the public. Supervisory Guidance for Managing Settlement Risk in Foreign Exchange Transactions is being issued as part of the credit package because settlement risk clearly has a credit risk dimension. The guidance builds on previous work by the Committee on Payments and Settlements Systems of the Bank for International Settlements. The Basel Committee was established by the central bank Governors of the Group of Ten countries in 1975 and operates under the auspices of the Bank for International Settlements in Basel, Switzerland. The Committee consists of senior supervisory authorities representing the world's largest banking systems and works to strengthen bank supervisory and regulatory practices worldwide.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application of Security Pecos Bancshares, Inc., Pecos, Texas, and Security Delaware Pecos Bancshares, Inc., Dover, Delaware, to acquire Security State Bank of Pecos, Pecos, Texas. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. Security Pecos Bancshares, Inc. Pecos, Texas Security Delaware Pecos Bancshares, Inc. Dover, Delaware Order Approving the Formation of Bank Holding Companies Security Pecos Bancshares, Inc. ("Security Pecos") and Security Delaware Pecos Bancshares, Inc. ("Security Delaware") (collectively, "Applicants") have requested the Board's approval under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act") (12 U.S.C. § 1842) to become bank holding companies by acquiring up to 100 percent of the outstanding voting shares of Security State Bank of Pecos, Pecos, Texas ("Bank"). Notice of the proposal, affording interested persons an opportunity to submit comments, has been published (64 Federal Register 9512 (1999)). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the proposal and all comments received in light of the factors set forth in section 3 of the BHC Act. Applicants are nonoperating companies formed to acquire Bank. Bank is the 382d largest depository institution in Texas, controlling $59.5 million in deposits, representing less than 1 percent of total deposits in depository institutions in the state. The proposal would not result in the acquisition of any additional banking assets. Based on all the facts of record, the Board concludes that the proposal would not have any significantly adverse effects on competition or on the concentration of banking resources in any relevant banking market. The BHC Act also requires the Board to consider the financial and managerial resources and future prospects of the companies and banks involved in a proposal, the convenience and needs of the community to be served, and certain other supervisory factors. The Board has carefully considered these factors in light of all the facts of record, including comments from a bank holding company that objects to the proposal ("Protestant"). Protestant contends that Applicants have significantly underestimated the probable cost of acquiring Bank and, consequently, the financial resources needed to acquire and support Bank. Protestant argues that Applicants have failed to demonstrate that they possess adequate financial resources to consummate the proposal. The Board has carefully reviewed all the financial and managerial information provided by Applicants and Protestant regarding the proposal and the assessment of the financial resources of Bank made in confidential reports of examination by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas. The Board notes that Bank currently is well capitalized. In addition, under the proposal submitted by Applicants, the projected financial condition of Applicants and Bank and the projected debt-service obligation of Applicants are reasonable and consistent with the Board's guidelines. The Board also has considered several commitments made by Applicants, including a commitment not to incur or assume any indebtedness in connection with the proposal if, immediately thereafter, Bank would be less than well capitalized. The Board also has reviewed relevant reports of examination of Bank, and the managerial resources of Applicants' organizers, all of whom currently are officers and directors of Bank. Based on these and all the other facts of record, including the commitments made by Applicants, the Board concludes that financial and managerial considerations as well as the future prospects of Applicants and Bank are consistent with approval. Considerations relating to the convenience and needs of the community, including the performance record of Bank under the Community Reinvestment Act, and other supervisory factors also are consistent with approval. Protestant also contends that Applicants are effectively prohibited from acquiring Security Pecos under the Texas Business Combination Law ("Combination Law"), which is designed to impede hostile takeovers of Texas companies. Protestant argues that it is unlikely that Applicants will obtain approval of the share exchange agreement by two-thirds of all shareholders eligible to vote on the proposal, as required by Texas law. The Board may not approve the acquisition of a bank by a bank holding company if the acquisition is prohibited by state law. The Texas Banking Commissioner has reviewed the proposal and indicated that the Combination Law applies to the proposal as structured because it includes an exchange agreement between Bank and Applicants. Applicants intend to proceed with the proposed transaction and to comply with the requirements of the Combination Law. However, to address the possibility that Applicants may not be able to obtain the required shareholder approval under the Combination Law, Applicants have proposed alternative methods to acquire Bank that, Applicants assert, would not be subject to the Combination Law. Applicants have determined not to proceed with the transaction unless they obtain at least 85 percent of Bank's voting shares. Applicants also have made several financial commitments intended to ensure that Applicants' financial resources and condition would not be impaired by a voluntary exchange and that Applicants' organizational structure would be substantially identical whether the proposal was consummated under an exchange agreement or on a voluntary basis. Based on the foregoing and all the facts of record, the Board has determined that the application should be, and hereby is, approved. The Board's approval is specifically conditioned on compliance by Applicants with all the commitments made in connection with the application. For the purposes of this action, the commitments and conditions relied on by the Board in reaching its decision are deemed to be conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its findings and decision and, as such, may be enforced in proceedings under applicable law. The proposed acquisition shall not be consummated before the fifteenth calendar day after the effective date of this order, or later than three months after the effective date of this order, unless such period is extended for good cause by the Board or by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, acting pursuant to delegated authority. By order of the Board of Governors, effective July 28, 1999. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Footnotes Applicants also would acquire all the voting shares of Security Safety Deposit Box Corporation, Pecos, Texas ("Security Box"), which provides safe deposit box services to customers of Bank. Shares of Security Box are held in trust for the benefit of shareholders of Bank on a pro rata basis and are only transferrable with Bank shares. Under section 225.22(c) of the Board's Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.22(c)), Applicants may acquire Security Box without the Board's prior approval. Deposit data are as of December 31, 1998. In this context, depository institutions include commercial banks, savings associations, and savings banks. Protestant also contends that the debt that Security Pecos would assume from its organizers would unfairly burden minority shareholders of Security Pecos, who would not contribute any debt. The Board notes that the courts have concluded that the Board's limited jurisdiction to review applications under the BHC Act does not authorize it to consider matters relating only to shareholder relations and their proper compensation. See Western Bancshares, Inc. v. Board of Governors , 480 F.2d 749 (10th Cir. 1973). These are matters of state corporate law and may be raised before a court with the authority to provide Protestant with adequate relief, if deemed appropriate. Protestant maintains that actions by Applicants in connection with the presentation of the proposal to the Board raise adverse managerial considerations. For example, Protestant alleges that Applicants did not disclose to the Board the appointment by Bank's board of directors of an independent committee to evaluate offers to acquire Bank, the independent committee's recommendation to Bank's shareholders, and the fact that Applicants' organizers raised their tender offer price after Applicants filed their application. In response, Applicants assert that the application has been amended to describe fully Applicants' current tender offer, and the record of the application includes substantially all facts regarding Protestant's dispute with Applicants and the role of the independent committee. Moreover, as noted above, all of Applicants' organizers are officers or directors of Bank, and the Board has considered Protestant's allegations in light of the most recent examination report and other supervisory information concerning the managerial resources of Bank. The Board also received a comment from an individual objecting that the proposed ownership of Bank by Security Delaware, a Delaware chartered company, is intended solely to authorize Bank to engage in transactions not otherwise permitted in Texas. The proposal would not have this effect. Tex. Bus. Corp. Act Ann. art. 13.01 et seq. (West 1999). Protestant argues that, under the Combination Law, Applicants' organizers are "affiliated shareholders" of Bank, and, as affiliated shareholders, the organizers may not cause Bank and Security Pecos to enter into an exchange agreement unless the proposal either has been approved by a majority of the board of directors of Bank before the organizers became affiliated shareholders or is subsequently ratified by two-thirds of the shareholders of Bank (other than the organizers). An affiliated shareholder is any shareholder or group of shareholders that controls more than 20 percent of the shares of a Texas company. See Whitney National Bank of Jefferson Parish v. Bank of New Orleans and Trust Company , 379 U.S. 411 (1965). Under one alternative, Applicants' organizers and any other willing shareholders of Bank would make a voluntary exchange of Bank shares for shares to be issued by Security Pecos. By making the exchange voluntarily, an exchange agreement involving Bank would not be required, and the proposed acquisition could proceed without a "business combination" as defined in the Combination Law. Based on a review of the relevant provisions of state law, and after consultation with the Texas Banking Commissioner, it appears that this alternative would comply with applicable state law. This action was taken pursuant to the Board's Rules Regarding Delegation of Authority (12 C.F.R. 265.4(b)(1)) by a committee of Board members. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan and Governors Kelley and Ferguson. Absent and not voting: Governors Meyer and Gramlich.
Remarks by Governor Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. Before the George Washington University Y2K Group , Washington, DC July 29, 1999 Continuing the Countdown to Year 2000: Focusing on Public Disclosure and Public Confidence As the countdown to the Year 2000 continues, and with only five months to go until the new year, it is certainly prudent for us to focus now on the Year 2000 readiness of our nation and, indeed, the entire global community. So I applaud the Research Program in Social and Organizational Learning here at George Washington University for sponsoring this wide-ranging conference. Over the course of several days, this assembly has discussed important issues in many sectors of our economy. These Year 2000 discussions, and others like them around the nation, will help to create public awareness and understanding, which are very important building blocks in the structure of public confidence. I will come back to the confidence issue in a few minutes, but I will commence with a review of progress to date. Preparedness of the Domestic Banking Industry First I want to provide today some perspectives on the Year 2000 readiness of the U.S. banking sector. At the Federal Reserve, we are closely involved with preparations for the century date change in the financial sector here and around the world. We expect there will be glitches. Nothing this complex can be completely without fault. However, I want to confirm at the outset that the Federal Reserve is ready for the Year 2000, and every current indication is that the domestic banking system also is, for all practical purposes, ready for a smooth transition. Much of my emerging confidence results from the fact that the Federal Reserve System is fully prepared for the Year 2000; 100 percent of the Federal Reserve's mission-critical systems are ready. At the Federal Reserve Board and the 12 District Banks, we are using today the automated systems that we will use in the Year 2000. In fact, we have been testing these systems for more than a year with banks and thrifts that are linked to us around the country for payments and related functions. These tests have gone extremely well. This is significant because the Federal Reserve Banks operate the hub of the nation's payments system, providing depository institutions with essential services in cash, checks, and electronic payments. Thus, because of the Federal Reserve's readiness, Americans can have confidence that the nation's basic payments infrastructure is sound and ready to process payments as usual before and after the century date change. Another fact that gives me confidence in the domestic financial sector's preparations for the century date change is that almost all of the nation's banks, thrift institutions, and credit unions are ready for Year 2000. The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) reported last month that 98.3 percent of insured institutions were ready. These good evaluations reflect years of diligent work by thousands of large and small institutions alike to meet rather aggressive deadlines for mission critical systems set by the regulators. As you may know, banks were required to meet certain milestones for identifying, renovating, implementing, and testing their mission critical automated systems to ensure that their customers would receive the quality and timeliness of service they expect after the century date change. The small handful of institutions that have not yet met the regulatory milestones are, I assure you, receiving the full attention of the regulators. Combined with the readiness of the Federal Reserve to support the nation's payments infrastructure, the readiness of commercial banks means that we can expect that the processing systems that support all methods of payment--ATM cards, debit cards, credit cards, direct deposit and other electronic payments, checks, and even cash--will work smoothly around the date change. The readiness of the Federal Reserve and the extensive preparations in the banking system do not, however, guarantee perfection. No one can say that there will be no problems in the banking system when the century date rolls over. As we are all aware, processing and other failures do occur in complex modern automated systems, often in ways that are rarely visible to the public. We fix these annoying minor faults every day and go on, and this is what we will do at the time of the century date change. Moreover, if isolated glitches do emerge, the Federal Reserve and depository institutions will draw on their contingency plans to get systems operating again as promptly as possible. At the Federal Reserve, we have extensive contingency plans, many of them already well tested during hurricanes, blizzards, and other events. It is important to emphasize that we believe such contingency planning to be an important element of planning and preparedness for a wide variety of possible events. It does not mean that we think particular problems are likely. In general, we encourage all banking institutions to undertake appropriate contingency planning, so they will be ready just in case there is an unexpected or unusual set of events. For the special circumstances of the century date change, we have developed additional wide-ranging plans to deal with contingencies of all kinds, even though we expect the banking system to operate normally. Let me give you some examples. One recent example of our contingency planning is the establishment of special liquidity arrangements for borrowing by depository institutions. As lender of last resort, the Federal Reserve always is ready to provide short-term loans to banks and thrifts that experience temporary liquidity needs. For additional liquidity, the Federal Reserve announced a plan to help healthy institutions meet credit demands late this year and in the first quarter of 2000 should they face short-term liquidity problems. This borrowing arrangement, by its very existence, even if it is not widely used, should provide assurance to the public and banks that the lender of last resort will be there to provide liquidity should banks need it during the rollover to 2000. To be prepared in case our fellow citizens choose to have a little extra cash on hand for the century rollover--it will be a long holiday weekend for many, after all-- the Federal Reserve is building an inventory of currency in our vaults. This inventory will be more than enough to meet any conceivable demand for cash. Given the high expectation that all normal payments methods will work, we do not expect that there will be any unusual demand for cash, but if there is, we will be ready to meet it. Just as the Federal Reserve has planned for even very remote contingencies, individual banks and thrifts also have been required to extend existing contingency plans to address new risks posed by Year 2000 and test these plans. These plans are meant to ensure that customers can be confident they will have access to their funds during the century date rollover period. For example, each institution was required to develop a liquidity plan describing how it would meet demands for cash from its customers and how it would meet the credit needs of its community. For some institutions, getting extra cash from the Federal Reserve or borrowing in the financial markets or from the Federal Reserve may be part of their plans. Having detailed the readiness and contingency planning of the Federal Reserve and the entire U.S. banking sector, I hope you can understand why I am increasingly confident that generally normal operations will prevail in this country's financial institutions during the century date change. International Financial Sector Developments Turning now to the international arena, I am encouraged at the progress being made this year by most foreign financial regulators and the largest financial institutions to meet the Year 2000 challenge, but I am somewhat less certain of the international preparations than I am of our domestic readiness. Let me emphasize that I am somewhat less certain, not fearful. Given the wide variety of institutions and systems around the world, and obvious difficulties in systematically collecting definitive and current information regarding Year 2000 readiness, no one can know for certain all of the international outcomes of the century date change. However, in my role as Chairman of the Joint Year 2000 Council, which is an international group of financial regulators representing banking, insurance, and securities regulators, as well as central bankers and payment system overseers, I have information that helps bring some of the issues into clearer focus. The preparation of our domestic payments links is bolstered by the fact that foreign financial services firms are generally believed to be among the best prepared in their respective countries. We do know that the largest, most internationally active firms are making good progress toward preparedness. They are forced to do so in order to remain viable in their home markets and globally. I also know that awareness among financial regulators is high. The Joint Year 2000 Council has held meetings in all regions of the globe. These regional meetings have been attended by regulators from over 100 countries. Similarly, the United Nations hosted a meeting for Year 2000 Coordinators in June, which was attended by representatives of more than 170 countries. These public sector efforts are mirrored by regional meetings held by leading members of the private sector. Surveys of international financial regulators, as well as my own conversations with many of them, also have demonstrated that a recognition of the problem increasingly has been translated into concrete plans and actions, many of which have gathered momentum in the last six months. Another positive perspective flows from the large and very successful test of domestic and cross-border payments systems last month. In this test using a simulated Year 2000 environment, more than 500 financial market participants from 19 countries were able to complete transactions in 34 national and international payment systems. The test included sending and receiving payment instructions, and payment settlements. There were virtually no errors, and the few problems discovered were remedied quickly. That cross-border test is one example of a broader development. We are getting increasingly positive information regarding the preparedness of core financial systems overseas, importantly including payment and settlement systems, that could, if not prepared, trigger difficulties in the world's financial operations. These systems have generally implemented extensive internal testing and most are testing with participants, as well. The large test last month does seem to confirm that Year 2000 readiness has improved in many of the more important financial sectors around the world. Avoiding Complacency We should not let these recent successes lead to complacency, either domestically or internationally. Domestically, institutions should continue to make preparations for the rollover period through event management and contingency planning, and in a very few cases by further remediation work. Most importantly, this should include maintaining an active effort to keep customers appropriately informed. Because of the important role of public confidence in sustaining financial stability during an event such as the Year 2000 rollover, in which there are inevitable uncertainties, persistent and effective public communication is essential. Full and fact-based information will certainly help individuals maintain perspective and encourage them to avoid taking needless risks. On the other hand, incomplete information or misunderstanding may cause some to take risks such as shifting deposits from banks, or withdrawing large sums of cash, or even making unreasoned decisions about other assets they hold. Without solid perspective about Year 2000 preparations, others may fall victim to Year 2000-related frauds or be asked to buy Year 2000 products and services of questionable value. Similarly, there is still work to be done internationally. First, while the financial sector worldwide is considered to be ahead of most other sectors, it is generally thought that the United States still leads most other countries in the degree of preparedness, although some are as advanced as we are. For example, testing programs and in some cases further remediation efforts still need to be made in some countries, although these activities are obviously quite advanced in our major trading partners and the other major industrialized economies. Second, all countries should hold themselves to the highest standard of self-disclosure, so that financial markets can make fully informed decisions. This need for disclosure includes industrial countries, as well as developing countries. Similarly, financial market participants need to seek full information on international preparedness, and make reasonable, calm, and considered--not hasty--trade-offs between risk and reward. Now that it seems as though the developed world is generally well positioned in dealing with the Year 2000 problem, the focus has shifted to the "emerging market countries." This group is described by some to be at the greatest risk of failure due to technical difficulties. My concern is that "emerging market countries" is too broad a group of nations, numbering well over 100. It is important that emerging and newly industrialized economies making good progress toward preparedness, and there are many, disclose that as clearly as possible. Market participants should look for and make those disclosures part of their decisionmaking. Those "emerging market economies" that are not making satisfactory progress should disclose their status and seek assistance as they work to remediate mission-critical systems and engage in contingency planning. In particular, financial institution preparedness can be hampered by a lack of preparedness in critical infrastructure--telecommunications, power, and water. This cannot be taken for granted. I would, however, note that many of the countries that may be the farthest behind are also those that are least dependent upon technology. Similarly, many of these countries have the fewest links to the international financial markets, and their performance during the century date change is least likely to have a significant cross-border impact. Finally, good contingency planning, including manual work-arounds may avoid serious problems. Ultimately, however, systems will have to be fixed or replaced, whether before the century date change or after, and the sooner the process is started, the better. Conclusion To sum up, I believe that the U.S. banking system is largely ready for the Year 2000 and that major foreign financial institutions generally are working diligently to be ready as well by January 1. Thus, I believe that the Year 2000 in the financial sector of the United States and many other countries is really less of a technical issue now than it was last year at this time. Moreover, the relevant regulators here and around the world know what needs to be done over the next five months, and are communicating with the business leaders managing the world's financial institutions. The progress we see in the global financial sector and the evidence from successful cross-border and domestic tests are also positive signs. Thus, with the technical and business elements generally making good progress, the real issue remaining for the United States and other leading countries is that of public awareness, understanding, and ultimately, public confidence. We should all recognize that the Year 2000 event is unique in that we all know that it will occur, but exactly what will occur is uncertain. In this environment, we should listen to the most reasonable and responsible sources. Part of maintaining public confidence is fact-based disclosure to both the public at large and to market counterparties. Disclosure still remains an issue for some, particularly as "emerging market economies" seek to distinguish those making good progress from those that need to increase efforts. Many emerging market and newly industrialized countries are making good progress. For some countries, technical challenges may remain, particularly for those that recognized this problem relatively recently. Finally, we know that there are likely to be some glitches, which I would expect to be small and of short duration. Similarly, I would expect any international disturbances to be limited in terms of the number of institutions and countries affected. In order to achieve that outcome, however, some countries and institutions should focus on mission critical systems, and all should engage in contingency planning as the key activity now. By remaining dedicated for the next five months we can all ensure that the work of the last several years is completed fully, and any remaining risks are minimized. I believe that those who have been working on this effort will rise to the challenge.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of a Notice of Suspension against Joseph C. Liu, the President, Chief Executive Officer and a director of the Great Eastern Bank, Flushing, New York. Mr. Liu is being suspended from his positions at the Great Eastern Bank on account of his indictment and arrest today on charges of conspiracy, the misapplication of bank funds, and the making of false entries in the bank's books and records. The suspension is effective pending the resolution of the criminal charges against Mr. Liu, or until the Board terminates the Notice of Suspension. The Board's action against Mr. Liu has been coordinated with the U.S. Attorney's Office for the Eastern District of New York. The board of directors of the Great Eastern Bank will be appointing William J. Laraia, the former President of The Apple Bank, New York, as the new President of the bank. A copy of the Notice of Suspension is .