No content found
For immediate release Walter J. Boyer Garland, Texas Jeremy Eisler Director of Litigation South Mississippi Legal Services Corp. Biloxi, Mississippi Robert F. Elliott Lake Forest, Illinois Martha W. Miller President Choice Federal Credit Union Greensboro, North Carolina Karla Irvine Executive Director Housing Opportunities Made Equal of Greater Cincinnati, Inc. Cincinnati, Ohio Daniel W. Morton Vice President and Senior Counsel The Huntington National Bank Columbus, Ohio Gwenn Kyzer Vice President Target Marketing Service Experian, Inc. Allen, Texas David L. Ramp State of Minnesota Assistant Attorney General St. Paul, Minnesota John C. Lamb Senior Staff Counsel Department of Consumer Affairs Sacramento, California Robert G. Schwemm Professor of Law University of Kentucky Lexington, Kentucky David J. Shirk Senior Manager, Lending Systems Framework, Inc. Tarrytown, New York Council members whose terms continue through 2001 are: Malcolm M. Bush President The Woodstock Institute Chicago, Illinois Rose Garcia Executive Director Tierra del Sol Housing Corporation Las Cruces, New Mexico Mary Ellen Domeier President State Bank & Trust Company of New Ulm New Ulm, Minnesota Vincent Giblin Chief Executive Officer International Union of Operating Engineers West Caldwell, New Jersey John C. Gamboa Executive Director The Greenlining Institute San Francisco, California Willie Jones Deputy Director The Community Builders, Inc. Boston, Massachusetts Anne S. Li Executive Director New Jersey Community Loan Fund Trenton, New Jersey Gary S. Washington Senior Vice President ABN AMRO Chicago, Illinois Marta Ramos Vice President & CRA Officer Banco Popular de Puerto Rico San Juan, Puerto Rico Robert L. Wynn II Financial Education Officer Department of Financial Institutions Madison, Wisconsin
For immediate release Preliminary figures indicate that operating income of the Federal Reserve Banks amounted to $29.347 billion during 1999. Net income before payment of dividends, additions to surplus, and payments to the Treasury totaled $26.255 billion. About $25.400 billion of this net income was distributed to the U.S. Treasury during 1999. Federal Reserve System income is derived primarily from interest earned on U.S. government securities that the Federal Reserve has acquired through open market operations. Income from the provision of financial services amounted to $836 million. Operating expenses of the 12 Reserve Banks totaled $1.904 billion. In addition, the cost of earnings credits granted to depository institutions under the Monetary Control Act of 1980 amounted to $322 million. Assessments against Reserve Banks for Board expenditures totaled $214 million and the cost of currency amounted to $485 million. Net deductions from income amounted to $526 million, resulting primarily from unrealized losses on assets denominated in foreign currencies revalued to reflect current market exchange rates. Statutory dividends to member banks were $375 million. Under the policy established by the Board of Governors at the end of 1964, all net income after the statutory dividend to member banks and the amount necessary to equate surplus to paid-in capital is transferred to the U.S. Treasury.
Remarks by Vice Chairman Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. Before the National Economic Association, Boston, Massachusetts January 7, 2000 Tale of Two Continents: A Comparison of Asian and Latin American Experiences during Recent Financial Turmoil Now that the recent emerging markets crisis has been resolved--or at least is well on its way toward resolution--it is appropriate to step back and assess what we have learned from this episode. Perhaps more than anything else, the crisis has raised an array of questions that demand our consideration, including the following: What are the major macroeconomic and financial characteristics that make countries vulnerable to crises? What factors determine the depth and severity of such crises, both for a particular country and for the global financial system as a whole? What is the nature of contagion? Why does a crisis in a given country adversely affect other countries that often have little interaction with (or little similarity to) the initial crisis country? These questions are of more than just intellectual interest. They have enormous implications for the formulation of economic policy and directly affect the welfare of millions of people across the globe. The economics profession in recent years has made some progress in formulating answers to these questions, but the limits of our understanding remain substantial. Today, I will focus on a subset of these issues, examining an aspect of the recent emerging markets crisis that remains something of a puzzle. For many years, the Asian developing countries have been held up as one of the global economy's shining success stories. Fueled by high domestic savings and investment rates, coupled with fiscal restraint and low inflation, real per capita GDP in these economies has risen dramatically since the 1960s. In contrast, during large portions of this period, the Latin American countries have been afflicted by a variety of economic ailments--including fiscal imbalances, capital flight, hyperinflation, and currency crashes--that have depressed domestic savings and investment and hindered economic growth. Judged by several measures, however, the Asian countries were hit much harder by the recent crisis than were the Latin American countries. Why was this the case? What vulnerabilities pushed these dynamic Asian economies into severe crisis? What economic policies or characteristics allowed the major Latin American countries to weather the storm with comparatively less damage? One apparent answer to these questions is that Latin America recently had endured a crisis--the 1994-95 peso devaluation. This observation, however, raises a complementary set of equally intriguing questions. Namely, in what sense does a crisis today inoculate a country against crisis tomorrow? Does this inoculation occur through improved macroeconomic fundamentals, stronger financial sector performance, or some other factors? In an effort to answer such questions, I will focus on two issues. First, I will discuss some evidence assessing the impact of the recent crisis on the emerging Asian and Latin American countries. Second, I will offer some working hypotheses that might explain the differential effects of the crisis on the two regions. Before going further, let me underscore the following point. The Asian economies have proven themselves to be very competitive in global markets and highly resilient. Consistent with this observation, the major Asian crisis countries appear to be well on their way to recovery, with the possible exception of Indonesia, which remains plagued by political instabilities. But notwithstanding the underlying strength of the Asian economies--or perhaps precisely because of their underlying strength--there is much to be learned in assessing why they fared poorly relative to their Latin American counterparts during the recent round of crises. Comparing the Impact of the Crisis The behavior of GDP provides a natural measure for assessing the severity of the recent crisis in the two regions . The Asian crisis began in Thailand during July 1997, when a run on the country's currency--the baht--forced the government to float the exchange rate. Not coincidentally, real GDP peaked in mid-1997 and fell more than 10 percent before reaching a trough during the second half of 1998. After the devaluation of the baht, the crisis spread to Malaysia, Indonesia, and the Philippines. Each of these countries was eventually forced to allow its currency to float more freely against the dollar, and each country also experienced a sharp contraction of its GDP. In Malaysia, output fell 10 percent between the third quarter of 1997 and the third quarter of 1998. Indonesia was even more severely afflicted, with GDP plunging more than 15 percent during that time. The Philippines was relatively less affected, however, as GDP declined just 3 percent from peak to trough. Korea, which was the last major Asian country hit by the crisis, endured sharp declines in the value of its currency and its domestic financial markets during late 1997 and early 1998. Korean GDP dropped about 8 percent during this period. Now turning to Latin America, this region first felt the effects of the financial crisis during the fall of 1997. At that time, Brazil--the center of the crisis in Latin America--raised interest rates to high levels and drew down its stock of international reserves to keep its currency--the real--from falling. However, pressures on Brazil re-emerged following the Russian devaluation in August 1998. The high interest rates necessary to defend the real became increasingly difficult to sustain, and the authorities floated the currency in January 1999. The real depreciated about one-third in the subsequent six months. To the surprise of most observers, Brazilian GDP fell only 3 percent from its peak during the second quarter of 1998 to a trough at the end of that year. Perhaps even more surprisingly, Brazilian inflation remained restrained after the devaluation, and the economy registered strong growth during the first half of 1999, nearly erasing the contraction that occurred during the second half of 1998. Ironically, several of Brazil's neighbors have fared worse. Argentina successfully defended its exchange rate regime but has suffered a comparatively steep decline in economic activity. The high interest rates necessary to defend its peg to the dollar, along with the intensified uncertainty generated by the crisis and reduced competitiveness following the Brazilian devaluation, pushed Argentine GDP down 5 percent from mid-1998 to mid-1999. Activity in Chile, Colombia, and Ecuador has fallen by a comparable amount. Mexico's experience, however, stands as an interesting contrast. For a number of reasons, which I will discuss later, economic activity in Mexico generally has remained strong. The country has endured only one quarter of negative GDP growth in the past three years. A second means of assessing the impact of the crisis on the two regions is the degree of external adjustment that occurred . Significantly, Thailand's current account swung from a deficit of 8 percent of GDP in 1996 to a surplus of 12 percent of GDP in 1998. This startling adjustment in the current account balance was accomplished entirely by a compression of imports, as the dollar value of exports was about flat but imports plunged 40 percent. The story for other major Asian crisis countries is broadly similar. In contrast, current account adjustment in the three major Latin American countries has been much less pronounced. All three countries have remained in deficit, with total adjustment during the crisis estimated to amount to only about $15 billion (compared with $120 billion in Asia) and current account deficits remaining around 3 to 5 percent of GDP. The extent of current account adjustment in Asia was necessitated in part by a sharp tailing off of private capital flows to the region . Specifically, gross private financial flows to Korea, Malaysia, Thailand, and the Philippines plunged from $28 billion in the second half of 1996 to just $4 billion in the last half of 1998. Over this period, new bank loans issued to these economies fell nearly two-thirds, and bond issuance declined more than 90 percent. Private financial flows to Latin America, in contrast, did not decline severely until the second half of 1998. Flows to both regions rebounded during the first half of 1999. Explaining the Differential Impact of the Crisis The available evidence clearly indicates that the Asian developing countries experienced sharper GDP declines, more severe current account adjustment, and a steeper falloff in private capital flows during the recent crisis than did their Latin American counterparts. I will now consider four broad hypotheses that may account for the differential impact of the crisis on the two regions. First, were macroeconomic conditions in Asia in worse shape than those in Latin America? Asia's growth performance in the years immediately preceding the crisis did not hint of disruptive imbalances. These economies were registering average annual growth of roughly 7 to 8 percent. While such rates of expansion might be considered unsustainably rapid, these countries had maintained such performance for many years without any apparent adverse effects. By comparison, the Latin Americans recorded more moderate growth rates in the years before the crisis. Inflation in both regions generally was well contained. What about current account imbalances ? All of these countries ran current account deficits in the period before the crisis. Although the imbalances in Asia were somewhat larger than those in Latin America, such differences--with the possible exception of Thailand--do not appear to be particularly significant. Moreover, the current account performance of the three major Latin American countries deteriorated further during 1998. Were real exchange rates in Asia substantially overvalued relative to those in Latin America ? During the first half of 1997, immediately before the onset of the crisis, the broad real exchange rates for Thailand, Indonesia, and Malaysia were only about 5 to 8 percent stronger than their 1990-96 average, and Korea's real exchange rate was slightly weaker than its 1990-96 average. The real exchange rate for the Philippines was more than 20 percent above its average, but--as previously noted above--this country was relatively less affected by the crisis. Hence, there is little evidence of substantial overvaluation of exchange rates in these countries. In comparison, during the first half of 1998, before the onset of the Latin American phase of the crisis, the real exchange rates for Argentina and Brazil were about 10 percent stronger than the 1990-97 average, while Mexico's real rate was about 5 percent stronger. Finally, the fiscal position of the Asian countries was no worse--and perhaps somewhat better--than that of the Latin American countries. Countries in both regions ran small deficits or slight surpluses. Brazil was the pronounced exception, with a fiscal deficit well over 5 percent of GDP. Accordingly, there seems to be little evidence that Asia's macro fundamentals in the run-up to the crisis were significantly weaker than those for the Latin American countries. Indeed, indicators point to roughly comparable performance and risk in the two regions. A second hypothesis is that the financial systems in the Asian developing countries were beset with greater vulnerabilities than was the case in Latin America. This explanation seems to be more promising. Consider the case of Thailand. In the mid-1990s, the country's domestic savings rate was about 35 percent of GDP, and the current account deficit was about 8 percent of GDP. This suggests that the financial system each year was intermediating investment flows on the order of 40 percent of GDP. It is conceivable that an economy with sound financial infrastructure and well-developed legal and regulatory institutions could have efficiently allocated such massive flows. However, in an emerging market economy that is still developing the institutions required to regulate, supervise, and support a viable financial system, it is not surprising that over time financial resources were misallocated and a substantial stock of bad loans emerged. In the absence of strong prudential regulation, the financial sector may have had inadequate incentives to assess risk properly and to monitor borrowers. From this perspective, the real puzzle may be why the Asian financial system did not falter sooner. Stated in slightly different terms, IMF statistics indicate that in 1996 bank claims on the private sector were about 100 percent of GDP in Thailand and about 60 percent of GDP in Korea. These numbers far exceed the ratios of roughly 20 percent of GDP that prevailed in Mexico, Argentina, and Brazil, countries that also experienced considerably slower domestic loan growth in the years preceding the recent crisis. The systemic risks implied by weak regulation may be much more severe in countries with relatively large banking systems. This observation is not unique to developing countries. Even Japan, one of the world's advanced industrial countries, has struggled with a bad-loan problem, partially because of massive bank lending in an environment of inadequate prudential supervision. Moreover, countries where the banking system is large relative to GDP may be forced to endure more-severe macroeconomic disruptions when a banking crisis actually occurs, since the costs of cleaning up the crisis are likely to be large compared with the size of the economy and firms are likely to be highly dependent on banks for the provision of credit. In light of these considerations, it is perhaps not surprising that Asian financial institutions were hit harder by the crisis than Latin American institutions. For example, Thailand was forced to close dozens of finance companies, and deep financial problems in two of Korea's largest banks persuaded the authorities to temporarily nationalize those institutions. In addition, an enormous bad-loan problem in Thailand and Indonesia--and to some extent in the other Asian crisis countries, including Korea--emerged after the crisis, thus creating uncertainty about the future economic performance and financial viability of these economies. In contrast, major Latin American countries moved to strengthen their financial systems following the peso crisis in the mid-1990s. As a result, banks in these countries appear to have sustained minimal new damage. Argentina is a notable example: Efforts to strengthen the financial position of the banks, coupled with improvements in prudential regulation, have allowed the banks to remain relatively healthy, despite the effects of the crisis and the country's protracted recession. This discussion suggests that financial system vulnerabilities probably were more severe in Asia than in Latin America. Such a conclusion, however, does not necessarily imply that Asian financial institutions were fundamentally less efficient or effective, only that they were more vulnerable when the crisis hit. Suffice it to say that policymakers in Latin America also are wrestling with sizable financial sector problems. A third hypothesis is that the crisis hit Asia harder because investor sentiment shifted more abruptly than it did in Latin America. In other words, one might be asked--Did the crisis somehow reveal comparatively more information about the performance of the Asian developing countries and their economic prospects? The answer to this question seems to be "yes." The major revelation--or wake-up call--that transformed the Asian devaluations into first-order crises was the (apparently sudden) realization on the part of investors that the Asian countries were suffering from deep structural imbalances, particularly in their financial sectors. This dramatic shift in sentiment was a central feature of the crisis in Asia. Importantly, there were no similar downside surprises in Latin America, because investors were already familiar with the region's structural inefficiencies and difficulties. It is fair to say that memories of the peso devaluation in 1994-95 remained fresh in investors' minds. The sudden shift in investor perceptions of the Asian countries is reflected in the dramatic downgrading of sovereign debt ratings that occurred between mid-1997 and early 1998 . During this period, Standard & Poor's downgraded Thailand four notches (from A to BBB-), Indonesia, six notches (from BBB to B), and Korea, ten notches (from AA- to B+). In contrast, S&P's credit ratings for Argentina and Mexico were unchanged during the crisis (at BB), and Brazil's rating was reduced only one notch (from BB- to B+). The less-pronounced reversal in sentiment regarding Latin America may be partially due to the fact that the crisis hit Asia first. This gave policymakers in Latin America an opportunity to implement preemptive measures, such as interest rate increases and initiatives to improve fiscal performance, that may have helped minimize subsequent damage. Another implication of the difference in timing was that "hot money" was able to leave Latin America gradually rather than in one frenetic rush. The Latin American countries also may have benefited because global economic policymakers--including the IMF--had learned from their experiences in Asia and Russia. A fourth hypothesis focuses on the speed and effectiveness of the policy response. Were policymakers in Asia slower to respond to the crisis than those in Latin America, and did this have a bearing on the severity of the crisis? The response to the crisis in the two regions differed in at least one important respect: The Latin Americans were much quicker to raise interest rates aggressively. Notably, short-term interest rates in Thailand did not peak until the second half of 1997, well after the baht was allowed to float. The authorities were hesitant to raise interest rates rapidly during the first half of that year, notwithstanding the fact that the currency had come under severe pressure. As an alternative strategy, the Thai authorities attempted to defend the pegged exchange rate regime through substantial foreign exchange intervention, which drained a significant fraction of official reserves and still failed to achieve the desired goal. In contrast, the major Latin American countries raised interest rates significantly as soon as they were hit by the shock waves from the crisis. More generally, Thailand's experience highlights the fact that a half-hearted defense of a fixed exchange rate regime may drain reserves, reduce the credibility of the authorities, and ultimately prove unsuccessful. Accordingly, an emerging consensus in the policymaking community suggests that, when fixed exchange rate regimes come under attack, they either should be abandoned as quickly as possible or defended with all available instruments, including aggressive monetary tightening. This discussion suggests a further observation. Ironically, Latin America's history of financial crises actually may have helped limit the damage done by the recent crisis. The regions' previous crises have allowed policymakers (many of whom are well-trained technocrats) to gain significant experience in crisis management. The Asian economies, in contrast, had grown essentially without interruption for many years. Perhaps as a result, policymakers in the region may have been less prepared to deal with the crisis. Additionally, since the Latin American countries had much experience with economic crises, the turmoil associated with the recent crisis may have been less damaging to the sentiment of investors and the general public than was the case in Asia. It seems reasonable to hypothesize that, when economic crises are a fact of life, institutions and practices are likely to develop that make countries more resilient in the face of such crises. Lessons from Mexico's Recent Experience I now turn to Mexico. As mentioned earlier, the Mexican economy has been particularly buoyant during the recent crisis. Are there any general lessons that can be drawn from Mexico's experience? Although the Mexican authorities have raised interest rates at various times over the past two years to stabilize the peso, they nonetheless have allowed the peso to depreciate. It is probably fair to say that any adverse effects of peso depreciation are small compared with the costs that would have been borne had the authorities attempted to prevent the currency from weakening. This suggests that the policies required to defend a pegged exchange rate--not to mention the disruptions that are endured when such pegs are blown out--may leave countries with this sort of regime more vulnerable to downturn when crises occur. An additional factor that likely has contributed to Mexico's resilience in recent years is its close relationship with the exuberant U.S. economy. Roughly three-quarters of Mexican exports are purchased by the United States, representing about one-fifth of Mexican output. The strength of the U.S. economy also has benefited Latin American countries more generally. On the other hand, the Asian countries are highly integrated with Japan. It may be more than coincidence that the Asian crisis erupted after a sustained depreciation of the yen and as Japan fell into a deep recession. Moreover, during the darkest days of the Asian crisis, Japanese imports from Asia declined sharply, and Japanese bank lending to these countries slowed. Developments in Japan almost certainly exacerbated the breadth and depth of the Asian crisis. Some Conclusions What conclusions can be drawn from this discussion? First, and not surprisingly, developing countries that are hit with adverse shocks are likely to fare much better if they are highly integrated with a large, booming economy. This unfortunately is more a matter of luck (namely, the position of the partner country in its business cycle) than a clear prescription for economic policy. Second, during times of crisis, flexible exchange rate regimes appear to have major advantages relative to more rigid regimes. Flexible regimes may provide additional room for maneuver, since adjustment to an adverse shock can come through exchange rate depreciation. Flexible exchange rate regimes are also less costly to defend. Third, when adverse shocks arise, the authorities should move quickly to put appropriate policies in place to preempt potential difficulties. Particularly, in the context of a fixed exchange rate regime, monetary policy should be tightened aggressively to defend the peg, or the regime should be abandoned. A fourth lesson from the discussion is that strong macroeconomic fundamentals are necessary--but not sufficient--for avoiding crisis. Structural policies are also of first-order importance. Fifth, developing countries should move to strengthen their financial infrastructure, improve the efficiency of financial intermediation, and ensure that the regulations and incentives for proper credit assessment and monitoring are in place. This is particularly important for those countries with huge quantities of domestic savings; if appropriate measures are not implemented, such countries may face further financial crises in coming years. Finally, probably the major factor generating the sharp economic decline in Asia was the dramatic reassessment of prospects for the region, largely reflecting a "wake-up call" regarding the financial sector's level of performance. Of necessity, investors will punish such downside surprises severely. To limit the magnitude of such downside surprises, policymakers should take action to maximize financial sector transparency and ensure appropriate disclosure of information. Footnotes Thailand's GDP declined during 1996:Q4 and 1997:Q1. The economy rebounded briskly during 1997:Q2, but GDP remained below its 1996 high. I have chosen 1997:Q2 (the local maximum) as the relevant pre-crisis peak. These data include bank loans received and issuance of bonds and equities. The data exclude interbank flows. In other words, consider the following: Suppose that the Asian banking systems and the Latin American banking systems were asked to intermediate a similar quantity of funds. In which region would the resulting allocation of credit and level of financial sector performance be closest to the "optimal" outcome? The answer to this question is not immediately clear. The sovereign ratings assigned by Moody's moved in a broadly similar fashion.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice by First National Corp. of Ardmore, Inc., to acquire 33.3 percent of the voting shares of Southern Land Title Services, Inc., both in Ardmore, Oklahoma, and thereby engage in real estate settlement and title abstracting services. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice of North Fork Bancorporation, Melville, New York to acquire JSB Financial, Inc. ("JSB") and thereby acquire JSB's wholly owned subsidiary, Jamaica Savings Bank FSB, both of Lynbrook, New York. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice of North Fork Bancorporation, Melville, New York to acquire Reliance Bancorp, Inc. ("Reliance") and thereby acquire Reliance's wholly owned subsidiary, Reliance Federal Savings Bank, both of Garden City, New York. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
Remarks by Governor Edward M. Gramlich Before the Charlotte Economics Club, Charlotte, North Carolina January 13, 2000 Inflation Targeting At one time or another, opinions on how central banks should operate have focused on fixing exchange rates, stabilizing the rate of growth of the money supply, smoothing the growth of nominal income, or setting short-term interest rates through an instrument rule. But lately both academic economists and central bankers have become enamored of a new procedure that may have more staying power than these other approaches and that has certainly been more widely adopted around the world. Called inflation targeting, this new procedure essentially commits a country's central bank to hit an inflation target, usually expressed as a low, positive rate of inflation subject to some margin of error and some allowance for outside price shocks. New Zealand was the first country to adopt a formal inflation targeting regime back in 1990. It was soon followed by Canada, the United Kingdom, Sweden, and Australia. The European Central Bank at least alludes to inflation targeting in its strategy statements, as do many countries in eastern Europe that aspire to join the European Union. At least ten emerging-market countries have adopted inflation targeting as a way to correct persistent inflation problems. In the last few months alone, Turkey, Switzerland, and South Africa have announced that they are switching to inflation targeting. When tallied up, the number of countries on either a formal or an informal inflation-targeting regime now approaches thirty. Perhaps more meaningfully, there seems to be no country that has first tried inflation targeting and then abandoned it. One apparent holdout is the United States. While U.S. central bankers have often stressed the paramount importance of controlling inflation, the United States has never adopted a formal inflation target or an inflation-targeting regime. The Federal Reserve operates under the Federal Reserve Act, which requires the Fed to try to achieve maximum employment along with price stability. But both in the academic community and in the halls of the Congress, there are advocates for change. In a series of articles and books, Bernanke, Laubach, Mishkin, and Posen (1999) have proposed that the United States adopt an explicit inflation-targeting regime. Senator Connie Mack has introduced a bill to this effect in the Congress, so far not adopted. Recognizing that the question of whether the United States should adopt inflation targeting is ultimately a congressional prerogative, one could still ask the normative question of whether the United States should go to inflation targeting. The question is difficult to answer. While inflation targeting seems to have been successful around the world, the preconditions for success may not be relevant for this country. Given the strong U.S. commitment to controlling inflation, in the end there may be little difference between the way monetary policy already is practiced in the United States and the way it is practiced under the flexible, forward-looking inflation-targeting regimes followed by many countries. Finally, although one can find economic circumstances in which inflation targeting will work well, it is also possible to imagine circumstances in which even forward-looking, flexible inflation targeting may not work so well, some of these circumstances from the fairly recent past of the United States. Basic Aspects of Inflation Targeting Describing an inflation-targeting regime is straightforward. A country or its central bank commits to controlling inflation, with an explicit target rate and usually a tolerance band around this target rate. Obvious price shocks such as indirect taxes, commodity prices, or interest rates themselves are usually excluded in the calculation of inflation targets. Many inflation-targeting regimes permit flexibility for pursuing other goals, such as output stabilization, though the primary commitment of the central bank is clearly to control inflation. Given the lags in monetary policy, many regimes also are forward-looking, in the sense that the central bank operates not against current inflation but expected inflation in the near future. Three rationales normally are given for the adoption of inflation-targeting regimes: The provision of a nominal anchor for policy, transparency, and credibility. A nominal anchor may be required if countries permit their exchange rates to vary and if they do not target either the growth of monetary quantities or nominal income. Governments or their central banks may need such an anchor to stabilize inflation, and they can generate the anchor by announcing an inflation target and then doing what they must do to hit that target. Such an approach would also lead to more transparent monetary policies, as economic actors would better understand the goals of monetary authorities. To the extent that monetary authorities can hit their target, central banks would also gain credibility, which many need after years of inflation. The ideals of transparency and credibility certainly have democratic value in their own right, but they may also pay off in narrower economic terms. It is commonly argued that inflationary expectations are a key aspect of the inflation process. In lowering inflationary expectations, inflation targeting can itself help reduce inflationary pressures. One can also rationalize inflation targeting through another form of economic reasoning. Some years ago many believed, along with Milton Friedman, that stabilizing the growth of the money supply would lead to stable prices. But this approach is now generally discredited because shocks in the demand for money and an unstable transmission mechanism imply that stable growth of monetary aggregates could lead to quite unstable behavior for prices and real incomes. The next step was to follow Bennett McCallum (1988) and avoid inappropriate responses to shocks in the demand for money by having the central bank simply stabilize nominal income growth. But again, if there were shocks in this nominal income growth, say productivity shocks, stabilizing nominal income growth would not necessarily stabilize prices. The same productivity shocks have led to difficulties with the instrument rule proposed by John Taylor (1993), which requires either a predictable rate of growth of potential output or a predictable natural rate of unemployment. As these other procedures for conducting monetary policy have run into difficulty, academic economists have increasingly drifted to the straightforward view of Bernanke, Laubach, Mishkin, Posen and many others that, if central banks want to stabilize prices, they should just do that by inflation targeting. But the migration of academic economists to inflation targeting is nothing compared with the migration of actual real world countries to inflation targeting. The earliest and still most elaborate procedures were adopted by New Zealand, where the parliamentary government in 1990 began negotiating inflation targets with its newly independent central bank, making these targets public, and holding the bank responsible for hitting the targets. Other regimes came later and were less elaborate, but by now a great many countries have regimes in which they publish inflation targets, have the central bank commit to meeting these targets, and comment on the progress in meeting the targets. Because all central banks in the world are responsible for controlling inflation, it is reasonable to ask how explicit inflation-targeting regimes differ from non-targeting regimes. From a legislative standpoint, the differences seem reasonably clear. Inflation-targeting regimes have explicit inflation targets, explicit commitments of the central bank to meet these targets, and less formal commitments to achieve other goals, such as output stabilization. But from a practical standpoint, the differences could be much less distinct. On one side, even non-targeting countries often will be strongly committed to controlling inflation. On the other side, countries that target inflation flexibly and in a forward-looking manner may also strive to reduce output variability, perhaps because it helps to stabilize future inflation. As will be discussed below, an empirical analysis by Cecchetti and Ehrmann (1999) does not find large differences in actual policy parameters between the two sets of countries. All existing inflation targets around the world are for low, positive rates of inflation. For developed countries with stable inflation rates, the world average target rate of inflation is around 2 percent, with an acceptable band that normally ranges from 1 to 3 percent. Target levels are higher, but are promised to be stepped down gradually over time, for emerging-market countries that are trying to bring inflation down from very high levels. There is academic interest in targeting future price levels as opposed to inflation rates. The two approaches differ mainly in their response to past errors: Is the central bank to be held responsible for offsetting these past errors and getting the price level back on track or just for stabilizing inflation from this time forward? But in practice this distinction may not be that important. King (1999) shows that, if a long enough interval is given to hit the target, there may be little difference between a price level target and an inflation rate target. In any event, no country now targets the future price level. However, there could be an important difference between a target of a low positive rate of inflation and one of a zero rate of inflation. Many potential inflation targeters ask, "Why not zero?" There are three reasons for targeting for an inflation rate above zero. The first is measurement bias. Try as they might, most countries do have some bias in their price indexes. It is hard for governmental statistical agencies to eliminate the measurement bias that occurs whenever new and improved goods are introduced to consumers, and new and improved goods are continually being introduced. It is also hard to deal with substitution bias by updating the weights on various consumer goods. Measurement bias is not huge around the world, and it is coming down as statistical agencies adopt new and improved statistical procedures. But there may still be some irreducible upward bias in measuring inflation. The second reason for shooting at a rate of inflation slightly above zero is known as the zero bound problem. If a country's real interest rates are close to zero and its inflation rate is close to zero, its nominal interest rates will also be close to zero. Since costs of holding cash are minimal, a central bank cannot push nominal interest rates much below zero. This means that countries that target for zero inflation could get in the bind of being unable to ease monetary policy in response to recessionary shocks. Today this issue is not much of a problem around most of the world, but it has become a significant problem in Japan. The balance of economic thought on the issue is that, once a country gets into this zero bound situation, it has a very difficult time getting out. This forms a strong rationale for avoiding the danger in the first place, which can be helped by targeting for a low positive rate of inflation. The third reason for targeting a low positive rate of inflation is labor market inefficiencies. Akerlof, Dickens, and Perry (1996) argue that these can be lessened with some positive inflation. Essentially, employers can be spared the necessity of cutting workers' nominal wage when these workers' productivity falls below their real wage. While Akerlof, Dickens, and Perry make an empirical case for their views, others find little evidence that labor markets become less efficient when inflation drops to very low levels. While economists are still debating these issues, from a pragmatic standpoint many countries do seem to be gravitating toward a consensus on how inflation targeting should work. All inflation-targeting developed countries target a low positive rate, and emerging-market countries aspire to this kind of target. No country targets for deflation. Most countries target inflation in a flexible and forward-looking manner. Most countries have roughly similar policies toward openness, commitment, and explanation. If whether the target should be a low positive number or zero is all there is to argue about, that disagreement certainly ranks low on the intensity scale of policy disputes. Theoretical Pros and Cons From a theoretical perspective, one might think that inflation targets would be most valuable to countries with a history of bad inflation. These countries' central banks need credibility and have two basic ways to get it. One is to peg their exchange rate to some hard currency and essentially tie the hands of their central bank. Currency boards, dollar pegs, and dollarization are all examples of such policies. The second route is to adopt an inflation target and to stick to it. If the prior inflation is very bad, as it often is in emerging-market countries, these targets might have to start at a high level and be worked gradually down as the central bank brings inflation under control. Although inflation targeting is usually described as an antidote to past inflationary binges, it has also been suggested as a cure to potential deflation. Krugman (1998), for example, has argued that Japan, with nominal interest rates stuck at their floor of zero, can lower real interest rates and stimulate investment by having the Bank of Japan target a positive rate of inflation and do what it can to hit that target. Inflation-targeting regimes might also work well when a country undergoes what is known as a productivity shock. Suppose a wave of innovations makes productivity rise, pushing up output and lowering unit labor costs. For a time this shock might be reflected in higher-than-trend rates of growth of output and lower-than-trend rates of unemployment, making it difficult to rely on normal indicators of demand and supply growth in the conduct of monetary policy. In such circumstances, a cautious central bank might well just wait for signs of inflation to emerge, thwart the inflation if it occurs, and not rely as heavily on normal measures of aggregate demand growth or labor market tightness. Such a central bank would, in effect, be following an inflation-targeting regime. Although liberals in general have been very critical of inflation targeting (Galbraith, 1999), in this case inflation targeting would lead to exactly the type of monetary policy they would favor. But in some cases, inflation targeting might not work out so well. One case is plain old recessions. Suppose there were a recessionary shock to aggregate demand. Because inflation normally responds slowly to such shocks, inflation targeters could respond in any of three ways. Strict inflation targeters, sometimes snidely called inflation nutters, might sit idly by and let the recession happen. Or, if inflation fell below target ranges, some central banks might take steps to boost inflation by expansionary monetary policy. They would clearly do this if deflation threatened, but they might do it even with low positive rates of inflation below target ranges. The third possible response involves flexible and forward-looking inflation targeting as is actually practiced in most countries. Because inflation usually responds slowly to output changes in recessions, flexible inflation-targeting regimes would be free to ease policy to stabilize output, much as would non-targeting central banks. Forward-looking central banks could even act affirmatively against recessions to prevent future inflation from falling below its target range. Svensson (1999) argues that such a policy strategy clearly outperforms other monetary regimes. But even here the flexibility to be forward-looking and to pursue other goals is less than a commitment of the central bank to try to stabilize output or promote full employment. The exact importance of these other objectives remains in question, even for flexible and forward-looking inflation-targeting regimes. Other instances in which inflation targeting might not work so well are negative supply shocks, such as most economies experienced in the mid-1970s when oil prices exploded. In these times, inflation rises just as output falls. The most flexible and competent central bank in the world would be faced with a difficult dilemma in such circumstances--forestall the recession by making inflation worse or limit the inflation by making the recession worse. But at least such a central bank would have a choice. In general, an inflation-targeting central bank would not have much of a choice. It would be forced to try to limit the inflation by contractionary policies, hence making the recession worse. Even a flexible, forward-looking inflation-targeting central bank would not have much freedom in such a situation, because in the end the central bank would be evaluated much more on its success in meeting inflation targets than in meeting output growth targets. Hence, inflation targeting does not appear to solve all the problems central banks might face and cannot be prescribed as a panacea. It still might be a reasonable policy strategy for most purposes, and it still seems to be generally the proper approach for dealing with histories of inflation or deflation and, perhaps, with productivity shocks. Actual Experience Theoretical arguments aside, many countries have used inflation targeting for most of the 1990s. Hence we can do more than theorize: We can actually look at the inflation-targeting experience in several countries and see how it has worked out. Various authors have done this in two ways. They have compared a country's post-inflation-targeting history with its pre-inflation-targeting history, and they have compared outcomes in inflation-targeting countries with those in non-targeting countries. The time series studies have focused mainly on the three countries that have had the longest experience with inflation targeting--New Zealand (adopted in 1990), Canada (1991), and the United Kingdom (1992). According to the simple numbers, once these countries adopted inflation targeting, actual inflation has fallen in each country, and nominal interest rates have fallen, suggesting lower inflation expectations. Real measures, such as the growth in output or unemployment, have either shown little change or worsened only slightly. Generally, unemployment rose as a country disinflated and then returned to its former average level, but sometimes not all the way there. Looking behind these simple numbers, a number of authors have done more sophisticated econometric tests. Ammer and Freeman (1995) estimated VAR models for real GDP, price levels, and real interest rates up to the adoption of a targeting regime and then simulated these models into the targeting era, comparing simulated values with actual values. They found that inflation fell below predictions in all three countries. Real GDP dipped down and then recovered in New Zealand and the United Kingdom but dipped down and only partly recovered in Canada. A subsequent analysis by Freeman and Willis (1995) focused more intensely on interest rates. The authors noted that long-term nominal rates fell in all three countries following the adoption of inflation targeting but then came back up in the mid-1990s. The latter rises could either indicate that inflation-targeting regimes became less credible or simply reflect the fact that world interest rates were rising at this time. Freeman and Willis worked out a model to disentangle the two effects and put most of the explanation for rising long-term nominal rates on the behavior of world interest rates, hence suggesting that inflation-targeting regimes remained credible. A more recent set of authors conducted similar tests. Mishkin and Posen (1997) noted that all three inflation-targeting countries reduced inflation before adopting a formal targeting regime. The achievement of inflation targeting, then, was to lock in the gains of earlier fights to stabilize prices. The authors also estimated VAR equations up to the adoption of inflation targeting and simulated these equations into the targeting period, now for six years. Just as in the earlier analysis of Ammer and Freeman, this analysis suggested that in all three countries the inflation targeting led to a drop in inflation and nominal interest rates. In Canada, the rate of growth of real GDP was down slightly; in the other two countries, there was no change in the rate of growth of real GDP. Similar results were found by Kahn and Parrish (1998). Despite the fact that inflation had dropped in all three countries before the adoption of inflation targeting, these authors observed upward inflationary blips in New Zealand and Canada; so perhaps the achievement of keeping inflation under control should not be taken for granted. Their results were buttressed by those of Kuttner and Posen (1999), whose VAR regressions for the United Kingdom found that inflation persistence was reduced by inflation targeting, as measured by inflation itself and by nominal interest rates. In Canada, there was no inflation persistence before or after inflation targeting as measured by inflation rates, though again targeting reduced inflation persistence as measured by nominal interest rates. In New Zealand, the results were the opposite--targeting reduced persistence as measured by inflation rates but seemed to increase it slightly as measured by nominal interest rates. The main cross-sectional study of countries was done by Cecchetti and Ehrmann (1999). They noted that the decade of the 1990s, when many countries went to inflation targeting, was a good one for economic outcomes: Many monetary regimes tried in this decade are likely to look good. In their formal work, these authors fit VAR models for twenty-three countries, nine inflation targeters and fourteen non-targeters. From these models, they deduced policymakers' aversion to inflation volatility. They found that inflation aversion rose in countries that adopted inflation targeting but only to the level of aversion already apparent in the policies of the non-targeting countries. At this point, there is very little difference between aversion to inflation in countries that target and countries that do not target inflation. Taken together, the basic data, the time series tests, and the cross-section tests indicate that inflation targeting has seemed to succeed. Inflation has dropped materially in the three countries with the longest experience with the regime, and all inflation-targeting countries are still content with inflation targeting, in some cases eight to ten years after its adoption. Measures of inflation persistence also have dropped. A seeming weakness of inflation targeting is in its response to unemployment, but at this time one can find little evidence that unemployment has worsened in targeting countries. At the same time, inflation targeting has been adopted in the 1990s, a good decade for economic outcomes in most countries. It is unclear how inflation targeting would look in more difficult economic circumstances such as the 1970s. Is Inflation Targeting Right for the United States? The hidden question in all this, of course, is whether the United States should go to a regime of explicit inflation targeting. I am not going to try to answer that question but will make several points. First, the question of whether the United States does or does not adopt a formal inflation targeting regime is not up to the Federal Reserve. The Federal Reserve Act now requires the Fed to strive for maximum employment and balanced growth, along with price stability and moderate long-term interest rates. Until the Congress changes these guidelines, the Fed will continue to pursue these goals. Second, the Federal Reserve is strongly committed to controlling inflation, however formally this goal is specified in the Fed's mandate. This can be seen from both words and deeds. Countless official pronouncements and testimony affirm the importance of controlling inflation. As for actions, at least Cecchetti and Ehrmann find that the Fed's revealed inflation aversion is now as high as that of the formal inflation-targeting countries. Given this strong inflation aversion, ultimately there may be little difference between informal inflation targeting as practiced in the United States and flexible, forward-looking inflation targeting as practiced in many other countries around the world. That said, one could still ask the normative question of whether the United States should go to what I will call a more formal system of inflation targeting. Such a system would have pluses and minuses. One potential plus is in credibility and transparency. Even if the present-day pragmatic Fed responds to exogenous rises in the growth of aggregate supply or drops in the non-inflationary rate of unemployment in a fully accommodative manner, inflation targeting may better communicate the strategy. For example, explicit inflation-targeting statements may help to make it clear that the Fed is really fighting inflation, not economic growth. But there are also potential disadvantages. Economic circumstances have been good in the 1990s, when countries have gone over to inflation targeting, and it is worth repeating that inflation targeting is no panacea. It may not work well in the presence of negative supply shocks like those experienced throughout the world in the 1970s. Moreover, there is a potential problem with inflation targeting even in good economic times. If forecasting inflation is difficult, even forward-looking inflation-targeting central banks may respond to inflationary shocks too late to ward off inflation. Although there are several ways to forecast inflation, none may be that reliable. On one side, many analysts use econometric models, but these may have intrinsic problems in periods of significant structural shifts. The very nature of such shocks is that they are not easy to predict or model. On the other side, one could imagine constructing leading indicators of inflation, but the experience until now is that not many of these are reliable either. One could also rely on market expectations of inflation, survey evidence, or other forecasts of inflation. But if models are not working well and there are not many reliable leading indicators, it is not clear how much information is contained in these other forecasts. Without models or leading indicators, even forward-looking inflation targeting strategies may not work as well as advertised. Conclusion Inflation targeting has many things going for it. This strategy of conducting monetary policy has been widely adopted around the world, and it has seemed to be successful in lowering inflation and perceptions of future inflation. It has a potential drawback in ignoring explicit consideration of output gaps and unemployment, but perhaps because it has been applied flexibly and in a forward-looking manner, in fact it has not seemed to generate more unemployment than other monetary regimes would have. It also may not work as well in times of negative supply shocks, though this point remains to be tested. For the United States, given the strong aversion to inflation already apparent in policy responses, there are various pros and cons, but it is not obvious that a more formal regime of inflation targeting will lead to very great differences in actual monetary policies. References Akerlof, George A., William T. Dickens, and George L. Perry, 1996, "The Macroeconomics of Low Inflation," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1:1996 , 1-76. Ammer, John, and Richard T. Freeman, 1995, "Inflation Targeting in the 1990s: The Experiences of New Zealand, Canada, and the United Kingdom," Journal of Economics and Business , 47:165-192. Bernanke, Ben S., Thomas Laubach, Frederic S. Mishkin, and Adam S. Posen, 1999, Inflation Targeting: Lessons from the International Experience , Princeton University Press. Cecchetti, Stephen G., and Michael Ehrmann, 1999, "Does Inflation Targeting Increase Output Volatility? An International Comparison of Policymakers' Preferences and Outcomes," National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 7426. Freeman, Richard T., and Jonathan L. Willis, 1995, Targeting Inflation in the 1990s: Recent Challenges, Federal Reserve Board, International Finance Discussion Papers 1995-525. Galbraith, James K, 1999, "The Inflation Obsession: Flying in the Face of Facts," Foreign Affairs , January-February, 78, 152-156. Kahn, George A., and Klara Parrish, 1998, "Conducting Monetary Policy with Inflation Targets," Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Economic Review , 3rd quarter, 5-32. King, Mervyn, 1999, "Challenges for Monetary Policy: New and Old," New Challenges for Monetary Policy , Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, forthcoming. Krugman, Paul R.,1998, "It's Baaack: Japan's Slump and the Return of the Liquidity Trap," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2:1998, 137-206. Kuttner, Kenneth N., and Adam S. Posen, 1999, "Does Talk Matter After All? Inflation Targeting and Central Bank Behavior," Federal Reserve Bank of New York, mimeo. McCallum, Bennett T., 1998, "Robustness Properties of a Rule for Monetary Policy," Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy , 29, 173-204. Mishkin, Frederic S., and Adam S. Posen, 1997, "Inflation Targeting: Lessons from Four Countries," Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Economic Policy Review , August, 9-110. Svensson, Lars E. O., 1999, "How Should Monetary Policy Be Conducted in an Era of Price Stability?" Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City , New Challenges for Monetary Policy , forthcoming. Taylor, John B, 1993, "Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice," Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy , 39, 195-214.
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan Technology and the economy Before the Economic Club of New York, New York, New York January 13, 2000 We are within weeks of establishing a record for the longest economic expansion in this nation's history. The 106-month expansion of the 1960s, which was elongated by the Vietnam War, will be surpassed in February. Nonetheless, there remain few evident signs of geriatric strain that typically presage an imminent economic downturn. Four or five years into this expansion, in the middle of the 1990s, it was unclear whether, going forward, this cycle would differ significantly from the many others that have characterized post-World War II America. More recently, however, it has become increasingly difficult to deny that something profoundly different from the typical postwar business cycle has emerged. Not only is the expansion reaching record length, but it is doing so with far stronger-than-expected economic growth. Most remarkably, inflation has remained subdued in the face of labor markets tighter than any we have experienced in a generation. Analysts are struggling to create a credible conceptual framework to fit a pattern of interrelationships that has defied conventional wisdom based on our economy's history of the past half century. When we look back at the 1990s, from the perspective of say 2010, the nature of the forces currently in train will have presumably become clearer. We may conceivably conclude from that vantage point that, at the turn of the millennium, the American economy was experiencing a once-in-a-century acceleration of innovation, which propelled forward productivity, output, corporate profits, and stock prices at a pace not seen in generations, if ever. Alternatively, that 2010 retrospective might well conclude that a good deal of what we are currently experiencing was just one of the many euphoric speculative bubbles that have dotted human history. And, of course, we cannot rule out that we may look back and conclude that elements from both scenarios have been in play in recent years. On the one hand, the evidence of dramatic innovations--veritable shifts in the tectonic plates of technology--has moved far beyond mere conjecture. On the other, these extraordinary achievements continue to be bedeviled by concerns that the so-called New Economy is spurring imbalances that at some point will abruptly adjust, bringing the economic expansion, its euphoria, and wealth creation to a debilitating halt. This evening I should like to address some of the evidence and issues that pertain to these seemingly alternative scenarios. What should be indisputable is that a number of new technologies that evolved largely from the cumulative innovations of the past half century have now begun to bring about awesome changes in the way goods and services are produced and, especially, in the way they are distributed to final users. Those innovations, particularly the Internet's rapid emergence from infancy, have spawned a ubiquity of startup firms, many of which claim to offer the chance to revolutionize and dominate large shares of the nation's production and distribution system. Capital markets, not comfortable dealing with discontinuous shifts in economic structure, are groping for sensible evaluations of these firms. The exceptional stock price volatility of most of the newer firms and, in the view of some, their outsized valuations, are indicative of the difficulties of divining from the many, the particular few of the newer technologies and operational models that will prevail in the decades ahead. How did we arrive at such a fascinating and, to some, unsettling point in history? The process of innovation, of course, is never-ending. Yet the development of the transistor after World War II appears in retrospect to have initiated an especial wave of innovative synergies. It brought us the microprocessor, the computer, satellites, and the joining of laser and fiber-optic technologies. These, in turn, fostered by the 1990s an enormous new capacity to disseminate information. To be sure, innovation is not confined to information technologies. Impressive technical advances can be found in many corners of the economy. But it is information technology that defines this special period. The reason is that information innovation lies at the root of productivity and economic growth. Its major contribution is to reduce the number of worker hours required to produce the nation's output. Yet, in the vibrant economic conditions that have accompanied this period of technical innovation, many more job opportunities have been created than have been lost. Indeed, our unemployment rate has fallen notably as technology has blossomed. One result of the more-rapid pace of IT innovation has been a visible acceleration of the process of "creative destruction," a shifting of capital from failing technologies into those technologies at the cutting edge. The process of capital reallocation across the economy has been assisted by a significant unbundling of risks in capital markets made possible by the development of innovative financial products, many of which themselves owe their viability to advances in IT. Before this revolution in information availability, most twentieth-century business decisionmaking had been hampered by wide uncertainty. Owing to the paucity of timely knowledge of customers' needs and of the location of inventories and materials flowing throughout complex production systems, businesses, as many of you well remember, required substantial programmed redundancies to function effectively. Doubling up on materials and people was essential as backup to the inevitable misjudgments of the real-time state of play in a company. Decisions were made from information that was hours, days, or even weeks old. Accordingly, production planning required costly inventory safety stocks and backup teams of people to respond to the unanticipated and the misjudged. Large remnants of information void, of course, still persist, and forecasts of future events on which all business decisions ultimately depend are still unavoidably uncertain. But the remarkable surge in the availability of more timely information in recent years has enabled business management to remove large swaths of inventory safety stocks and worker redundancies. Information access in real time--resulting, for example, from such processes as electronic data interface between the retail checkout counter and the factory floor or the satellite location of trucks--has fostered marked reductions in delivery lead times and the related workhours required for the production and delivery of all sorts of goods, from books to capital equipment. The dramatic decline in the lead times for the delivery of capital equipment has made a particularly significant contribution to the favorable economic environment of the past decade. When lead times for equipment are long, the equipment must have multiple capabilities to deal with the plausible range of business needs likely to occur after these capital goods are delivered and installed. With lead times foreshortened, many of the redundancies built into capital equipment to ensure that it could meet all plausible alternatives of a defined distant future could be sharply reduced. That means fewer goods and worker hours are caught up in activities that, while perceived as necessary insurance to sustain valued output, in the end produce nothing of value. Those intermediate production and distribution activities, so essential when information and quality control were poor, are being reduced in scale and, in some cases, eliminated. These trends may well gather speed and force as the Internet alters relationships of businesses to their suppliers and their customers. The process of innovation goes beyond the factory floor or distribution channels. Design times and costs have fallen dramatically as computer modeling has eliminated the need, for example, of the large staff of architectural specification-drafters previously required for building projects. Medical diagnoses are more thorough, accurate, and far faster, with access to heretofore unavailable information. Treatment is accordingly hastened, and hours of procedures eliminated. Indeed, these developments emphasize the essence of information technology--the expansion of knowledge and its obverse, the reduction in uncertainty. As a consequence, risk premiums that were associated with all forms of business activities have declined. Because the future is never entirely predictable, risk in any business action committed to the future--that is, virtually all business actions--can be reduced but never eliminated. Information technologies, by improving our real-time understanding of production processes and of the vagaries of consumer demand, are reducing the degree of uncertainty and, hence, risk. In short, information technology raises output per hour in the total economy principally by reducing hours worked on activities needed to guard productive processes against the unknown and the unanticipated. Narrowing the uncertainties reduces the number of hours required to maintain any given level of production readiness. In economic terms, we are reducing risk premiums and variances throughout the economic decision tree that drives the production of our goods and services. This has meant that employment of scarce resources to deal with heightened risk premiums has been reduced. The relationship between businesses and consumers already is being changed by the expanding opportunities for e-commerce. The forces unleashed by the Internet are almost surely to be even more potent within and among businesses, where uncertainties are being reduced by improving the quantity, the reliability, and the timeliness of information. This is the case in many recent initiatives, especially among our more seasoned companies, to consolidate and rationalize their supply chains using the Internet. Not all technologies, information or otherwise, however, increase productivity--that is, output per hour--by reducing the inputs necessary to produce existing products. Some new technologies bring about new goods and services with above average value added per workhour. The dramatic advances in biotechnology, for example, are significantly increasing a broad range of productivity-expanding efforts in areas from agriculture to medicine. Indeed, in our dynamic labor markets, the resources made redundant by better information, as I indicated earlier, are being drawn to the newer activities and newer products, many never before contemplated or available. The personal computer, with ever-widening applications in homes and businesses, is one. So are the fax and the cell phone. The newer biotech innovations are most especially of this type, particularly the remarkable breadth of medical and pharmacological product development. At the end of the day, however, the newer technologies obviously can increase outputs or reduce inputs and, hence, increase productivity only if they are embodied in capital investment. Capital investment here is defined in the broadest sense as any outlay that enhances future productive capabilities and, consequently, capital asset values. But for capital investments to be made, the prospective rate of return on their implementation must exceed the cost of capital. Gains in productivity and capacity per real dollar invested clearly rose materially in the 1990s, while the increase in equity values, reflecting that higher earnings potential, reduced the cost of capital. In particular, technological synergies appear to be engendering an ever-widening array of prospective new capital investments that offer profitable cost displacement. In a consolidated sense, reduced cost generally means reduced labor cost or, in productivity terms, fewer hours worked per unit of output. These increased real rates of return on investment and consequent improved productivity are clearly most evident among the relatively small segment of our economy that produces high-tech equipment. But the newer technologies are spreading to firms not conventionally thought of as high tech. It would be an exaggeration to imply that whenever a cost increase emerges on the horizon, there is a capital investment that is available to quell it. Yet the veritable explosion of high-tech equipment and software spending that has raised the growth of the capital stock dramatically over the past five years could hardly have occurred without a large increase in the pool of profitable projects becoming available to business planners. As rising productivity growth in the high-tech sector since 1995 has resulted in an acceleration of price declines for equipment embodying the newer technologies, investment in this equipment by firms in a wide variety of industries has expanded sharply. Had high prospective returns on these capital projects not materialized, the current capital equipment investment boom--there is no better word--would have petered out long ago. In the event, overall equipment and capitalized software outlays as a percentage of GDP in nominal dollars have reached their highest level in post-World War II history. To be sure, there is also a virtuous capital investment cycle at play here. A whole new set of profitable investments raises productivity, which for a time raises profits--spurring further investment and consumption. At the same time, faster productivity growth keeps a lid on unit costs and prices. Firms hesitate to raise prices for fear that their competitors will be able, with lower costs from new investments, to wrest market share from them. Indeed, the increasing availability of labor-displacing equipment and software, at declining prices and improving delivery lead times, is arguably at the root of the loss of business pricing power in recent years. To be sure, other inflation-suppressing forces have been at work as well. Marked increases in available global capacity were engendered as a number of countries that were previously members of the autarchic Soviet bloc opened to the West, and as many emerging-market economies blossomed. Reductions in Cold War spending in the United States and around the world also released resources to more productive private purposes. In addition, deregulation that removed bottlenecks and hence increased supply response in many economies, especially ours, has been a formidable force suppressing price increases as well. Finally, the global economic crisis of 1997 and 1998 reduced the prices of energy and other key inputs into production and consumption, helping to hold down inflation for several years. Of course, Europe and Japan have participated in this recent wave of invention and innovation and have full access to the newer technologies. However, they arguably have been slower to apply them. The relatively inflexible and, hence, more costly labor markets of these economies appear to be an important factor. The high rates of return offered by the newer technologies are largely the result of labor cost displacement, and because it is more costly to dismiss workers in Europe and Japan, the rate of return on the same equipment is correspondingly less there than in the United States. Here, labor displacement is more readily countenanced both by law and by culture, facilitating the adoption of technology that raises standards of living over time. There, of course, has been a substantial amount of labor-displacing investment in Europe to obviate expensive increased employment as their economies grow. But it is not clear to what extent such investment has been directed at reducing existing levels of employment. It should always be remembered that in economies where dismissing a worker is expensive, hiring one will also be perceived to be expensive. An ability to reorganize production and distribution processes is essential to take advantage of newer technologies. Indeed, the combination of a marked surge in mergers and acquisitions, and especially the vast increase in strategic alliances, including across borders, is dramatically altering business structures to conform to the imperatives of the newer technologies. We are seeing the gradual breaking down of competition-inhibiting institutions from the keiretsu and chaebol of East Asia, to the dirigisme of some of continental Europe. The increasingly evident advantages of applying the newer technologies is undermining much of the old political wisdom of protected stability. The clash between unfettered competitive technological advance and protectionism, both domestic and international, will doubtless engage our attention for many years into this new century. The turmoil in Seattle last month may be a harbinger of an intensified debate. However one views the causes of our low inflation and strong growth, there can be little argument that the American economy as it stands at the beginning of a new century has never exhibited so remarkable a prosperity for at least the majority of Americans. Nonetheless, this seemingly beneficial state of affairs is not without its own set of potential challenges. Productivity-driven supply growth has, by raising long-term profit expectations, engendered a huge gain in equity prices. Through the so-called "wealth effect," these gains have tended to foster increases in aggregate demand beyond the increases in supply. It is this imbalance between growth of supply and growth of demand that contains the potential seeds of rising inflationary and financial pressures that could undermine the current expansion. Higher productivity growth must show up as increases in real incomes of employees, as profit, or more generally as both. Unless the propensity to spend out of real income falls, private consumption and investment growth will rise, as indeed it must, since over time demand and supply must balance. (I leave the effect of fiscal policy for later.) If this was all that happened, accelerating productivity would be wholly benign and beneficial. But in recent years, largely as a result of the appreciating values of ownership claims on the capital stock, themselves a consequence, at least in part, of accelerating productivity, the net worth of households has expanded dramatically, relative to income. This has spurred private consumption to rise even faster than the incomes engendered by the productivity-driven rise in output growth. Moreover, the fall in the cost of equity capital corresponding to higher share prices, coupled with enhanced potential rates of return, has spurred private capital investment. There is a wide range of estimates of how much added growth the rise in equity prices has engendered, but they center around 1 percentage point of the somewhat more than 4 percentage point annual growth rate of GDP since late 1996. Such overall extra domestic demand can be met only with increased imports (net of exports) or with new domestic output produced by employing additional workers. The latter can come only from drawing down the pool of those seeking work or from increasing net immigration. Thus, the impetus to spending from the wealth effect by its very nature clearly cannot persist indefinitely. In part, it adds to the demand for goods and services before the corresponding increase in output fully materializes. It is, in effect, increased purchasing from future income, financed currently by greater borrowing or reduced accumulation of assets. If capital gains had no evident effect on consumption or investment, their existence would have no influence on output or employment either. Increased equity claims would merely match the increased market value of productive assets, affecting only balance sheets, not flows of goods and services, not supply or demand, and not labor markets. But this is patently not the case. Increasing perceptions of wealth have clearly added to consumption and driven down the amount of saving out of current income and spurred capital investment. To meet this extra demand, our economy has drawn on all sources of added supply. Our net imports and current account deficits have risen appreciably in recent years. This has been financed by foreign acquisition of dollar assets fostered by the same sharp increases in real rates of return on American capital that set off the wealth effect and domestic capital goods boom in the first place. Were it otherwise, the dollar's foreign exchange value would have been under marked downward pressure in recent years. We have also relied on net immigration to augment domestic output. And finally, we have drawn down the pool of available workers. The bottom line, however, is that, while immigration and imports can significantly cushion the consequences of the wealth effect and its draining of the pool of unemployed workers for awhile, there are limits. Immigration is constrained by law and its enforcement; imports, by the willingness of global investors to accumulate dollar assets; and the draw down of the pool of workers by the potential emergence of inflationary imbalances in labor markets. Admittedly, we are groping to infer where those limits may be. But that there are limits cannot be open to question. However one views the operational relevance of a Phillips curve or the associated NAIRU (the nonaccelerating inflation rate of unemployment)--and I am personally decidedly doubtful about it--there has to be a limit to how far the pool of available labor can be drawn down without pressing wage levels beyond productivity. The existence or nonexistence of an empirically identifiable NAIRU has no bearing on the existence of the venerable law of supply and demand. To be sure, increases in wages in excess of productivity growth may not be inflationary, and destructive of economic growth, if offset by decreases in other costs or declining profit margins. A protracted decline in margins, however, is a recipe for recession. Thus, if our objective of maximum sustainable economic growth is to be achieved, the pool of available workers cannot shrink indefinitely. As my late friend and eminent economist Herb Stein often suggested: If a trend cannot continue, it will stop. What will stop the wealth-induced excess of demand over productivity-expanded supply is largely developments in financial markets. That process is already well advanced. For the equity wealth effect to be contained, either expected future earnings must decline, or the discount factor applied to those earnings must rise. There is little evidence of the former. Indeed, security analysts, reflecting detailed information on and from the companies they cover, have continued to revise upward long-term earnings projections. However, real rates of interest on long-term BBB corporate debt, a good proxy for the average of all corporate debt, have already risen well over a full percentage point since late 1997, suggesting increased pressure on discount factors. This should not be a surprise because an excess of demand over supply ultimately comes down to planned investment exceeding saving that would be available at the economy's full potential. In the end, balance is achieved through higher borrowing rates. Thus, the rise in real rates should be viewed as a quite natural consequence of the pressures of heavier demands for investment capital, driven by higher perceived returns associated with technological breakthroughs and supported by a central bank intent on defusing the imbalances that would undermine the expansion. We cannot predict with any assurance how long a growing wealth effect--more formally, a rise in the ratio of household net worth to income--will persist, nor do we suspect can anyone else. A diminution of the wealth effect, I should add, does not mean that prices of assets cannot keep rising, only that they rise no more than income. A critical factor in how the rising wealth effect and its ultimate limitation will play out in the market place and the economy is the state of government, especially federal, finances. The sharp rise in revenues (at a nearly 8 percent annual rate since 1995) has been significantly driven by increased receipts owing to realized capital gains and increases in compensation directly and indirectly related to the huge rise in stock prices. Both the Administration and the Congress have chosen wisely to allow unified budget surpluses to build and have usefully focused on eliminating the historically chronic borrowing from social security trust funds to finance current outlays. The growing unified budget surpluses have absorbed a good part of the excess of potential private demand over potential supply. A continued expansion of the surplus would surely aid in sustaining the productive investment that has been key to leveraging the opportunities provided by new technology, while holding down a further reliance on imports and absorption of the pool of available workers. I trust that the recent flurry of increased federal government outlays, seemingly made easier by the emerging surpluses, is an aberration. In today's environment of rapid innovation, growing unified budget surpluses can obviate at least part of the rebalancing pressures evident in marked increases in real long-term interest rates. As I noted at the beginning of my remarks, it may be many years before we fully understand the nature of the rapid changes currently confronting our economy. We are unlikely to fully comprehend the process and its interactions with asset prices until we have been through a complete business cycle. Regrettably, we at the Federal Reserve do not have the luxury of awaiting a better set of insights into this process. Indeed, our goal, in responding to the complexity of current economic forces, is to extend the expansion by containing its imbalances and avoiding the very recession that would complete a business cycle. If we knew for sure that economic growth would soon be driven wholly by gains in productivity and growth of the working age population, including immigration, we would not need to be as concerned about the potential for inflationary distortions. Clearly, we cannot know for sure, because we are dealing with world economic forces which are new and untested. While we endeavor to find the proper configuration of monetary and fiscal policies to sustain the remarkable performance of our economy, there should be no ambiguity on the policies required to support enterprise and competition. I believe that we as a people are very fortunate: When confronted with the choice between rapid growth with its inevitable insecurities and a stable, but stagnant economy, given time, Americans have chosen growth. But as we seek to manage what is now this increasingly palpable historic change in the way businesses and workers create value, our nation needs to address the associated dislocations that emerge, especially among workers who see the security of their jobs and their lives threatened. Societies cannot thrive when significant segments perceive its functioning as unjust. It is the degree of unbridled fierce competition within and among our economies today--not free trade or globalization as such--that is the source of the unease that has manifested itself, and was on display in Seattle a month ago. Trade and globalization are merely the vehicles that foster competition, whose application and benefits currently are nowhere more evident than here, today, in the United States. Confronted face-on, no one likes competition; certainly, I did not when I was a private consultant vying with other consulting firms. But the competitive challenge galvanized me and my colleagues to improve our performance so that at the end of the day we and, indeed, our competitors, and especially our clients, were more productive. There are many ways to address the all too real human problems that are the inevitable consequences of accelerating change. Restraining competition, domestic or international, to suppress competitive turmoil is not one of them. That would be profoundly counterproductive to rising standards of living. We are in a period of dramatic gains in innovation and technical change that challenge all of us, as owners of capital, as suppliers of labor, as voters and policymakers. How well policy can be fashioned to allow the private sector to maximize the benefits of innovations that we currently enjoy, and to contain the imbalances they create, will shape the economic configuration of the first part of the new century. Footnotes Since the early 1990s, the annual growth rate in output per hour of nonfinancial corporate businesses outside high tech has risen by a full percentage point. For example, the emergence of many alternate technologies in areas where only one or two will set the standard and survive has created high-risk, high-reward outcomes for their creators. The desire to spread risk (and the willingness to forgo the winner-take-all return) has fostered a substantial number of technology-sharing alliances. The inflation expectations employed in this calculation are those implicit in the gap between the interest rates on ten-year Treasury inflation-indexed notes and those on a nominal security derived from Treasury STRIPS constructed to have comparable duration. The latter are used because they have the same relatively limited liquidity as inflation-indexed notes.
Remarks by Governor Laurence H. Meyer Before a National Bureau of Economic Research Conference, Prudential Supervision: What Works and What Doesn't, Cheeca Lodge, Islamorada, Florida January 14, 2000 Supervising LCBOs: Adapting to Change Conference themes, rhetoric, and commentary have emphasized the nature of dramatic change in the banking industry for so long that it has become one of the cliches that dominate our professional lives. The reality of change in banking--significant and dramatic change--has become, well, humdrum. It has, in fact, become so well understood and so real that the Congress has finally enacted financial modernization legislation. This is not a cheap shot. The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act was a massive and complicated effort to make the legal structure consistent with the new reality while accommodating the myriad of new and old interests affected by the economic and legislative changes. Arguably, the legislation, to a considerable degree, validated in law changes that had already occurred--or were soon to occur--in the marketplace with the aid both of loopholes and of regulatory actions. Nevertheless, it is worth emphasizing that structural and other efficiency gains brought about by statutory revision are important in and of themselves. The supervisory response to change--the real theme, I hope, of this conference--is quite another matter. That is to say, the official response of the banking agencies to the changes in banking is, I think, incomplete. To be sure, we have made some real progress with risk-focused examinations that recognize the reality that effective risk-management systems are critical to the safe operation of a modern bank. Similarly, the use of models to determine capital for market risk on traded securities and derivative positions is another genuine step forward. But, despite these advances, our capital rules have been undermined by the state of the art. The one-size-fits-all risk weight for credit risk on commercial loans has induced creative ways to arbitrage whenever regulatory capital exceeds economic capital. At the same time, banks have taken advantage of being undercharged for capital for loans with above-average risk. The result has been a greater emphasis by banks on unproductive capital arbitrage schemes and bank capital ratios that are significantly less relevant and informative than intended. Indeed, as banks become more adept at internal risk classifications, their incentive to arbitrage economic and regulatory capital can only increase, and regulatory capital will carry less and less meaning. In addition, the growing scale and complexity of our largest banking organizations--and, I might add, not only ours but also those of many other nations--raises as never before the potential for systemic risk from a significant disruption in, let alone failure of, one of these institutions. We seem, in this regard, to face the unattractive options of exposing our economies to additional risk in order to obtain financial efficiencies and market choices or of imposing more regulation with both its attendant moral hazard and inefficiencies. Bank supervisors have been trying to respond to this new reality, to adapt to change as it were. The response is taking longer than we wish. But it is important to get our response as right as we can because so much is at stake. At the Fed, we are working through three major channels: through the evolution of the Federal Reserve System's supervisory practices in cooperation with the other banking agencies; through the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, where we meet with officials from other G10 countries; and through work in a System group called the F-6, which I chair. Much of the effort in each case is directed at what we call the Large Complex Banking Organizations or LCBOs. By talking of F-6s and LCBOs, I'm about to share with you some of the secrets of the temple. You, too, will soon be able to talk the talk of the central banker by spicing your conversation with the same catchwords. Before I discuss the evolution in supervisory practice in the Federal Reserve System and other agencies, let me briefly note the highlights of our work with the Basel supervisor's committee, for this work sets the stage for some of the issues I want to discuss with you. For those of you interested in the economics of bank supervision, the research of Dave Jones and John Mingo on capital arbitrage, Mark Carey and Bill Treacy on internal risk classifications, and Mark Flannery and Charlie Calomiris on market discipline contributed importantly to the work on improving the international accord in Basel. As you know, the evolving consensus of the Basel supervisors is to base a new accord on the so-called three pillars of capital, supervision, and market discipline. More specifically, the capital pillar--at least for larger banks, as I will discuss momentarily--is to be designed so as to link regulatory capital more tightly to the same economic capital that banks use for their own internal management. Large banks already have been directed by the Fed to create internal risk classification systems for such purposes, and cutting-edge banks have made substantial progress. We fully anticipate that within the next decade, or less, these systems will evolve into full internal risk models that could be used to measure market and credit risks throughout large banks. Bankers do not want their institutions to fail and--with exception of when failure may be close at hand--never plan to take excessive risk with inadequate capital. They will, no doubt, strive on their own to establish strong and meaningful internal risk classification systems and internal risk models. But the second pillar--supervision--is to be used in a "trust, but verify" mode. That is, a major role of supervision will be to independently test and compare systems and models to best practices. This is already occurring at the Fed and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC). Although supervisory reviews of risk management systems will become even more important in the years ahead, they are not enough by themselves. As large banking institutions become increasingly complex--and fund themselves more from non-insured sources--market discipline and its prerequisite, public disclosure, must play a greater role. Indeed, increased transparency and market discipline can also help substantially to address concerns about increased systemic risk associated with ever-larger institutions and to avoid the potentially greater moral hazard associated with more-intrusive supervision and regulation. The edifice that these pillars are to support is not designed to cover all banks in the United States. For most, the existing system works just fine with only minor modifications and probably will continue to do so for the foreseeable future. Rather, the edifice covers the large, complex banking organizations that engage in capital arbitrage and often operate at the edge of the envelope in risk-return tradeoffs and in the creation of new instruments and strategies. Thus, the U.S. banking agencies have been strong supporters of "bifurcation" in the Basel deliberations--central bankese for having separate policy applications for large banks and for other banks. Indeed, the OCC has had a large bank program for some time, and the Federal Reserve has established a separate supervisory arrangement for LCBOs. The Fed has designated about thirty entities--accounting for about 60 percent of total U.S. bank assets--as LCBOs. The number and distribution of these organizations will no doubt change over time; one-third, by the way, are now foreign owned, a fact that vividly highlights the globalization of banking. Each LCBO has a designated team of Federal Reserve supervisors whose job is to thoroughly understand the organization's business strategy, management structure, key policies, and risk control systems. Each team is led by a senior examiner--designated a central point of contact, or CPC. The CPC and his or her team of examiners draw on specialists in risk management, payments, credit- and market-risk modeling, information technology, and other technical areas. I've already mentioned the increasing emphasis of the OCC and the Fed on the largest banking organizations as well as our emphasis on examining and evaluating risk management systems. In addition, last summer the Fed established a supervisory policy requiring LCBOs to evaluate their capital relative to their internal risk evaluations. Jointly with other agencies, we have also established policies on the use of synthetic credit instruments in securitizations and will soon announce a policy on asset sales with recourse. All of these efforts are designed to limit the disproportionate reduction in regulatory capital requirements that might otherwise occur. The Federal Reserve is also dealing with implications arising from changing market structures through senior level ad hoc groups. During the past year, for example, the Board formed a group, the previously mentioned F-6, to study the systemic implications of changing banking markets. The group was originally composed of three Federal Reserve governors and three Reserve Bank presidents and chaired by me. Along the way, we added a fourth president but didn't change the name. The F-numbered ad hoc groups, with the number depending on size, have existed from time to time for the last ten years or so and began when a governor decided to make a bit of sport of the various G-designated groups that meet internationally. Now you know all of our secrets! During 1999, the current F-6 commissioned and reviewed several studies that have played a significant role in shaping our evolving supervisory policy. These studies addressed issues involving systemic risk, the potential regulatory role of subordinated debentures, the value of public disclosure, staff resource needs for supervising LCBOs, and other supervisory issues. I would like to discuss some of these topics in greater detail. Public Disclosure Greater public disclosure at LCBOs is an idea whose time has come. As my colleagues and I struggled with the complexities of capital reform in Basel, the systemic concerns of increasing scale and concentration, the rising weight of the "C" in LCBO, the burden and moral hazard of additional supervision and regulation, and the accelerated speed with which markets respond to shock, we concluded that harnessing markets to work in our behalf was a necessity, not a choice. And, as I have already noted, markets cannot operate well without transparency. Put another way, the prerequisite for market discipline is more rapid dissemination of information by the regulators and, more importantly, the direct provision to market participants of critical and timely information about risk exposures by the LCBOs themselves. We are painfully aware of a potentially difficult downside to public disclosure: the herdlike withdrawal of funding in the event of bad news or surprise. As one of my colleagues notes, the good news is that market discipline will work. The bad news is that market discipline will work. That risk is there but needs to be balanced by the ex ante change in bank behavior that expanded public disclosure will induce. We should also consider that more disclosure will induce changes in funding costs when individual banks take on more risk. Such responses should increase bank safety and soundness and reduce risks and surprises. Market discipline is not, of course, the only instrument for disciplining the risk-taking of banks; it may not even be the strongest pillar among the three. But I have great expectations that it will become an effective supplement to the supervisory process. I also hope that it will, at least to some extent, substitute for additional future regulation, if not permit a reduction in regulation. However, if public disclosure does not induce meaningful market discipline, there could be significant additional regulation--and more intrusive supervision--as organizations increase in scale and complexity. A public version of the staff F-6 paper on public disclosure will be published by the Board in a month or so. It documents the significant amount of public disclosure that already occurs at LCBOs, makes a case that current disclosure is not sufficient, and suggests examples of kinds of disclosures that might be helpful for the problem at hand. They relate to the residual risks held in securitizations; the distribution of credits by internal risk classification; and concentrations of credits by industry, geography, and borrower. As an aside, we understand that the work that the Federal Reserve has published to date on internal systems for credit risk classification and on analysis of economic capital has been actively sought out by rating agencies, investors, and analysts, who have repeatedly expressed strong support for more-meaningful disclosure about bank risk profiles. Let me underline that we are still developing the LCBO public disclosure initiative, and we hope to engage senior bank executives in helping us design the program. We are fairly far along in designing what we have in mind, but it is very much a work in progress. Let me share with you our conceptual framework. At least initially, we are limiting application of the program to the LCBOs. For the domestic LCBOs, only a little more than half of the organizations' worldwide consolidated assets are funded from deposits, and not all of their deposits are insured; 42 percent of assets are funded by nondeposit debt, and 7 percent by equity. Market discipline thus has a potential for significant impact. I noted that one-third of the LCBOs are foreign-chartered banks. Any U.S. disclosure policy would apply to only the U.S. operations of foreign-chartered banks but to the consolidated worldwide operations of U.S. chartered organizations. Even though there are only about thirty LCBOs, a one-size-fits-all disclosure requirement simply would not work. The strategies, business mixes, and risk control methods and policies among banks are simply too diverse and rapidly changing. Rather than imposing a predetermined set of statistics and reporting schedules for all LCBOs, we may require some reverse engineering tailored for each bank. Each LCBO might be asked to disclose information on the frequency and at the level of detail that would be necessary for uninsured creditors and other stakeholders to evaluate that LCBO's unique risk profile. Lest you conclude that this is some voluntary effort that LCBOs could meet in principle, but not in fact, let me make three observations. First, I hope that the Fed and the banking community can jointly develop a "best practices" standard for public disclosure. Second, a best practices standard will, it seems clear, set up considerable market pressure on all LCBOs (as well as other large banks) to disclose similar kinds of information. And, third, examiners will be reviewing an LCBO's disclosures to confirm that the organization's policy is consistent with best practices and to confirm that the bank's actual disclosures are consistent with its own policy. Public disclosure is not going to be easy for bankers because it may well bring new pressures that they may not like in the short run. It is not going to be easy on creditors and other stakeholders because they will have some tough analysis to do, although it will greatly help them to do a more effective job. It is not going to be easy on examiners because they will have to make some tough judgments. But the alternatives--more supervision and regulation--are not easy either. Subordinated Debentures Beyond the broad public disclosure effort, Charlie Calomiris has helped focus attention on the potential for subordinated debentures as a way of increasing the degree of market discipline in banking. Charlie has a quite specific proposal in mind, but I would like to address a more generic model, applicable to LCBOs. That broader model--built around investment grade unsecured long-term debt issuance--is now almost required by the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act and is one of the hoops through which large banks must jump if they want to operate securities subsidiaries of the bank. In December 1999, the Board published a , under the direction of Myron Kwast and drawn from a paper for the F-6, that analyzes the potential for using subordinated debt as an instrument of market discipline. And the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act requires the Treasury and the Fed to conduct a joint study evaluating the use of mandatory subordinated debentures for large banks and financial holding companies. Let me just highlight some of the reasons policymakers might be interested in requiring LCBOs to make subordinated debentures a part of--or a supplement to--Tier 2 capital requirements. Of course, the general principle, from which all else flows, is that these instruments would provide a market signal of the perceived riskiness of the issuer--directly at the time of issue and indirectly in its secondary market price. These instruments are particularly relevant because the holders have interests similar to those of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). Subordinated debt holders have an interest in discouraging excessive risk-taking because their claims are both long-term and junior to all depositors and any senior debt holders, and they share in upside potential in very limited ways. If the train crashes, the subordinated debt holders sit not in the caboose but in the cab of the engine. They are thus quite sensitive to the speed of the train and the quality of the tracks. Another factor supporting the regulatory use of subordinated debentures is that the market is already well established--thirty-six of the fifty largest bank holding companies have such instruments outstanding and held by third parties today; eight of the fifty largest banks do as well. The market is well defined and homogenous. Rates on outstanding instruments adjust promptly to events, and the market appears to closely monitor the spreads across issuers. Issuers disclose considerable information at the time of issuance, and such disclosure refreshes secondary market prices. There are several things we do not yet know. We do not know if the market behavior of these instruments provides information to supervisors that they do not already appreciate or if such information is provided earlier than from other sources or is simply confirming. We do not yet have a good understanding of how much additional market discipline would be provided by mandatory subordinated debt relative to equity, voluntary subordinated debt, and other uninsured liabilities. The F-6 has asked the staff to study these and related matters, and that effort is under way. In addition, we have asked the staff to help us resolve some thorny analytical and practical questions. Would a mandatory policy provide greater advantages than current market practices? If there were a mandatory policy, should it apply to banks or to holding companies? Which banks or holding companies? Should it be a part of Tier 2 requirements or a supplement? What should be the required minimum? How frequently should issuance be required? What sort of issuance flexibility should be permitted, especially at times of market or individual bank stress? While the Fed is not committed to a specific policy as yet, my own view is that subordinated debt will be shown to be quite useful as a supplement to supervision, especially in conjunction with a broader program of additional public disclosure and greater reliance on market discipline. Perhaps we should not expect too much from these instruments, taken alone, but I think they could be a useful part of a broader program. Let me end this discussion of subordinated debt and public disclosure by noting and underlining an obvious point. None of this will be worth the effort--indeed, will not work--unless the market believes that the authorities will refuse to rescue uninsured creditors of failed or reorganized institutions. And that expectation cannot be sustained unless the government and its agencies demonstrate it by their actual behavior. Other Issues With my eye on the clock, let me briefly mention a couple of other items that the F-6 has reviewed in recent months. Decentralization is fundamental to the culture of the Federal Reserve System, and I have been impressed by how beneficial it is for obtaining intelligence about banking, financial markets, and the macro and micro economy. The presidents, their boards of directors, and the staffs of the Reserve Banks are invaluable for providing the System with an understanding of what is going on and helping ensure that the policies developed in Washington are meaningful and relevant. Nonetheless, the lack of congruity between the geographical distribution of banks and Federal Reserve Districts creates the potential for a maldistribution of resources: Not every District can afford to maintain the expert specialists that are required to examine the LCBOs for which they are responsible, and other Districts may be allocating their experts on District assignments with a lower national priority. Therefore, to ensure reasonable resource allocations consistent with System priorities, and as a result of our F-6 discussions, we are in the process of recruiting a staff coordinator to facilitate the allocation of scarce staff experts at all the Reserve Banks to the highest System priority in LCBO exams. Another important issue involves the cooperation and coordination among the many financial services supervisors with complementary and sometimes overlapping responsibilities within banking organizations. The wider scope of financial activities for banking organizations authorized by the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act has made this an increasingly important concern. There are potential tensions in the interaction between the Federal Reserve as umbrella supervisor, on the one hand, and the specialized functional regulators of nonbank activities--the Security and Exchange Commission (SEC) and the state insurance commissioners--on the other. Moreover, the increased complexity of banking organizations requires improved cooperation and coordination between the Federal Reserve as umbrella supervisor and the primary bank supervisors, particularly the OCC, given that most LCBOs have lead banks with national charters. One final issue. As a matter of prudent contingency planning, the F-6 reviewed the implications of changes in markets and financial structure for central bank management of LCBO failures. The review made clear that the speed of financial market reactions to shocks has increased greatly. This faster response reflects globalization, information technology, banks' increased emphasis on short-term nondeposit funding and securitization by banking organizations, the greater participation in dealing and hedging markets by LCBOs, and the increased scale of operations of the largest organizations. At the same time, statutory and policy reforms have limited the options available for addressing difficulties at individual institutions, although I hasten to add that the tools available for macro policy and short-term assistance to individual institutions remain unchanged. My colleagues and I carried away from this review a greater appreciation of the need for contingency planning by bank management for significant disruptions--including the sale of units and business lines and more active participation by outside directors. In addition, the review emphasized the need for supervisors to be ready and willing to intervene aggressively and rapidly when significant difficulties occur. As a result, we are in the process of reviewing and implementing a series of technical recommendations to facilitate the resolution of a problem or failing bank by regulatory agencies. While such actions are needed, the analysis and discussion of these issues have greatly reinforced my view that we must rely more on market discipline in an effort to create ex ante conditions that minimize excessive risk-taking and that provide supervisors with rapid signals when there are difficulties. Conclusion As I consider how to end my remarks today, I am reminded of the story about the time Chico Marx was playing a zippy little melody on the piano in Groucho's presence. It went on and on repeating the same silly little tune with what seemed to be never-ending regularity. Chico observed "That's funny, I can't think of how to end this." To which Groucho responded, "That's funny, that's all I can think about."
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of an Order of Prohibition against Christopher J. Woods, a former assistant vice president and institution-affiliated party of the Midwest Bank and Trust Company, Elmwood Park, Illinois. Mr. Woods, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order due to his alleged participation in violations of law and unsafe or unsound practices regarding misapplication of bank funds and falsification of the Bank's books and records. A copy of the Order is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of a consent Order against Solomon King, an institution-affiliated party of the First Western Bank, Cooper City, Florida, a state member bank. Mr. King, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the Order to resolve allegations that he violated the Change in Bank Control Act in connection with his acquisition of beneficial ownership of the shares of the bank. A copy of the Order is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of an Order of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty against Charles A. Drummond, a former president, chief executive officer and director, and an institution-affiliated party of the Professional Bank, Denver, Colorado. Mr. Drummond, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order for his alleged violations of sections 23A, 23B and 22(h) of the Federal Reserve Act, 12 U.S.C. '' 371c, 371c-1 and 375b, and Regulation O, 12 C.F.R. Part 215, in connection with insider and affiliate transactions at the bank. Mr. Drummond paid a fine of $10,000. A copy of the Order is attached.
Remarks by Governor Laurence H. Meyer Before the National Economists Club and the Society of Government Economists, Washington, D.C. January 20, 2000 Sustainability and Monetary Policy Economic performance over the past several years has been exceptional. The economy is about to set a record for the longest expansion. Economic growth has been proceeding at a rate that is close to double what was generally viewed as the long-term trend when this expansion began. Inflation remains modest, despite a decline in the unemployment rate to levels that many would have expected to trigger a significant acceleration in prices. But if you are a forecaster or a policymaker, rather than an economic historian, you must focus on the next chapter. The fundamental question today, it seems to me, is whether the current set of macroeconomic conditions--specifically, the growth of output and the unemployment rate--is sustainable--that is, consistent with stable, low inflation. If it is, the expansion could continue on its current path, unless disturbed by some shock or policy mistake. Otherwise, the challenge for monetary policy is to guide the economy to a sustainable path while preserving low inflation. This challenge is heightened by the unusual degree of uncertainty about the limits of capacity and potential growth, related in part to ongoing structural changes in the economy. Concerns have also been raised about potential imbalances in some sectors, for example, about the sustainability of equity prices, the personal saving rate, the current account deficit, and debt burdens. These concerns about sustainability and the challenges they pose for monetary policy are the focus of my remarks this afternoon. Let me remind you that, as always, the views I express are my own. I am not speaking on behalf of either the Board of Governors or the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Varieties of Landings In , I present four plausible scenarios for future growth. Each has a quite different implication for both the outlook and policy. In each case the economy faces an initial gap between actual output (the dashed line) and potential output (the solid line). Such a gap is typical of conditions that follow a recession. During the expansion phase, at least for a period, growth in production typically exceeds the growth in capacity, so that the gap between actual and potential output is closed gradually. For the moment, I shall focus exclusively on the concerns about sustainability related to the balance between aggregate supply and demand. Later I shall turn to concerns about imbalances in equity prices, the personal saving rate, the current account, and the household debt burden. A Soft Landing Figure 1.A depicts a soft landing scenario, the graceful transition from the initial output gap to a sustainable growth path at full employment. A soft landing occurs if, as the level of output approaches potential, the growth of actual output slows to the growth of potential output just as actual output reaches potential. The line for potential output is, in effect, the runway. The line for actual output is like the path of a plane coming in for a soft landing--at least if you stand on your head while looking at the chart! Steady inflation is generally one of the signs of sustainability. A simple model of inflation dynamics is that changes in inflation are induced by excess aggregate demand or supply, as reflected in the output gap. When actual output rises above potential, according to this model, the resulting excess aggregate demand leads to rising inflation. In the short run, supply shocks--including both relative price shocks and changes in trend productivity--can also affect inflation dynamics. But these effects are temporary. Ultimately, inflation dynamics will be driven by the output gap. At some point in any expansion, therefore, a soft landing is the preferred path to preserve a healthy expansion. Such a slowdown in growth is desirable because the alternative is higher inflation--indeed, continually rising inflation. Looking back, most recessions have resulted from attempts by the policy authorities--yes, the Fed--to reverse increases in inflation generated by overheating. A Reverse Soft Landing Figure 1.B depicts an alternative scenario in which the above-trend growth in the expansion phase has moved the economy beyond the point of its sustainable capacity to produce. Policymakers in this case failed to execute a soft landing. What could they do in this case to best ensure the continuation of a healthy expansion? The answer is to engineer the closest possible approximation to a soft landing, one in which we glide to potential beginning from a position initially above rather than from below potential. Because the convergence to potential is from above rather than below, I call this a "reverse" soft landing. In this case, because the economy is already operating beyond its sustainable capacity, the economy may not be able to avoid some acceleration in inflation as policymakers try to engineer the soft landing. Therefore, the return to the potential output path has to be achieved in a sufficiently timely fashion to minimize any increase in inflation during the transition. Also, in the reverse soft landing case, growth must slow, not just to trend but to below trend in order to close the output gap. As a result, the unemployment rate must rise during the transition to full employment in this case. Hence, whereas the soft landing outcome in figure 1.A involves a stabilization of the unemployment rate at its low point and of inflation near its recent low, in the reverse soft landing case depicted in figure 1.B, both inflation and unemployment rates are likely to rise during the transition. The Best-Case Scenario: Supply Meets Demand The first two scenarios I have described assume that demand has to adjust to a steady supply path to achieve sustainability. There are natural equilibrating mechanisms, as well as policy adjustments, that encourage such adjustment in demand relative to supply. An alternative scenario is that supply adjusts to demand. This case is depicted in figure 1.C in which the growth of potential increases just as output threatens to push beyond potential. In this scenario, the runway has fortuitously landed on the plane, as it were. If this scenario describes the current episode, then the economy can continue to grow at 4 percent, the unemployment rate can remain near 4 percent, and inflation can remain steady at its prevailing rate. This scenario may seem farfetched. But it has the advantage of incorporating the role of supply-side as well as demand-side forces that appear to be at work in this expansion, and it would at least help explain the stability of inflation at prevailing growth and unemployment rates. Indeed, a possible decline in the NAIRU and, especially, an increase in the growth rate of potential output appear to be essential elements of this expansion. Still, even if we take into account the supply-side changes, we should not expect a perfect balancing between supply and demand. The Worse-Case Scenario: Hard Landings The worst-case alternative to a soft landing, to continue the analogy, is often referred to as a hard landing. Despite, or perhaps because of, the recent exceptional performance of the U.S. economy, some see a growing danger of a hard landing. A hard landing might seem like an oxymoron. A crash is a crash, after all, not a landing. But the key to a landing is that it is required to ensure sustainability of an expansion. A soft landing is the preferred course to ensuring a healthy, sustainable expansion, if it can be executed. A reverse soft landing is the second-best option. Otherwise, a hard landing may be unavoidable, despite the best efforts of policymakers. The upside of a hard landing is that it contributes to reversing imbalances and, afterwards, allows policymakers to aim once again at achieving a healthy, sustainable expansion, ultimately combining full employment, maximum sustainable growth, and price stability. It is useful to distinguish two broad classes of hard landings. The first involves the reversal of an imbalance between aggregate supply and aggregate demand. The classic example is the boom-bust scenario. The second class involves the unwinding of sector or market imbalances that either initiate a downturn in the economy or aggravate a downturn that would otherwise have occurred. A classic example of this genre is a stock market correction. I will focus first on the boom-bust scenario to complete my classification of paths to sustainable combinations of growth and the output gap. In the boom-bust scenario, depicted in figure 1.D, above-trend output growth during the expansion ultimately pushes output well beyond potential for a persistent period. The resulting overheating puts upward pressure on inflation. The monetary policy response to reverse the inflation often yields a decline in output, as depicted here, resulting in a period of economic slack and a reversal of the rise in inflation. This is the scenario from which we draw the lesson that timely, typically preemptive, policy restraint to avoid the excesses of a boom results in longer expansions and avoids unnecessary fluctuations in both output and inflation. Where are We Relative to Potential and Do We Need to Land? To identify whether the initial conditions today correspond to those in one of the panels of figure 1, we have to assess where output is relative to its potential and whether growth is above or below trend. This assignment is more difficult than usual because structural changes of uncertain dimension may have raised both the level and the growth rate of potential output. There is, for example, a consensus that the NAIRU has declined since the early 1990s. That decline translates into an increase in the level of potential output at any given time or a decline in the output gap for a given level of output. There is also a consensus that the rate of growth of potential output is higher today than during the twenty years preceding this expansion. However, the degree to which these two parameters have changed is not a settled issue. In particular, some think that the rapid growth and low unemployment rate of the past two years represent the economy's new equilibrium (case 1.C), but others believe that the economy has still been running ahead of potential recently, despite structural changes. We should not be surprised that a period of structural change would also be one of heightened uncertainty about key parameters, such as the NAIRU and trend growth. offers various estimates of the NAIRU and trend growth, drawn from researchers, model-based forecasts, assumptions incorporated in government budget projections, and surveys of economic forecasters. These estimates suggest that actual output is above potential (the unemployment rate is below the NAIRU) and that actual output growth has been above trend growth of potential. Despite the uncertainties, the consensus estimates of the NAIRU and the growth of potential give us a hint about what type of landing we should be aiming for and which of the scenarios depicted in figure 1 best describe the economy's initial conditions and prospects. The answer, it seems to me, is that no scenario in figure 1 does justice to the complex forces that have been in play during this expansion. I believe that the prevailing macro configuration is best described by some combination of figures 1.B, 1.C, or 1.D. That is, even after we incorporate the estimated decline in the NAIRU and the higher rate of growth of potential (as reflected in figure 1.C), output is above potential and output growth exceeds that of potential (as depicted in figures 1.B and 1.D). If output were above potential, we still would not know whether the outcome would be a soft (1.B) or a hard (1.D) landing. To complete the picture, we also have to rely on the temporary disinflationary effects of favorable relative-price shocks and the increase in the productivity trend that have allowed the economy to operate, for a while, beyond potential without suffering inflationary consequences. Hard Landings Associated with the Unwinding of Sector and Market Imbalances Much of the recent concern about the sustainability of this expansion is, nevertheless, not related directly to the balance between aggregate demand and aggregate supply. Rather these concerns are related to perceived imbalances in particular sectors or markets. Most notably, attention has focused on equity prices, the personal saving rate, the current account deficit, and debt burdens. The unifying theme among this class of imbalances is that they typically arise during an expansion, often as the result of changing attitudes toward the perceived risk in the economy or as a result of increased willingness to accept risk. Many, though not all, of these imbalances are financial in nature--for example, increases in leverage or declines in liquidity and other margins of safety. These developments typically play a role in supporting or financing expansions. The resulting imbalances do not typically induce a downturn by spontaneously reversing. But they may act to magnify any downward forces that hit the economy, increasing the depth and perhaps duration of downturns. Hence, these factors play an important role in both phases of the boom-bust scenario. I associate many of the second class of hard landing scenarios with the work of a former colleague and friend, Hyman Minsky, who died in 1996. He emphasized the development of financial vulnerabilities in expansions and their contribution to serious recessions. In his view, serious recessions are typically the result of a coincidence of adverse shocks on an already vulnerable economy. Minsky emphasized the role of vulnerabilities arising from financial imbalances, including excessive debt burdens or increases in the price of risky assets relative to safe assets. Historical Perspective on Market or Sector Imbalances offers a historical perspective on equity prices, the personal saving rate, the current account, and debt burden. In each case, I identify a preferred measure of each variable, scaling it relative to an appropriate measure of output or income. I want to emphasize that we cannot reach a judgment from these charts about whether the perceived imbalance is real and serious, but we can at least understand why concerns have been raised in each case. The chart for the stock market, figure 2.A, shows the price-to-earnings ratio for the S&P500 index, based on the trailing four-quarter earnings. The current p/e ratio of about 32 compares with an average of 16 since 1957 and a high before this expansion of 22.3 in August 1987. The personal saving rate, charted in figure 2.B, has declined in this episode to a record low. The current account balance, pictured in figure 2.C, is measured as the ratio to nominal gross domestic product (GDP). This ratio has also declined to a record low. In figure 2.D, I have charted the ratio of debt service costs to disposable income for the household sector, a preferred measure of the household debt burden. It has been rising since the mid-1990s but remains below the peak reached in the mid-1980s. As I noted, none of these diagrams definitively demonstrate that there is an unsustainable imbalance. The point of the exercise is to show why some have worried that there might be. It would take a more detailed analysis than time permits to reach an informed judgment about the risks in each case. And when we were done with this more detailed analysis, we could reasonably expect that we would still be left with considerable uncertainty. Common Sources of Recent Developments What I do want to focus on this afternoon are possible common sources for the developments pictured in figure 2 and the relation of any imbalance between aggregate supply and demand to those developments. There are, I believe, some common sources of the developments pictured in figure 2. First, these variables are all cyclically sensitive. During expansions, equity prices tend to rise, although they often decline before a downturn in the economy. Discerning a consistent pattern for the saving rate during an expansion from the chart is more difficult: Too many other factors play a role. But regression analysis indicates that the saving rate tends to move countercyclically. The current account balance tends to deteriorate if the expansion in the United States outpaces that abroad, as has been the case in recent years. After some point, the debt burden tends to increase sharply during expansions, although it often turns before a recession. But this cyclical expansion is not ordinary. It is exceptional. The unemployment rate, for example, has declined to a 30-year low. By some estimates, the output gap is the widest since the early 1970s. The duration of the expansion is about to set a record. It is therefore not surprising that cyclically sensitive variables are behaving exceptionally by historical standards. Second, the composition of output gains in this episode has also contributed to the patterns in figure 2. Private domestic demand typically is the driver of expansions, but its contribution has been even greater than usual this time. The direct contribution of federal government spending and tax changes, reflected in the swing in the federal budget from deficit to surplus, has been a net drag on growth. The weakness of our trading partners and the crises among emerging market economies contributed to the sharpness of the decline in net exports. So the pace of domestic private demand has been even stronger than the growth in overall output. Private domestic spending has been driven, in part, by the wealth effect arising from higher equity prices, a situation that also helps to explain much of the decline in the personal saving rate, and has been financed by a higher household debt and by the tapping of foreign saving. Also the two types of imbalances--an imbalance between aggregate demand and aggregate supply and sector or market imbalances--could be connected. Consider a situation in which growth is above trend and output moves beyond capacity. If investors misread these developments as sustainable and, therefore, extrapolate the exceptional conditions, exceptional and perhaps unsustainable movements in equity prices, the saving rate, and debt burden might be encouraged. Alternatively, a rise in equity prices that outstrips fundamentals might contribute to a pace of private domestic demand that ultimately takes output beyond capacity; in this case, the market or sector imbalance would be what contributed to the aggregate demand-supply imbalance. It also seems quite possible, indeed likely, that both these directions could operate simultaneously and reinforce each other. Finally, market or sector imbalances could possibly rise to worrisome proportions in the absence of an imbalance between aggregate demand and supply. This analysis leaves us with four possible combinations: (1) simultaneous imbalances in both aggregate demand/supply and market/sector variables; (2) simultaneous balance in each class; (3) aggregate demand/supply imbalance accompanied by balance in market/sector variables; and (4) aggregate demand/supply balance accompanied by market/sector imbalances. There are clearly a wide variety of opinions about which of these combinations best describes the current situation. Indeed, many observers, including myself, are uncertain about which combination best fits the current picture. The problem in assessing the risks associated with market/sector imbalances is not only determining whether or not prevailing levels of these variables constitute an imbalance in the first place but also figuring out the circumstances and time frame over which any true imbalance might be unwound. In addition, the effects on the economy as a given imbalance is unwound will depend importantly on interactions with other imbalances and with events that trigger the unwinding of the imbalance, as well as on the policy response. For example, a stock market correction is typically triggered by some adverse event so that the effect on the economy will be the combined effects of the triggering event and the stock market decline. A decline in the stock market might also, for example, reduce confidence in the U.S. economy and reduce the willingness of foreigners to accumulate the increment in U.S. liabilities associated with the current account deficit. And the net effect will also depend on the policy response to the adverse effects of the unwinding of any imbalances. As a result of these considerations, simple multiplier exercises, such as the effect on the economy of a given percentage decline in equity prices, probably tell more about the econometric model used than about prospects for the economy. The Challenge for Monetary Policy The most important of the perceived imbalances I have discussed today is, in my view, the possibility of an overheated economy. In three of the four combinations of aggregate demand/supply and market/sector imbalances, it seems to me that the best approach would be to focus directly on the aggregate demand/supply imbalance and allow the indirect effects of such a policy to mitigate any other imbalances. In addition, any other imbalances are more likely to grow to worrisome proportions during an unsustainable boom and are more likely to unwind in a disruptive manner if confronted by rising inflation, sharply higher interest rates in response to higher inflation, and a subsequent recession. As a result, my guess is that if we avoid the boom-bust scenario, we shall have avoided the most serious of the other imbalances or at least will be in a better position to absorb and respond to the unwinding of other possible imbalances. That leaves the possibility that there might be cases when we face market/sector imbalances in the absence of any aggregate demand/supply imbalance. In such a case, the level and growth of output are sustainable in the sense that they are not putting pressure on inflation; but this aggregate balance might be threatened subsequently by a spontaneous unwinding of a market/sector imbalance. Alternatively, the depth and duration of a downturn in response to some future adverse shock might be aggravated by the unwinding market/sector imbalances. What role can and should monetary policy play in such a case? Policymakers will, I expect, be reluctant to undermine macroeconomic performance in the short run in an attempt to unwind a perceived market/sector imbalance that might not be serious or might unwind in a gradual and nondisruptive fashion on its own. Furthermore, it is not obvious how to unwind an excessive debt burden, to raise the personal saving rate, or to narrow the current account deficit in a sustainable way through monetary policy. As a result, monetary policy, in my view, needs to focus on achieving balance between aggregate supply and aggregate demand. In pursuing this course, monetary policy is confronted by two competing challenges. The first is to allow the economy to realize the benefits of any decline in the NAIRU and any increase in trend growth. Supporting maximum sustainable growth is very much the business of monetary policy. But achieving maximum sustainable growth also is about ensuring the sustainability of an expansion and hence avoiding overheating. This is the second challenge today. I view the efforts of the FOMC as precisely focused on balancing these considerations.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today its approval of the application of E.Sun Commercial Bank, Limited, Taipei, Taiwan, to establish a branch in Los Angeles, California. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM E.Sun Commercial Bank, Limited Taipei, Taiwan Order Approving Establishment of a Branch E.Sun Commercial Bank, Limited ("Bank"), Taipei, Taiwan, a foreign bank within the meaning of the International Banking Act ("IBA"), has applied under section 7(d) of the IBA (12 U.S.C.  3105(d)) to establish a state-licensed branch in Los Angeles, California. The Foreign Bank Supervision Enhancement Act of 1991, which amended the IBA, provides that a foreign bank must obtain the approval of the Board to establish a branch in the United States. Notice of the application, affording interested persons an opportunity to comment, has been published in a newspaper of general circulation in Los Angeles, California ( San Gabriel Valley Tribune , July 12, 1999). The time for filing comments has expired, and the Board has considered the application and all comments received. Bank, with total consolidated assets of approximately $6.3 billion, is a full-service commercial bank. Its shares are publicly traded and widely held. Bank operates 37 branches and an overseas banking unit in Taiwan, and representative offices in The Philippines and Hong Kong. Bank currently does not have any operations in the United States. The purpose of the proposed branch is to allow Bank to better serve the needs of its customers that have business interests in the United States. In addition, the proposed office would seek to develop new customers among U.S. businesses and individuals who have business interests in Taiwan. The activities of the proposed branch office would include commercial lending, mortgage lending, syndicated and participation loans, purchasing and selling interbank funds, maintaining credit balances and deposit accounts, and letter of credit services. Bank would be a qualifying foreign business organization within the meaning of Regulation K (12 C.F.R. 211.23(b)). In order to approve an application by a foreign bank to establish a branch in the United States, the IBA and Regulation K require the Board to determine that the foreign bank applicant engages directly in the business of banking outside of the United States, and has furnished to the Board the information it needs to assess the application adequately. The Board also shall take into account whether the foreign bank and any foreign bank parent is subject to comprehensive supervision or regulation on a consolidated basis by its home country supervisor (12 U.S.C.  3105(d)(2); 12 C.F.R. 211.24). The Board may also take into account additional standards as set forth in the IBA and Regulation K (12 U.S.C.  3105(d)(3)-(4); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)(2)-(3)). As noted above, Bank engages directly in the business of banking outside the United States. Bank also has provided the Board with information necessary to assess the application through submissions that address the relevant issues. With respect to supervision by home country authorities, the Board previously has determined, in connection with applications involving other banks in Taiwan, that those banks were subject to home country supervision on a consolidated basis. Bank is supervised by the Ministry of Finance ("Ministry") and the Taiwan central bank on substantially the same terms and conditions as those other banks. Based on all the facts of record, the Board has determined that Bank is subject to comprehensive supervision on a consolidated basis by its home country supervisors. The Board has also taken into account the additional standards set forth in section 7 of the IBA and Regulation K ( see 12 U.S.C.  3105(d)(3)-(4); 12 C.F.R. 211.24(c)(2)). The Ministry has no objection to the establishment of the proposed branch. Bank must comply with the minimum capital standards of the Basel Capital Accord, as implemented by Taiwan. Bank's capital exceeds these minimum standards and can be considered equivalent to capital that would be required of a U.S. banking organization. Managerial and other financial resources of Bank are also considered consistent with approval, and Bank appears to have the experience and capacity to support the proposed branch. Bank has established controls and procedures for the proposed branch to ensure compliance with U.S. law, as well as controls and procedures for its worldwide operations generally. With respect to access to information about Bank's operations, the Board has reviewed the restrictions on disclosure in relevant jurisdictions in which Bank operates and has communicated with relevant government authorities regarding access to information. Bank has committed to make available to the Board such information on the operations of Bank and any of its affiliates that the Board deems necessary to determine and enforce compliance with the IBA, the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956, as amended, and other applicable federal law. To the extent that the provision of such information to the Board may be prohibited by law, Bank has committed to cooperate with the Board to obtain any necessary consents or waivers that might be required from third parties for disclosure of such information. In addition, subject to certain conditions, the Ministry may share information on Bank's operations with other supervisors, including the Board. In light of these commitments and other facts of record, and subject to the condition described below, the Board concludes that Bank has provided adequate assurances of access to any necessary information that the Board may request. On the basis of all the facts of record, and subject to the commitments made by Bank, as well as the terms and conditions set forth in this order, the Board has determined that Bank's application to establish a branch should be, and hereby is, approved. Should any restrictions on access to information on the operations or activities of Bank and its affiliates subsequently interfere with the Board's ability to obtain information to determine and enforce compliance by Bank or its affiliates with applicable federal statutes, the Board may require termination of any of Bank's direct or indirect activities in the United States. Approval of this application also is specifically conditioned on compliance by Bank with the commitments made in connection with this application and with the conditions in this order. The commitments and conditions referred to above are conditions imposed in writing by the Board in connection with its decision and may be enforced in proceedings under 12 U.S.C.  1818 against Bank and its affiliates. By order of the Board of Governors, effective January 24, 2000. (signed) Robert deV. Frierson Associate Secretary of the Board Footnotes All data are as of June 30, 1999. In assessing this standard, the Board considers, among other factors, the extent to which the home country supervisors: (i) ensure that the bank has adequate procedures for monitoring and controlling its activities worldwide; (ii) obtain information on the condition of the bank and its subsidiaries and offices through regular examination reports, audit reports, or otherwise; (iii) obtain information on the dealings with and relationship between the bank and its affiliates, both foreign and domestic; (iv) receive from the bank financial reports that are consolidated on a worldwide basis or comparable information that permits analysis of the bank's financial condition on a worldwide consolidated basis; (v) evaluate prudential standards, such as capital adequacy and risk asset exposure, on a worldwide basis. These are indicia of comprehensive, consolidated supervision. No single factor is essential, and other elements may inform the Board's determination. See Taipei Bank , 79 Federal Reserve Bulletin 143 (1993); United World Chinese Commercial Bank , 79 Federal Reserve Bulletin 146 (1993); Bank of Taiwan , 79 Federal Reserve Bulletin 541 (1993); Chiao Tung Bank , 79 Federal Reserve Bulletin 543 (1993); Medium Business Bank of Taiwan , 79 Federal Reserve Bulletin 807 (1993); The Farmers Bank of China , 81 Federal Reserve Bulletin 620 (1995); Taiwan Business Bank , 81 Federal Reserve Bulletin 746 (1995); First Commercial Bank , 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin 315 (1997); Land Bank of Taiwan , 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin 336 (1997); Bank SinoPac , 83 Federal Reserve Bulletin 669 (1997); Chinatrust Commercial Bank, Ltd. , 84 Federal Reserve Bulletin 1121 (1998). The Board's authority to approve the establishment of the proposed branch parallels the continuing authority of the State of California to license offices of a foreign bank. The Board's approval of this application does not supplant the authority of the State of California and the State of California Department of Financial Institutions ("Department") to license the proposed office of Bank in accordance with any terms or conditions that the Department may impose. Voting for this action: Chairman Greenspan, Vice Chairman Ferguson, and Governors Kelley, Meyer, and Gramlich.
Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan On nomination to fourth term as Chairman Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate January 26, 2000 I want to begin my remarks today by expressing my gratitude to President Clinton for his confidence in me, and to you, Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee, for holding hearings on my renomination for a fourth term as Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. The Federal Reserve has had a close and productive relationship with this Committee over the years. If you and your Senate colleagues afford me the opportunity, I look forward to working with you in the years ahead to build a framework to enable the American people to enjoy the fruits of a sound and efficient financial system, in an economy that is delivering the greatest possible sustained increases in standards of living. We at the Federal Reserve face considerable challenges in carrying out our responsibilities for both the financial system and the overall economy. In many respects, these challenges relate to discerning, and keeping up with the implications of, the accelerating pace of technological change in our society. The Congress took a major step last year in passing legislation that will help the citizens of the United States realize the benefits of the rapid evolution of technology in the delivery of financial services. The Federal Reserve's challenge now, working with our fellow regulators, is not only to implement the new law, but more broadly to design supervisory and regulatory policies that can deal effectively with the changing financial structure. Effective oversight must balance a number of possibly conflicting criteria. It must enable our financial sector to evolve in a way that allows competition and technological change so that financial services are delivered in the least costly, most efficient way possible to the highest possible number of our citizens. It must at the same time foster the fundamental soundness of our financial system and put in place safeguards to protect against the remote possibility that unsound behavior in the financial sector is transmitted beyond the firms involved to the economy more generally. And, it must accomplish the latter with minimal use of the government safety net and of implicit or explicit guarantees that tend to reduce accountability and market discipline and foster excessive and destabilizing risk-taking. For the economy overall, the marked pickup in technological innovation has accelerated productivity and raised standards of living for many--though regrettably, not all--Americans. Our challenge in monetary policy is to foster, as best we can, the financial conditions that will allow this economic expansion and technological revolution to continue as long, and as vigorously, as possible. Experience has demonstrated that an essential ingredient in this prosperity, and an ingredient for which the central bank has ultimate responsibility over the long run, is low and stable inflation. Effective price stability removes a major source of uncertainty and distortion that would otherwise interfere with the spending and saving decisions of households and businesses. Maintaining price stability also reduces the likelihood that imbalances could develop that would ultimately undermine economic expansion. We have also learned that the Federal Reserve's potential contributions to financial and economic stability should not end with making policy decisions. We also need to explain to the public what we are doing and why. Importantly, in our democratic system our explanations provide the members of this Committee, your Congressional colleagues, and the people you serve with the information necessary to evaluate our actions and to hold us accountable for them. As you know, we have made considerable efforts in recent years to improve the communication of our decisions, our expectations, and their rationales to the public consistent with our mandate to deliver effective monetary policy. This has not always been a straightforward process, in which the consequences of each step could be readily predicted, but it is one that must continue. Thus the challenges and the opportunities are substantial in a number of the areas in which Congress has given the Federal Reserve important responsibilities. But in the Federal Reserve, the Congress also has created an institutional structure extraordinarily well-suited to address these issues. The combination of a Board of Governors, firmly tied to the national democratic process and providing overall leadership to the System, and regional Reserve Banks, deeply rooted in their local communities, enables us to bring a unique perspective to the consideration of policy issues. Our Reserve Banks supply real-time information about developments in their regions, and ongoing observation of, and familiarity with, the financial institutions headquartered there. This information enhances our ability not only to conduct monetary policy, but also to supervise financial institutions and deal with emerging problems in the financial sector, and to play a constructive role in regional economic developments. Board members and Reserve Bank presidents can employ these observations, along with their knowledge of the national and international economic and financial situations, to carry out our legislated mandates. This structure and these responsibilities have attracted to the Federal Reserve System men and women of high intellectual capabilities and deep knowledge of the relevant subjects. Naturally, and fortunately, these people often disagree. Disagreements, however, are largely over evidence and analysis, not goals and objectives. To be sure, Federal Reserve decisions often emerge as a broad consensus of policymakers. But forming that consensus involves considerable give and take, with many people influencing the outcome. Policymakers are in turn supported by outstanding staff at the Board and the Reserve Banks. Many, perhaps most, of the policymakers and staff could be making substantially more income in the private sector, but, attracted by the character of their colleagues, the nature and importance of issues they deal with, and the atmosphere in which those issues are addressed, they chose to exercise their considerable talents within the Federal Reserve. The strength of the institutions and structures of the Federal Reserve is perhaps most visible in the work of the Federal Open Market Committee. There, the ability of Reserve Bank presidents to draw on local contacts can reveal significant developments in the economy before they are visible in the national data, and can help in understanding the forces behind important economic trends. The Committee is an extraordinary collection of individuals. Among the 17 people gathered around that table, 13 have Ph.D.s. The others have the experience, skills, and common sense to prevent the Committee from becoming paralyzed with a surfeit of two-handed economists. But monetary policy is not the only area in which this unique blend of skills and perspectives is brought to bear. We utilize committees of Board members and Reserve Bank presidents to deal with such responsibilities as our oversight of the payments system and the implications for supervision and regulation of the growing size and complexity of financial institutions. What success the Federal Reserve has had in carrying out its legislated responsibilities in recent decades derives from many sources. Certainly, we have enjoyed good fortune--dealing with the challenges of a pickup in innovation and productivity is decidedly more enjoyable than the task faced by our predecessors in the 1970s when productivity slowed and stagflation held sway. I believe we have also learned from our past mistakes, and I hope that we will recognize the new misjudgments we will inevitably make quickly enough to prevent them from becoming too serious and disruptive. And we have had help and support from various Congresses and administrations seeking, like us, to promote sound public policies. But our ability to meet the legislative mandates of the Congress rests ultimately on the strength of the institutions of the Federal Reserve and the people who inhabit them. It has been an extraordinary privilege to be able to serve my country at the Federal Reserve, and I would be honored if the Senate saw fit to enable me to continue this association for another four years.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the proposal by Centura Banks, Inc., Rocky Mount, to merge with Triangle Bancorp, Raleigh ("Triangle"), and thereby acquire Triangle's wholly owned subsidiary banks, Triangle Bank, Raleigh, and Bank of Mecklenburg ("Mecklenburg"), Charlotte, and Triangle's nonbanking subsidiary, Coastal Leasing, L.L.C., Greenville, all of North Carolina. The Board also approved the applications of Centura Bank, Rocky Mount, North Carolina, to merge with Triangle Bank and Mecklenburg, and to retain and operate branches at the locations of the main offices and branches of Triangle Bank and Mecklenburg. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application by Old Kent Financial Corporation, Grand Rapids, Michigan ("Old Kent"), to merge with Merchants Bancorp, Inc. ("Merchants"), and thereby acquire its subsidiary bank, Merchants National Bank of Aurora ("Merchants Bank"), both in Aurora, Illinois. The Board today also announced its approval of the application by Old Kent's subsidiary bank, Old Kent Bank, Grand Rapids, Michigan, to merge with Merchants Bank, and to retain and operate branches at the locations of the main office and branches of Merchants Bank. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.