For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Caisse Nationale de Crédit Agricole, Paris, France; Crédit Agricole Indosuez, Paris, France; Crédit Agricole Indosuez, New York Branch, New York, New York; the Federal Reserve Bank of New York; and the New York State Banking Department. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced the issuance of a Final Decision and Order of Prohibition against Sammie R. Golden, former employee, Union Planters Bank, Memphis, Tennessee. The Order, the result of an action brought by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, prohibits Ms. Golden from participating in the conduct of the affairs of any financial institution or holding company. A copy of the Final Decision and Order is attached.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Office of the Comptroller of the Currency AGENCIES ISSUE INTERIM CAPITAL RULE FOR COLLATERAL IN SECURITIES BORROWINGS The federal bank regulatory agencies today issued and requested public comment on an interim rule revising the risk-based capital treatment of cash collateral posted in connection with certain securities borrowing transactions. The agencies are also requesting comment on the capital treatment of securities borrowing transactions where securities are posted as collateral. The rule applies only to those banking organizations with significant trading activities that are subject to capital treatment under the market risk rules. The interim rule, published in the Federal Register by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, provides a capital treatment for U.S. banking organizations that is more in line with the capital treatment applied to their domestic and foreign competitors. The interim rule is effective January 4, 2001 . U.S. banking organizations may apply the provisions of this interim rule beginning December 5, 2000. Comments on the rule are due by January 19, 2001. Neither the Basel Accord nor the risk-based capital guidelines adopted by the three agencies specifically address securities borrowing transactions. The Accord is an international framework for assessing the capital adequacy of depository institutions by risk weighting their assets and off-balance sheet exposures and serves as a basis for the banking agencies' risk-based capital guidelines. In recent years, U.S. banking organizations have experienced rapid growth in securities borrowing transactions, which are used for various purposes, including short sales and securities fails (securities sold but not made available for delivery on the settlement date), and in conjunction with option and arbitrage positions. The agencies recognize that securities borrowing is a long-established financial activity that historically has resulted in an exceedingly low level of losses. The interim rule recognizes this low risk and effectively lowers the capital requirement associated with these transactions. Media Contacts: Federal Reserve: Dave Skidmore (202) 452-2955 FDIC: Phil Battey (202) 898-6993 OCC: Sam Eskenazi (202) 874-5770 Federal Reserve: Dave Skidmore (202) 452-2955 FDIC: Phil Battey (202) 898-6993 OCC: Sam Eskenazi (202) 874-5770
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Office of the Comptroller of the Currency Office of Thrift Supervision AGENCIES PROPOSE LOWER RISK WEIGHTING FOR BANK CLAIMS ON SECURITIES FIRMS The federal banking regulatory agencies today requested public comment on a proposal to amend their capital standards for banks, bank holding companies and savings associations to reduce the risk weight applied to claims on, or guaranteed by, qualifying securities firms. The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the Office of Thrift Supervision published the proposal in todayï¿½s Federal Register . The proposal would mitigate a competitive inequity for U.S. depository institutions and holding companies by lowering the risk weight applied to claims on qualifying securities firms from 100 percent to 20 percent. This change is consistent with the treatment of claims on securities firms under an April 1998 amendment to the Basel Accord. The Accord is an international framework for assessing the capital adequacy of depository institutions by risk weighting their assets and off-balance-sheet exposures and serves as a basis for the banking agenciesï¿½ risk-based capital guidelines. Under the proposal, qualifying securities firms incorporated in the United States must be registered broker-dealers subject to and in compliance with the net capital rule of the Securities and Exchange Commission, and subject to margin and other regulatory requirements applicable to registered broker-dealers. Securities firms incorporated in other countries that are members of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) must be subject to supervisory and regulatory arrangements, including risk-based capital requirements, comparable to those imposed on depository institutions under the Basel Accord. Qualifying U.S. and OECD securities firms also must have a long-term credit rating in one of the three highest investment-grade credit ratings categories used by a nationally recognized statistical rating organization. Comments are due by January 22, 2001 . Media Contacts: Federal Reserve: David Skidmore (202) 452-2955 FDIC: Phil Battey (202) 898-6993 OCC: Sam Eskenazi (202) 874-5770 OTS: William Fulwider (202) 906-6913 Federal Reserve: David Skidmore (202) 452-2955 FDIC: Phil Battey (202) 898-6993 OCC: Sam Eskenazi (202) 874-5770 OTS: William Fulwider (202) 906-6913
Remarks by Vice Chairman Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. At the Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, New York December 6, 2000 Technology, Macroeconomics, and Monetary Policy Thank you for inviting me to the Presidential Colloquium at Rochester Institute of Technology. This is a particularly appropriate place to discuss the effects of technological change on the economy and some of the implications for monetary policy. As always, the views I will be expressing are my own and are not necessarily shared by other members of the Board of Governors or the Federal Open Market Committee. Let me start with a brief review of the extraordinary performance of the U.S. economy over the past five years. Since 1995, real gross domestic product has grown, on average, more than 4-1/2 percent per year. This pace is significantly above that in the previous five years, and you have to go back to the 1960s to find even closely comparable periods of consistently robust economic expansion. In this environment, the unemployment rate has fallen to 4 percent, and the underlying rate of price inflation has slowed, on net, despite very high rates of resource utilization. Even the most optimistic of forecasters could not have anticipated such a favorable confluence of economic events. Productivity Growth and Cost Reductions So, what happened? As a policymaker, I'd like to think that well-executed monetary and fiscal policies--each focused importantly on their respective long-run goals of achieving price stability and reining in deficit spending--played some role in creating economic conditions that fostered non-inflationary economic growth. Our economy has also benefited from past actions by the government to deregulate industries. The removal of unnecessary government regulation started more than twenty years ago during the Administration of President Ford and gathered momentum during the Carter years. It has altered the business landscape by allowing, indeed forcing, businesses to focus more clearly on a more competitive marketplace with fewer constraints and increased flexibility. But the dominant force of late appears to have been a significant increase in the rate of productivity growth: Output per hour in the nonfarm business sector--a conventional measure of productivity--has increased at an annual rate of almost 3 percent since 1995, well above the pace earlier in the decade. Cyclical forces such as the inability of businesses to add to their payrolls as rapidly as they would have liked in response to the rise in demand have probably played some role in these efficiency gains. But I suspect that longer-term, structural changes, reflecting the boom in capital spending and the revolution in information technology, probably have been more important. Let me turn to the evidence on this point. Technology Change and Productivity Growth Bob Solow--the MIT economist who won the Nobel Prize in economics for his work on the theory of economic growth--once quipped that you can see computers everywhere except in the productivity statistics. A few years ago that situation began to change, and we now have strong evidence that the faster productivity growth our economy has experienced is in fact due partly to newer technologies. Research by economists Steve Oliner and Dan Sichel of the Federal Reserve Board staff sheds some light on the sources of this faster productivity growth. About 1/2 percentage point of the increase in productivity growth over the 1995-99 period can be attributed to so-called "capital deepening," most of which reflected greater spending by businesses on computers, software, and communications equipment. The high (and rising) levels of business investment raised the amount of capital per worker and thereby boosted productivity. Another 1/2 percentage point of the pickup in productivity growth reflected technological innovations in the actual production of computer hardware and semiconductors as well as better management--perhaps assisted by these high-tech investments--of the nation's capital and labor resources. Oliner and Sichel estimate that the consolidated influences of high-tech investments account for about two-thirds of the acceleration in productivity since 1995. This research supports the view that fundamental changes are underway in our economy. What's So Special about this Capital? While it is interesting to note that trend productivity has picked up and that high-tech investments are the source of the acceleration, by now these are not new observations. Perhaps at this stage it is more useful to explore more deeply this positive "shock" to the ability of our economy to produce goods and services. What is so special about computers and other information technologies that they can have such an impact on our economy? Let me highlight three special characteristics of high-tech equipment. First, computers and communications equipment depreciate at a very rapid pace. The current best estimate is that computers probably depreciate about 30 percent annually, although that estimate might be low, while other equipment probably depreciates at a rate of less than 15 percent annually. Therefore, computers are retired, on average, after three years, and the useful life for other equipment is about seven years. Firms must invest in computers at a faster rate than that for other forms of capital just to maintain a given level of the capital stock. The rapid replacement of high-tech capital means that technological progress becomes "embodied" in the capital stock at a faster rate than is the case for longer-lived assets. The second feature of high-tech equipment that sets it apart from other classes of capital is the sensitivity of its demand to fluctuations in the cost of capital. Economists have debated for decades about the magnitude of cost-of-capital effects on traditional capital goods. A past consensus was that there probably was a cost-of-capital effect but that it was small and very difficult to identify empirically. A somewhat different conclusion has arisen lately when the same basic models of investment are applied to spending on computers alone. The latest research shows that computers are quite sensitive to movements in the cost of capital, and as a result of the 20 percent per annum decline in relative computer prices, the cost of this type of capital fell rapidly in the past decade. This combination of a high price elasticity and a rapidly declining price led to the boom in high-tech investment. A third characteristic of high-tech investment is the magnitude of "external" or "spillover" effects that it generates. High-tech equipment generates benefits not only to the owner of the machine but to other agents in the economy as well. I am thinking in particular about so-called network effects--that is, linking computers together makes possible larger productivity gains than do computers operated as stand-alone units. Although difficult to measure, such network effects certainly have stimulated the demand for high-tech equipment and have helped to speed up the dispersion of new technologies. Supporting Structural Changes The technological changes inspired by investments in computers have enhanced the ability of businesses to reduce their operating expenses. In many industries, investments in information technologies have helped firms to cut back on the volume of inventories that they hold as a precaution against glitches in their supply chain or as a hedge against unexpected increases in aggregate demand. Product development costs have probably also been reduced through the use of better computer hardware and software, and new communications technologies have increased the speed with which firms can share information--both internally and with their customers and suppliers. This is the intersection of macroeconomics and management. Many business observers now believe that these newer technologies are not only reducing the cost of transforming inputs into outputs but also decreasing "interaction costs," the costs incurred in getting different people and companies to work together to exchange goods and services. Obviously, the line between "transformation" and "interaction" is not clear, but consultants who have studied this topic believe that these interaction costs account for 55 percent of all labor costs, with some industries, such as financial services, estimated to have interaction costs as high as 70 percent of labor costs. I cannot verify these numbers, but the general concept seems useful. Largely as a result of the increase in productivity in the recent past, we have experienced a remarkable stability in unit labor costs. During the past five and a half years, unit labor costs for nonfinancial corporations, which are the most accurately measured, increased an average of 0.2 percent at an annual rate. This compares quite favorably with the experience in the preceding ten years of a 2.2 percent annual rate of increase. If in fact "interactions" account for 55 percent of labor costs, this relatively flat trend in unit labor cost increases is consistent with the concept that the newer technologies are allowing easier, less labor-intensive, interactions. Importantly, given the high rate of depreciation and the steep declines in costs of high-tech equipment, these savings in unit labor costs are not being undermined by offsetting increases in unit nonlabor costs. Moreover, given intense competition and the resultant lack of pricing "leverage," ongoing programs to reduce costs have become a key part of corporate strategies to maintain or improve profit margins. The focus on cost reduction has worked to head off the development of inflationary pressures in this expansion. The Future Path for Productivity Improvements But technological waves ebb and flow, and it is natural to ask whether we can count on such rapid productivity growth in the future. On this score, I am cautiously optimistic, but I recognize both that forecasting technology is extremely difficult and that there will be occasional bumps in the road. Let me explain my reasons for caution and optimism. The risk that productivity growth might moderate centers on the high-tech sector, computers and communications equipment, and the associated relative price declines. Historical patterns suggest that such narrowly based productivity increases might not continue, and therefore caution is in order. However, there are two reasons to be optimistic. First, the recent burst in productivity growth seems to be more a product of changing technology than of transient business cycle influences, and as a result, there is less chance of a "payback period" of particularly sluggish productivity growth. Second, computer industry experts, including those in the semiconductor industry, do not indicate that the industry has exhausted its potential to produce faster and cheaper computers. Similarly, business leaders suggest that they are still taking advantage of the advances in computing power at lower costs to find new and productive uses of newer technologies. The Macroeconomic Implications of Faster Productivity Growth Theory teaches us that the step-up in the growth rate of technological change certainly has important implications for economic activity and inflation. The main reason policymakers and economists are interested in the growth rate of productivity is that it helps us to understand the economy's potential to supply goods and services. The effects on the economy's ability to produce goods and services are clear, but theory predicts that a new higher level of productivity growth would also affect the demand for goods and services. The most immediate effects would be on capital investment, as we have seen. A more rapid pace of technological change raises the real rate of return on new investments--perhaps significantly. Put another way, a more rapid pace of technological change makes investments in capital goods embodying the new technology more profitable. When businesses recognize the new technological possibilities, capital spending accelerates to take advantage of the new profit opportunities. The employment and income generated by business spending on capital goods boosts consumer spending and sets off another round of investment spending. Typically referred to by economists as "multiplier-accelerator" effects, such processes would continue as long as the real rate of return on a new capital project exceeded the real cost for capital for that project. Through this process, an innovation on the supply side of the economy generates a comparable increase in aggregate demand. It is important to emphasize that higher productivity growth translates into higher real income growth for employees. This added income is seen most clearly in the higher wages paid to that growing number of workers whose cash compensation is tied to company performance. In addition, for those workers who have been granted stock options, higher profits today and the potential for further increases tomorrow translates into higher stock prices for their company and ultimately an increase in their overall compensation. But real incomes should increase even for workers whose compensation is not directly linked to company performance, as profitable business opportunities bolster the demand for scarce labor. Theory also teaches that the increase in the rate of return on capital--even if generated by a rise in the growth rate of technical change--ultimately requires an increase in real market interest rates. Market interest rates must rise in order to maintain equilibrium between the higher demand for investment funds and the supply of investment funds. And, indeed, we have seen that market interest rates, particularly for corporate issuers, have risen steadily for the last year or so. Interestingly, rates of return for forms of capital other than computer equipment, including both structures and non-computer equipment, either have not increased or have not risen as much as the rates of return on their high-tech counterparts. It is therefore possible that, during this period, investment flows have been reallocated away from firms producing traditional capital goods and toward firms and industries that make high-tech goods and services. This somewhat abstract description of the effects of a step-up in the growth rate of technical change bears a striking resemblance to the developments of recent years in labor markets, prices of goods and services, capital investments, and fixed-income markets. But there's still an element missing: the stock market. A higher rate of technical change that raises the productivity and hence the profitability of capital should elevate the value of equities. Since equity prices reflect market expectations of future cash flow and dividends, any adjustment in profit expectations can and does lead to a resetting of equity prices. Are stocks today overvalued, correctly valued, or undervalued? I certainly do not know, and I am not aware of anyone who does. As a result, I believe that it would be unwise--and indeed impossible--for the Federal Reserve to target specific levels of valuations in equity markets. However, equity markets obviously do have spillover effects on the real economy and, thus, need to be considered in assessing the aggregate balance of supply and demand. Given the efficiency and forward-looking nature of financial markets, even expected future technical innovations will have an immediate effect on equity valuations. Equity values, in turn, can influence consumer behavior. As you know, economists often speak of the "wealth effect," and econometric modeling indicates that consumers eventually tend to raise the level of their spending between 2 and 5 cents for every incremental dollar of wealth. As a consequence, equity valuations can have a noticeable effect on consumption and on macroeconomic performance. To put a rough number on these influences, simulations by the Board staff using our econometric model of the economy suggest that wealth generated in the equity markets over the last four years added about 1 percentage point to the growth rate of real GDP. Of late, equity markets have given up some of their gains. However, economists who have studied the topic generally think that an impact of a change in stock market generated wealth on consumption begins to build in the first year and may take two to three years to be fully felt. Additionally, equity markets are a source of investment capital, and valuations in the stock market are one determinant of the cost of capital for businesses. External financing conditions, including equity valuations, are important because recent investments have increasingly been financed from external sources. External funds raised now account for about 20 percent of nominal capital expenditures--close to the highs of the past two decades. Monetary Policy and the "New" Economy As I have said many times before, uncertainty about productivity trends poses a major challenge in the design and implementation of monetary policy. As you can imagine, it is very difficult to infer the true structure of the economy through the interpretation of the twists and turns of incoming economic data. How do we know, for example, if unexpected developments are just temporary movements away from stable longer-run relationships or are manifestations of changes in the underlying economic structure? In many cases, this judgment is difficult to make with much confidence even considerably after the fact. In the meantime, we must bear in mind that the statistical relationships we work with, embodied in our econometric models, are only loose approximations of the underlying reality. The considerable uncertainty regarding statistical constructs such as the "natural" rate of unemployment or the "sustainable" rate of growth of the economy suggests, in my judgment, the need to downplay forecasts of inflation based solely on those variables. Some fog always obstructs our vision, but when the structure of the economy is changing, the fog is considerably denser than at other times. What should be done when such uncertainties seem particularly acute? When we suspect that our understanding of the macroeconomic environment has deteriorated, as evidenced by strings of surprises difficult to reconcile with our earlier beliefs, I think that the appropriate response is to rely less upon the future predicted by the increasingly unreliable old models and more upon inferences from the more recent past. That means we should weight incoming data more heavily than data from decades past in trying to make judgments about the new economy and, of course, act appropriately when the evidence becomes clear. It also is important to be aware of the potential for unanticipated developments to emerge that might have implications for policymaking. The rate of growth of our economy has stepped down from the unsustainable pace of earlier this year. During such a period, potential risks emerge more clearly. First, we must be mindful that an unexpected slowdown might occur in the growth of productivity. As I said, I am cautiously optimistic that the rapid pace of productivity growth can be extended. However, we now know that an unexpected and unrecognized slowdown in productivity growth occurred in 1973. The causes are still debated, but we know that the slowdown contributed to "stagflation," which emerged as employees demanded increased compensation, based on unrealistically high expectations of productivity growth and gradually rising inflation expectations, and employers granted those increases. To maintain profit margins, businesses then passed on those cost increases through to prices. This passthrough occurred as the rate of growth in the economy subsided. This is the reverse of the good news that we have experienced in this expansion. The second risk to good performance is that the investment boom, at least in some sectors, may overshoot. We are not only in the longest expansion in the history of our nation but also in the longest investment boom. Expectations of future returns from capital may not materialize, and companies may find that they have over-invested in capital stock. Other investment booms have ended with a pullback in investment that has slowed growth sharply, and we should be mindful that such an outcome is not impossible. Indeed, the recent releveling of the stock prices of some high-tech companies may suggest that we are entering a period of reduced optimism about future profits and less rapid growth in business investment. The third risk is that the capital inflows from abroad that have been funding our domestic investments may dry up. The elevated stock market has reduced household savings. Net government saving has increased greatly, in the form of the surplus at the federal, state, and local levels, but as a nation we also rely on capital inflows from overseas. Capital inflows, as you know, are the counterpart of our record current account deficit. The gap between domestic savings and investment is large and growing, and if the inflow of foreign capital reversed suddenly, the consequences for our economy would be noticeable. A fourth risk arises from ongoing adjustments in financial markets to the perception of a riskier economic environment. Over the course of this year, commercial banks have tightened their lending standards, and quality spreads have increased in the bond market--especially in the high-yield sector. Activity in the IPO market has subsided as equity investors have turned away from riskier ventures. Taking into account also the decline in equity prices since the spring and the rise in the foreign exchange value of the dollar, financial markets are imposing more restraint on the economy than they have in recent years. A reassessment of risks is a natural and desirable byproduct of financial market adjustments, and of returning to more sustainable economic conditions. There is always a danger, however, that participants will overreact in such a period of adjustment. I do not today see such an overreaction, but we have to be aware that markets have turned excessively pessimistic in the past, with negative effects on economic activity. Similarly, although investment growth appears to have slowed, it is still rapid by historical standards and the dollar remains firm. Thus, I do not see, at this stage, evidence of a marked drop off in investment or of a sudden reversal in capital flows. However, it is prudent to be mindful of these risks in this transition period. Conclusion In conclusion, let me remind you that, while these are challenging times for monetary policymakers and financial market participants, the U.S. economy is enjoying a period of unprecedented prosperity. Our job at the Federal Reserve is to do our utmost to produce a stable economic environment of maximum sustainable growth without inflation so that these trends can continue. To produce such an environment we must be equally vigilant against the risk of either an extended period of growth unacceptably below potential, or a resurgence of inflation.
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan Productivity and efficiency in the Federal Reserve System At the dedication of the new Birmingham Branch Building of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta December 8, 2000 This afternoon, it is my distinct pleasure to be with you at this dedication ceremony to speak about the gains in productivity and efficiency that technology is bringing to the Federal Reserve. We are standing in an exemplar of this phenomenon. This new structure--which succeeds a building dating to 1927--will for the first time use automated guided vehicles and an automated stacking and retrieval system to process and store both currency and coin. Until now, we've used such systems only for currency. Buildings such as this new Birmingham Branch, employing the most modern technologies, are central to the System's continued fulfillment of the basic purposes and functions for which it was founded more than eighty years ago. However, we should note that, as important as such buildings are in our endeavors to maintain a prosperous economy, a safe and strong financial system, and a reliable and efficient payment system, people--not machines--remain at the heart of whatever success we have achieved. I am speaking of the dedicated professional men and women employed at this and other Federal Reserve offices and of the many public-spirited citizens who give of their time and expertise as directors and advisers to our Banks and Branches. I am also referring to the many people outside the System who recognize the importance of safeguarding and supporting the nation's independent central bank. Thus, at the outset, I would like to acknowledge the important assistance we have received from the members of Congress from Alabama. In 1992, they helped win passage of an amendment to the Federal Reserve Act that enabled us to move forward on this project. We are grateful to Senator Richard Shelby, who succeeded in moving the legislation through the Senate, and to former Congressman Ben Erdreich, who sponsored the bill through the House of Representatives. Without their efforts we would not have been able to construct this new Branch. I would like to recognize Congressman Spencer Bachus, chairman of the subcommittee in the House Banking Committee with jurisdiction over the Federal Reserve. In fact, the subcommittee he now chairs conducted hearings on the Branch building legislation. We value the Federal Reserve's close working relationship with him. I am pleased to recognize Senator Jeff Sessions and Congressman Earl Hilliard as well. We appreciate their support for this new structure. I also would like to acknowledge state and local officials, Federal Reserve directors and officers, and other invited guests. A board of nine members serves each of the twelve regional Reserve Banks and a board of five or seven members serves each of twenty-five Branch offices. All together, 270 men and women--industrialists, union leaders, bankers, educators, farmers, and shopkeepers, all leaders in their communities--offer their knowledge and advice as directors. So, in a sense, this building also stands as a symbol of our unique form of central banking, which draws its strength from the closeness of its ties to local and regional economies across the nation. Convenience and efficiency in coin and currency distribution and in check-processing may be the least of the benefits flowing from this far-flung network of offices, stretching from Seattle to San Antonio and from Buffalo to Birmingham. Our System's broad geographic reach also ensures that we who have the privilege of serving as policymakers--the presidents of the regional Banks and the Board members in Washington-- receive a clear sense of the economic and business life beyond the Beltway, which encircles the nation's capital. As keen observers of local economies, the directors here and elsewhere contribute vitally to the formulation of monetary policy by offering important insights absent, by definition, from even the most careful analysis of aggregate data. Often they know what is happening in the various regions of the country well before the hard data are collected by national statistical agencies. Most importantly, this singular system of broad and diverse representation, nurtured by close contacts at the regional and local levels, fosters a long-term perspective and a continuity. So it is, on this special and festive occasion in the life of the Federal Reserve, that this exceptional new structure, which benefits from the latest in technological innovation, also reminds us of our fundamental purposes and our roots. It reminds us that the regional Banks and local Branches, and the people who serve in them, are an integral part of central banking in this country. It stands as a testament to the continued success of our unique type of "decentralized" central banking.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application and notice of The Chase Manhattan Corporation to merge with J.P. Morgan & Co. Incorporated, both of New York, New York. Attached is the Board’s Order relating to this action.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of several enforcement actions related to foreign banking organizations that had been involved with Operation Casablanca. Operation Casablanca was a law enforcement undercover operation that resulted in numerous criminal money laundering convictions of drug traffickers, bankers, and two foreign banking organizations with operations in the United States - - Bancomer, S.A., Mexico City, Mexico and Banca Serfin, S.A., Lomas de Sante Fe, Mexico. The Federal Reserve provided substantial assistance to the United States Customs Service and the United States Department of Justice during the undercover operation and subsequent prosecutions. On May 18, 1998, in response to the alleged misconduct by employees of several foreign banking organizations whose activities were identified during Operation Casablanca, the Federal Reserve Board issued Temporary Orders to Cease and Desist. The Temporary Orders required the banks to enhance their anti-money laundering policies and procedures in the United States. The Federal Reserve Board's actions today included: The issuance of an order with regard to Bancomer, S.A. determining that it is not necessary to terminate the United States operations of the bank as a result of the bank's conviction for a money laundering offense in the United States. The issuance of a consent Cease and Desist Order against Bancomer, S.A., requiring continued enhancements of the bank's anti-money laundering policies and procedures. Because Banca Serfin, S.A. ceased all operations in the United States at the end of 1999, no further enforcement action against the bank was necessary. The issuance of a Written Agreement between Banco Industrial de Venezuela and the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta requiring continued enhancements of the bank's anti-money laundering policies and procedures. The termination of the Temporary Orders to Cease and Desist that had been issued against Bancomer, S.A., Banca Serfin, S.A. and Banco Industrial de Venezuela. In March 2000, the Federal Reserve Board terminated Temporary Cease and Desist Orders that had been issued in 1998 against Banco Nacional de Mexico, Mexico City, Mexico; Banco Internacional, S.A., Mexico City, Mexico; and Banco Santander, Madrid, Spain. The issuance of these enforcement actions concludes the Federal Reserve's enforcement efforts arising out of Operation Casablanca. Copies of the relevant orders and the Written Agreement are attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of an Order of Prohibition against Bruce Jeffrey Kingdon, a former partner, operating committee member, managing director, employee, and institution-affiliated party of the Bankers Trust Company, New York, New York. Mr. Kingdon, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order as a result of his alleged violations of law, unsafe or unsound banking practices, and breaches of his fiduciary duties to Bankers Trust and its customers. A copy of the Order is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between People’s Bancshares, Inc., New Bedford, Massachusetts, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced the issuance of a Final Decision and Order of Prohibition against Kaye G. Hill, former employee, Barnett Bank, N.A., Jacksonville, Florida. The Order, the result of an action brought by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, prohibits Ms. Hill from participating in the conduct of the affairs of any financial institution or holding company. A copy of the Final Decision and Order is attached.
For immediate release
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today requested public comment on a proposal that would amend Regulation Y (Bank Holding Companies and Change in Bank Control). The proposal would permit: all bank holding companies, as an activity that is closely related to banking, to conduct a greater amount of nonfinancial data processing in connection with processing financial data; and financial holding companies, as an activity that is complementary to financial activity, to invest in companies engaged in certain types of data storage, web hosting and data processing advisory activities, so long as the investment was related to the provision of financial products and services. The proposal also requests comment on whether the Board should permit financial holding companies to invest in companies that: develop new technologies that might support the sale and availability of financial products and services; provide communications links for the delivery of financial products and services; and/or engage in the electronic sale and delivery of products and services that include, but are not limited to, financial products and services. Comment is requested by February 16, 2001 . The Boardï¿½s notice is attached.
For immediate release
For immediate release
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board, after consulting with the Secretary of the Treasury, has determined by rule that acting as a “finder” is an activity that is incidental to a financial activity and, therefore, a permissible activity for a financial holding company. The Board’s final rule provides that a finder may act through any means to bring together buyers and sellers of products and services for transactions that the parties themselves negotiate and consummate. Among other things, a finder may host an Internet marketplace consisting of links to the web sites of buyers and sellers. A finder also may operate a web site that allows buyers and sellers to post information concerning products and services and to enter into transactions among themselves. The rule, approved by the Board on December 13, is effective 30 days after publication in the Federal Register, expected shortly. The Board's notice is attached.
For immediate release Federal Reserve Board Chairman Alan Greenspan issued the following statement today: Arthur Levitt has much to be proud of in his lengthy and careful stewardship of the Securities and Exchange Commission. Our nation has benefited from his service and he will be missed by all of us who had the pleasure of working with him on a daily basis. I am, of course, hopeful that he will continue to agree to the occasional round of golf, and I wish him all good things as he ponders his next tough assignment.
For immediate release Federal Reserve Board Chairman Alan Greenspan issued the following statement today: In Paul O’Neill, the President-elect has attracted an exceptional and talented person. I look forward to again working closely with an old friend and colleague.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today approved an interim rule defining three categories of activities listed in section 4(k)(5) of the Bank Holding Company Act as financial in nature or incidental to a financial activity. The interim rule also establishes a mechanism through which financial holding companies or other interested parties may request that the Board find, by order, that particular specific activities fall within one of the three categories. The categories in section 4(k)(5), added to the Bank Holding Company by the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, are: Lending, exchanging, transferring, investing for others, or safeguarding financial assets other than money or securities; Providing any device or other instrumentality for transferring money or other financial assets, and Arranging, effecting or facilitating financial transactions for the account of third parties. The Board is soliciting comment on the mechanism set out in the interim rule for requesting a Board finding and on what activities, if any, should be found by rule to fall within one of the three categories. The Board plans to issue a joint notice with the Secretary of the Treasury, who is promulgating a similar interim rule implementing section 5136A(b)(3) of the Revised Statutes, which parallels section 4(k)(5). The interim rule will become effective on January 2, 2001, and will be published shortly in the Federal Register.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today proposed revisions to the methods used for calculating the private sector adjustment factor (PSAF) and net income on clearing balances (NICB). The Board requested comment by April 6, 2001 . The PSAF imputes the costs that would have been incurred and profits that would have been earned had the Reserve Banks' priced services been provided by a private firm. The NICB imputes income on the investment of depository institutions' clearing balances held with the Reserve Banks, less related costs. The Monetary Control Act of 1980 requires that the Federal Reserve set fees for its services to recover, over the long term, its actual costs of providing the services, as well as these imputed costs and profits. The Board reviews its method for calculating the PSAF periodically to assess whether it is still appropriate in light of the changing environment. The Board's proposal would base the PSAF on a priced-services balance sheet that resembles that of a private business, using real assets and liabilities, imputing liabilities and equity only to the extent necessary, and more appropriately reflecting the risk inherent in priced-service activity. The Board's notice is attached. Separately, the Board made available a related research paper proposing a new approach for calculating the cost of equity capital used in the PSAF. The paper has been posted on the Internet at
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today approved a final rule setting forth procedures for domestic bank holding companies and foreign banking organizations to qualify as financial holding companies. The rule, effective 30 days after publication in the Federal Register, also lists financial activities permissible for financial holding companies under the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act. The final rule reflects public comment submitted on the interim rule in effect since March 11, 2000 . With respect to foreign banks, the final rule: Removes the Tier 1 leverage ratio from the numerical screening test in the definition of "well capitalized" and adds the leverage ratio to the list of factors the Board may take into account in determining whether a foreign bank's capital is comparable to that required of a U.S. bank owned by a financial holding company. Adopts specific standards with respect to consolidated home country supervision in order for a foreign bank to be treated as a financial holding company. Clarifies the definition of "well managed" used in the assessment required of the overall operations of the foreign bank by its home-country supervisor. Revises the definition of "well-managed" to require a foreign bank to have a satisfactory composite rating for its U.S. branch and agency operations, rather than requiring each office individually to have a satisfactory rating. The Board believes that the standards and procedures for foreign banks represent a flexible approach that takes into account the statutory requirement for comparability of capital and management standards while ensuring that foreign banks operating in the United States are offered national treatment and equality of competitive opportunity. The Board's notice is attached.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Office of the Comptroller of the Currency Office of Thrift Supervision Agencies Adopt Rule On Disclosure And Reporting Of CRA-Related Agreements The federal bank regulatory agencies today approved the issuance of final regulations implementing the CRA Sunshine Requirements of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (FDIA), which were recently enacted by the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act. The FDIA establishes annual reporting and public disclosure requirements for certain written agreements that are entered into between insured depository institutions or their affiliates and nongovernmental entities or persons (NGEPs) and that are made pursuant to, or in connection with, the fulfillment of the Community Reinvestment Act of 1977 (CRA). The final rule, to be published in the Federal Register by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the Office of Thrift Supervision, identifies the types of agreements that are in fulfillment of the CRA and implements the requirements of the statute. The FDIA exempts from coverage all agreements with NGEPs that have not had a communication concerning the CRA with the relevant banking organization or a banking agency. The final rule clarifies when NGEPs have had these types of communications and implements this exemption. The final rule also implements the exemptions included in the FDIA for certain types of loans and loan commitments. Consistent with the statute, the agencies have implemented the disclosure and reporting requirements of the act in a manner that limits potential burden. For example, the final rule establishes simple disclosure and reporting procedures and allows NGEPs to use reports that they have prepared for other purposes - such as tax returns and financial statements - if these reports provide the information required by the FDIA. The regulations, which are identical in all substantive respects, are effective April 1, 2001. Media Contacts: Federal Reserve: Rose Pianalto (202) 452-2955 FDIC: David Barr (202) 898-6992 OCC: Dean DeBuck (202) 874-4876 OTS: Ella Allen (202) 906-6677 Federal Reserve: Rose Pianalto (202) 452-2955 FDIC: David Barr (202) 898-6992 OCC: Dean DeBuck (202) 874-4876 OTS: Ella Allen (202) 906-6677
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the names of seven new members of its Thrift Institutions Advisory Council (TIAC) and designated a new President and Vice President of the Council for 2001. The Council is an advisory group made up of twelve representatives from thrift institutions. The panel was established by the Board in 1980 and includes savings and loan, savings bank, and credit union representatives. The Council meets at least three times each year with the Board of Governors to discuss developments relating to thrift institutions, the housing industry, mortgage finance, and certain regulatory issues. The new Council President for 2001 is Thomas S. Johnson, Chairman and CEO, GreenPoint Bank, New York, New York. The new Vice President is Mark H. Wright, President and CEO, USAA Federal Savings Bank, San Antonio, Texas. The seven new members, named for two-year terms beginning January 1, are: Ronald S. Eliason President and CEO Utah Community Federal Credit Union Provo, UT D.R. Grimes Vice President and CEO NetBank Alpharetta, GA Charlotte, North Carolina Karen L. McCormick President and CEO First Federal Savings and Loan Association Port Angeles, WA James F. McKenna President and CEO North Shore Bank, FSB Brookfield, WI Charles C. Pearson, Jr. Co-Chairman and CEO Waypoint Bank Harrisburg, PA Herbert M. Sandler Chairman and CEO World Savings Bank, FSB Oakland, CA Evertt Stiles President and CEO Macon Bank Franklin, NC Other TIAC members whose terms continue through 2001 are: Tom R. Dorety President and CEO Suncoast Schools Federal Credit Union Tampa, FL Cornelius D. Mahoney Chairman, President, and CEO Woronoco Savings Bank Westfield, MA Clarence Zugelter President, CEO, and Chairman of the Board First Federal Bank, F.S.B. Kansas City, MO
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board is seeking public comment on a proposal to permit financial holding companies to act as real estate brokers and managers. Comment is due by March 2, 2001 . The rule, proposed by the Board on December 13, would determine that real estate brokerage and management services are financial in nature or incidental to financial activity and are therefore permissible for financial holding companies. Concurrently with the Board, the Secretary of the Treasury developed a proposal that would allow financial subsidiaries of national banks to act as real estate brokers and managers. The Board and the Secretary will jointly publish their proposed rule in the Federal Register. The Boardï¿½s notice is attached.