For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application of Valley View Bancshares, Inc., Overland Park, Kansas, to acquire Bank of Lee's Summit, Lee's Summit, Missouri. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today its approval of the application of Banca Intesa S.p.A., Milan, Italy, to establish a state-licensed branch in New York, New York, and representative offices in Chicago, Illinois, and San Francisco, California. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application by Caisse Nationale de Crédit Agricole, Paris, France, to own indirectly all of the voting shares of Espírito Santo Bank, Miami, Florida. The Board also applications by Banco Espírito Santo,S.A., Lisbon, Portugal, and its related holding companies to obtain all of the voting shares of Espírito Santo Bank. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the applications by E.S.Control Holding S.A., E.S.International HoldingS.A., Espírito Santo Financial GroupS.A., each of Luxembourg, Espírito Santo Financial (Portugal) Sociedade Gestora de Participações Sociais,S.A., Bespar-Sociedade Gestora de Participações Sociais,S.A., and Banco Espírito Santo,S.A., each of Lisbon, Portugal, to obtain all of the voting shares of Espírito Santo Bank, Miami, Florida. The Board also the application of Caisse Nationale de Crédit Agricole, Paris, France, to own indirectly all of the voting shares of Espírito Santo Bank. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
Remarks by Vice Chairman Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. At Widener University, Chester, Pennsylvania April 6, 2000 Realism during Times of Opportunity It is a pleasure to be here at Widener University and to join the list of Federal Reserve officials who have addressed this distinguished audience. As you know, the current economic expansion is now the longest in our nation's history. This is due, in part, to a combination of good fiscal and monetary policies. However, more than anything that we do in Washington, D.C., the economy's strength is the direct result of the myriad private decisions made on a daily basis by you and all Americans. In a very real sense, you are the heroes of this story, and you deserve to be commended. Having said that, it is important to be mindful that now is the most important time for realism, prudence, and vigilance by both policymakers and the public at large. We should be mindful that generally good economic times can soften the impact of--and often mask totally--poor judgments. Eventually, however, those judgments will have detrimental consequences. Let me focus on three areas of realism that are required in this time of historic opportunity: the financial sector, individual decisions, and the international sphere. Realism in the Financial Sector As you know, at the end of last year, the Congress passed and the President signed into law a bill to modernize the financial industry of the United States. This law, the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, presents opportunities and challenges for the financial sector, which must be approached realistically and prudently. The most obvious opportunity for the financial sector now is one of ongoing consolidation and broadening--consolidation largely in continuing response to the end of legal constraints on geographical operations and broadening as financial institutions take advantage of the opportunities to expand lines of business offered by the act. The consolidation movement among banking organizations, of course, predates the passage of the most recent financial modernization law. In fact, it is reasonable to believe that the forces for consolidation and broadening were so strong that they provided an impetus for the repeal of Glass-Steagall, following a generation of effort not only by the Congress but also by financial institutions and regulators. Nevertheless, by enhancing certainty about what can be done and how it can be done, I believe that the financial modernization law will likely bring an increase in mergers among firms that had been specializing in different financial services. These mergers will be undertaken to take advantage of the perceived synergies and cost advantages imagined from such combinations. If synergies in back office operations or in delivery of service can be captured, such linkages might well provide a more efficient, and hence less costly, delivery of complementary services. The extent of consolidation and broadening remains in question, however, which gives rise to the second opportunity: the opportunity to deepen specialization. In a world of large, full-service providers, I think there will be demand for specialty providers. These niche players presumably will be smaller and potentially more competitively agile than the larger competitors. The ability to foresee the creation of important specialty competitors requires no more than an ability to generalize from other industries, such as retailing, in which consolidation has existed side by side with the emergence of successful specialty businesses. Another opportunity open to the financial sector is the continuation of the impressive trend toward globalization and international consolidation. Major overseas markets are becoming more open, although the degree of openness varies from market to market. "Big bangs" have occurred in major markets, and privatization is the norm in a number of others. Of course, wisely or not, some still demand "national champions," and others worry about privatizing the "crown jewels." Importantly, the sophistication, scale, and scope that firms are building domestically, both here and in Europe, translates easily into a global platform. Examples abound: not only the success of U.S. securities firms in European and Asian markets but also European banks in the United States. Also, the emergence of the euro as a successful global currency, with the payments infrastructure, unified monetary policy, and converging fiscal policies that are associated with it, creates an attractive, large market. This is a market that U.S. firms have found, and will continue to find, hospitable and in which European cross-border mergers will, no doubt, continue. And, of course, the deepening of technology capabilities in most financial institutions means that management on a global scale, particularly risk management, is now feasible as well as necessary. This dynamic presents many challenges. The most obvious is in achieving the benefits and promise of consolidation and broadening. As we have seen, mergers between banks do not all achieve the full promise originally envisioned. In some cases, post-merger integration skills are found wanting, as the challenge of providing seamless service while integrating disparate back offices and branch networks proves to be beyond the skills of management. In other cases, the dynamics of newly acquired businesses prove unpredictable and leave even experienced managers explaining revenue shortfalls and earnings disappointments. As we know, markets can be unforgiving of such surprises, and boards of directors often follow the market signal and punish the top management thought to be responsible for failure. An obvious difficulty is the inability to predict which merger will be successful, with the winners not just cost-cutters but those who know how to develop new sources of revenue. While in general the early experience in large, cross-industry consolidation appears to be successful, we have not yet had the test of a slowing economy. Until we have gone through a full business cycle, it is hard to know how strong the business case for integration truly is. Second, we must be cautious in assuming that more-diversified and larger firms are inherently less risky. One of the ongoing challenges in the emerging world of high-tech finance is risk management. The experiences of the last two-and-one-half years indicate that the speed of market movements, combined with the scale of financial endeavor, can lead to a rapid reversal of fortune for even the most sophisticated market participants. Models are inherently backward-looking, and even the best of them have not proven to be foolproof in sounding the alarm for newer risks. There is evidence that banking organizations, and probably financial institutions more generally, will use the benefits gained from diversification to increase the risk in the individual components of their portfolios. Indeed, some activities now permissible in financial organizations, such as merchant banking, have high average returns, but those returns mask a wide variance in result, with some outcomes quite detrimental to profits and potentially to organizational vitality. In practice, the results will differ from firm to firm, but appropriate disclosure and risk-management practices will become even more important. I am heartened, I might add, by what seems to be the fact that U.S. bank risk-management skills paid large dividends--although clearly not avoiding all losses--in the Asian financial crisis a couple of years back. A major reality of financial institutions is that their businesses are ultimately built on understanding and trust by both retail consumers and wholesale counterparties. The third, and most ephemeral, challenge is to build scale and complexity and still maintain understanding and trust while protecting proprietary information. The debate about privacy that accompanied the modernization discussion in the Congress reflects the challenges and constraints that lie ahead. On the wholesale side the challenge is to reveal to the market enough about risk and performance to allow for full and accurate evaluation by counterparties without disclosing proprietary information. Future LTCMs will be expected by counterparties to be much less opaque. Similarly, the ongoing review of the role of publicly issued subordinated debt for large and complex organizations is another example of the expectation that such organizations will be held to a higher test of transparency in order to build counterparty understanding and trust. In addition to realism in considering the opportunities that the new law allows, bank managers must be prudent in managing and monitoring the performance of banks. There has been a recent decline in profit-growth expectations among equity analysts. The consensus view among analysts appears to be that the industry will experience earnings-per-share growth in a range of 10 to 12 percent over the next five years. This is a respectable growth but is somewhat lower than the growth experienced in the last five years. I hope that bank managers are keenly aware of the risk profiles of their companies and are not inclined to take additional risks to hit earnings targets. Banks are clearly trying to diversify their earnings streams. They will need to monitor carefully the performance of newer products developed and marketed during the 1990s in response to broad consumer needs. While we have enjoyed record expansion, the prospects for a business and an economic downturn must be factored into pricing decisions. Credit and underwriting decisions should take into account realistic downside sensitivity analysis. Prudence in Individual Investment and Borrowing Decisions However, financial institutions are not the only economic actors who need to maintain realistic expectations and to exercise prudence and caution during this period. Individuals must exercise ongoing vigilance in their personal financial behavior. In particular, individuals should recognize that in this era of technology-induced growth, high growth goes hand in hand with high uncertainty and, for newer companies, volatility in their financial performance. This means that accurately valuing a company in the high-growth industries is dauntingly complex. Therefore, individual investors are best advised to consider a range of scenarios, including not just the rosy outcome of possible success but also the very real one of potential failure. History clearly demonstrates that for every successful start-up the vast majority find success elusive. Individuals would also be well advised to consider a range of personal financial scenarios. Perhaps based on expectations of solid income growth, which we all hope will be borne out, households have increased their debt faster than their disposable personal income in every quarter over the past five years. Despite increased borrowing, however, the household debt service burden, as conventionally measured to include consumer and mortgage debt, remains below the levels reached in the 1980s. This burden has been held down in recent years by falling interest rates and a shift toward longer maturity mortgage debt. Nonetheless, even in good economic times it is prudent for households to be prepared for a range of outcomes, not just the most optimistic ones. Caution in the Global Economy While being cautious, let me not convey a pessimistic tone, because I believe that the four major forces currently driving the domestic economy could well provide the underpinning for a new era of prosperity in the global economy. The first of these forces is the creation of, and massive investment in, technology--particularly information and communication technologies. Technology is thought to have played an important role in the increase in productivity--the output of goods and services per hour of labor--that is currently providing momentum for the economy of the United States. The second major force is business deregulation. The removal of unnecessary government regulation started more than twenty years ago during the administration of President Gerald Ford but gathered momentum during the Carter years. Deregulation allowed businesses, indeed forced businesses, to focus more clearly on the competitive market place, with lessened constraints and increased flexibility. The third major force is more prudent fiscal policy. The latter part of the 1990s has been characterized by government surplus, which, many believe, has freed investment resources for private-sector investment. The final major change was the reduction of both actual inflation and the expectation of inflation as a necessary component of personal and business decisionmaking. This trend began during the early 1980s, and it has reached the point of fruition only in the past few years. Relatively stable prices have allowed businesses and households to plan their economic affairs with a general expectation that the value of investments will not be eroded through a pernicious increase in the general price level. Indeed, price level stability has reinforced the impetus provided by deregulation for businesses to manage their affairs with a priority on efficiency. These developments are not unique to the United States. While our nation was the first to achieve the full benefits of these forces, they have been at work globally as well. Software and capital goods embodying newer information and communications technology are a major export of the United States. Other nations have their own domestic equivalents of our Silicon Valley and Route 128, whether they are called Bangalore in India or Helsinki in Finland. We are probably ahead in experiencing the benefits of newer technologies, but other countries will certainly catch up. The other three factors, which are preconditions to achieving the benefits of technology, are showing signs of advancing outside the United States, although the pace differs from country to country. Most industrialized economies have debated, and are continuing to debate, the question of how to free businesses from unnecessary regulation and what governments can and should do to make labor markets more flexible. This issue is clearly the focus of much attention currently in Europe. A number of emerging-market economies have privatized state-owned enterprises and generally are reducing regulation. The United Kingdom and Japan put into place financial deregulation in the 1980s and earlier in the 1990s. Additionally, much of the industrialized world has governments following a path of smaller deficits and eventually smaller debt. The 1992 Maastricht Treaty, laying the groundwork for the unification of much of Europe into a single market with its own currency--the euro--is the most obvious but not the only example of this trend. Finally, the emerging consensus among politicians, policymakers, and the general public in many nations is that any benefits of inflation are at best ephemeral and that inflation ultimately is highly destructive. The efforts being made by countries that have experienced periods of inflation, such as Brazil and Argentina, to avoid a recurrence of those experiences is instructive in this regard. Inflation has been coming down in both industrialized and emerging-market economies during the 1990s. However, achieving sustained global growth requires certain improvements. This potential global prosperity demands sounder banking institutions in all countries, particularly those that are still heavily dependent on bank-based financial intermediation, and more-stable financial systems, putting a special burden on supervisory and regulatory authorities to remain vigilant. Similarly, technology allows for a more intertwined financial system, which again requires discipline by both the private sector and the public sector to remain successful. Finally, a global economy built around higher levels of technology and greater competition in markets for goods, services, and labor input will nevertheless also include persons or regions who by fortune or skill are not fully prepared to participate in a world economy. Those on the outside of this highly productive economy, be they our fellow citizens or entire nations and regions, will require special consideration from the national and international authorities with responsibility for providing economic assistance. Conclusion In concluding, let me reiterate that the prosperity now experienced by the United States, and potentially to be shared by the rest of the world, is certainly a welcome development. It is clearly the goal of the Federal Reserve to follow policies that will help extend this prosperity for as long as possible. However, it is also important for the financial sector and other members of the private sector here in the United States, and for market participants, banks, and regulators in other countries, to remain vigilant if this expansion is to continue here and to spread globally. We are in the midst of a period of enormous opportunity, one that can be extended and strengthened if we are realistic, remaining mindful of our obligations to act responsibly, both individually and collectively. In this context, for managers in the financial sector acting responsibly includes recognizing that not all financial institutions can successfully consolidate or profitably take advantage of every new power. For individuals, personal financial decisions--both investment and borrowing--should take into consideration the possibility that the most optimistic expectations of corporate or personal financial success might not come true. Finally, nations seeking to replicate the growth experience of the recent past in the United States should recognize that the current expansion is built, in part, on an underpinning of a sound financial system, including both healthy institutions and well-functioning capital markets, as well as solid supervision and regulation. I hope that we all recognize these lessons so that our age of opportunity reaches its full potential. Thank you for your attention.
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan Technology innovation and its economic impact Before the National Technology Forum, St. Louis, Missouri (via videoconference) April 7, 2000
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan Retail payment systems Before the National Automated Clearinghouse Association Annual Meeting, Los Angeles, California (via videoconference) April 10, 2000 It is a pleasure to be with you this morning to discuss the changes that are taking place in our retail payments system. Many of the individuals and institutions involved in these changes will be addressing this conference over the next three days. It seems clear that, as in many sectors of the economy, innovations in technology, changes in business practices, and effective competition are reinforcing one another and causing the pace of experimentation with new products and services to accelerate. Nonetheless, the payment systems of the United States present a paradox. Our systems and banking arrangements for handling large-value dollar payments are all electronic and have been for many years. Banking records, including those for loans and deposits, have been computerized since the 1960s. Securities markets also now rely on highly automated records and systems, born out of necessity following the paperwork crisis of the 1970s. Yet in transactions initiated by consumers, paper--currency and checks--remains the payment system of choice. There were sweeping predictions in the late 1960s and early 1970s that electronic payments would quickly replace paper in the nationï¿½s commerce. In the wholesale financial markets, these predictions came true, as concerns about risk and efficiency led to the widespread adoption of electronic technologies in back offices of financial firms and in payment and settlement systems. Yet in the retail payments system, we have tended to underestimate the size of the hurdles confronting a shift away from paper. Indeed, the average consumer is exceptionally conservative and traditional when it comes to money, which has a profoundly important role in day-to-day living. To the vast majority of people, it represents the stored value of oneï¿½s previous efforts. To many, it is the embodiment of their lifeï¿½s work. Tampering with money has always had profoundly political implications. Much of American politics of the late nineteenth century, for example, was about the gold standard and the free silver movement. William Jennings Bryanï¿½s famous ï¿½Cross of Goldï¿½ speech during the presidential campaign of 1896 reflected the deep-seated views of moneyï¿½s role in society and, even today, one can hear echoes of that debate in the public discourse about money. Our history vividly affirms that the average person is far more sensitive to what form our money--our store of value and medium of exchange--takes than we payments system specialists have readily understood. It took many generations for people to feel comfortable accepting paper in lieu of gold or silver. It is taking almost as long to convince them that holding money and making payments in ephemeral electronic form is as secure as using paper. There is, of course, more to the tenacity of paper than a deep psychological connection between money and tangible wealth. Paper instruments also are perceived to have a greater degree of privacy than electronic payments, although there have been experiments with electronic money and other instruments that would provide relatively high levels of privacy. But confidence in such arrangements may take quite awhile to emerge. Currency, and to a large degree checks, are currently perceived to offer significant advantages in privacy over electronic payment systems that entail centrally maintained databases with elaborate records of individual transactions. Perhaps an even more important dimension influencing our behavior regarding money and payments is convenience. Currency and checks do not require the users to travel to special locations, dial the number of a special machine, or maintain special equipment to originate payments. This is not to deny that automation has played an important role in reducing risks and increasing efficiency in handling currency and checks. Rather, the issue is that traditional paper instruments allow the users themselves, within a structured format, to have significant control over when, where, and how to make payments. Turning to the suppliers of payment instruments and services, we see that many are straddling two different worlds. The world of paper is well known and a major part of the business of traditional financial institutions. The world of electronic commerce is a new and growing part of business that is changing daily and operating on a different time scale. The phrase ï¿½Internet timeï¿½ has now been added to our vocabulary. Behind this phrase is a serious observation that advances in information technology allow new ideas to be transformed into products and services much more rapidly than a few years ago, thus greatly speeding up product cycles. At the same time, new information technologies have broken down barriers between firms and stimulated very creative and competitive processes across the economy. Some traditional financial institutions have tended to view this process with concern. As many firms have driven to find new ways to supply financial and other kinds of information, along with transactions and accounting services, some have expressed concern that their traditional payment franchise is being eroded. This concern is another manifestation of the insecurity brought on by innovation and change. Many firms, including financial firms, have now opened channels of data communication with existing and potential customers and business partners through the Internet. In this world, particularly in retail commerce, payments by paper have been the exception, not the rule. Despite ongoing discussions about privacy and security in electronic commerce, credit cards have rapidly become the payment instrument of choice for consumers. Interestingly, there have been experiments with new payment systems analogous to private currency. To date, these products have not been widely successful, despite the fact that some have offered significant degrees of privacy and security. Instead, familiarity with and confidence in the credit card built up over more than half a century of use seem for now to have shaped behavior. Some suppliers have sought to deepen confidence by voluntarily expanding consumer protections. In a twist of history, even gold coins can now be purchased on line with a credit card. Experiments are also taking place to facilitate the use of debit cards in on-line transactions. The use of such instruments would clearly expand electronic payment capabilities over the Internet to those with bank accounts who do not hold credit cards. Experiments with technologies such as electronic money that do not even require bank accounts may yet find a role to play. New arrangements are also being tried that would mimic the flexibility of the check in making payments in diverse on-line transactions ranging from ad hoc person-to-person payments to routine business-to-business purchases. Regarding the older electronic payment systems such as the automated clearinghouse (ACH), both suppliers of payment services and the end users are continuing to look for new ways to build on the interbank processing efficiencies that these systems offer. One of the great ironies is that studies in the 1960s and ï¿½70s led to recommendations that it would be more economical for society to build whole new electronic payment systems such as the ACH than to adopt check-truncation technologies. Although the ACH has been extremely effective for automating some types of transactions, it has not been as widely used as originally anticipated. One of the problems has apparently been the relative lack of flexible and low-cost interfaces with consumers and with business systems similar to those that have been built up around the check. Now, however, a range of experiments and businesses are building on the ACH, and potentially on other electronic payment networks. In a revival of the idea of check truncation, projects have gone forward to truncate checks at the point of sale, as well as at lockbox locations, and to substitute ACH payments. These projects seek to combine the benefits to users of the check with the processing efficiencies of electronic payment systems. One more set of very interesting experiments involves electronic bill presentment and bill payment. There are competing models of the way technology can be used to eliminate paper and save time in both the presentment and payment of consumer bills. Leading models draw heavily on the ACH as the electronic payment mechanism, creating a much more flexible interface for users with the ACH than has existed in the past. As we look forward, the Federal Reserve recognizes that whatever innovations develop, the check will likely be with us for many years. Americans still write about sixty eight billion checks a year, and the numbers are expected to grow. At the Federal Reserve, we continue to modernize our check-processing systems. We are testing new systems for truncating and electronically presenting checks, which include capturing and storing the image of checks and enabling institutions to make payment decisions in real time by accessing these images through the Internet. At the same time, we are working to strengthen the payments system by enhancing the long-term efficiency of our check and automated clearinghouse services. The Federal Reserve also clearly recognizes the need to foster innovation in the private sector and to help remove barriers to the development and adoption of new payment services for electronic and traditional commerce. As I have often said, to continue to be effective, governmentï¿½s regulatory role must increasingly be focused on assuring that adequate risk management systems are in place in the private sector. As financial systems have become more complex, detailed rules and standards have become both more burdensome and less effective. If we wish to foster financial innovation, we must first be careful not to impose rules that inhibit it, and we must be especially watchful that we not unduly impede our increasingly broad electronic payments system. Thus, the private sector needs to play the pivotal role in determining what payment services consumers and businesses actually demand and in supplying those services. In a period of change and uncertainty there may be a temptation, and a desire by some market participants, to have the government step in and resolve the uncertainty, whether through standards, regulation, or other policies. In the case of electronic payment innovations, only consumers and merchants will ultimately determine what new products are successful in the marketplace. Government action can retard progress, but almost certainly cannot ensure it. One important role government can play, however, is to help identify and, where appropriate, help remove barriers to innovation. As part of our continuing efforts, the Federal Reserve established last summer the Payments System Development Committee. The Committee, led by the Boardï¿½s Vice Chairman Roger Ferguson and President Cathy Minehan of the Boston Federal Reserve Bank, will advise us on public policy issues relating to the strategic development of the retail payments system. An important objective of the Committee is to work with the private sector to identify specific barriers to improving the retail payments system, along with steps that the Federal Reserve could take to address these barriers. As you begin this three-day conference focusing on new developments in the payments system, I hope that you will approach your discussions with a sense of both history and of new opportunities. Centuries of experience have been distilled into our traditional forms of paper payments, and change has not always come quickly. Yet new technologies and new forms of business are engines for change. More fundamentally, the enthusiasm of our society for experiment and innovation reflects a strong sense of confidence about the future that began in the very early days of our country. I am confident that this past will be prologue.
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan The evolving demand for skills At the U.S. Department of Labor National Skills Summit, Washington, D.C. April 11, 2000 I am pleased to have the opportunity to be part of today's National Skills Summit and appreciate the hospitality of Secretary Herman, President Swygert, and Howard University. In my remarks, I would like to offer a macroeconomic perspective on the evolving demand for skills in our economy. That process has been set in motion by the accelerated expansion of computer and information technologies, which in turn has brought, and will continue to bring, significant changes in the workplace. A number of technologies with their roots in the cumulative innovations of the past half-century have now begun to yield dramatic changes in the way goods and services are produced and in the way they are distributed to final users. Your discussions today are an important element in the ongoing dialogue that our nation's leaders in business, labor, education, and public policy must have if we, together, are to be successful in meeting the rising demand for skilled workers and realizing the potential that technological change has to enhance living standards for a large majority of Americans. The process of innovation is, of course, never ending. Indeed, the substitution of physical capital that embodies new technologies for manual labor is simply an extension of a trend that began more than a century ago when work in craft shops shifted to factories, then to assembly lines. In the initial stages, these shifts required little change in the types of skills that workers used on the job. But when work subsequently moved to more automated continuous-processing and batch-processing manufacturing and electricity was introduced, new skills were demanded of workers who had to interact with an increasingly more complex stock of capital. More recently, the development of the transistor after World War II appears in retrospect to have initiated a special wave of creative synergies. It brought us the microprocessor, the computer, satellites, and the joining of laser and fiber-optic technologies. By the 1990s, these and a number of lesser but critical innovations had fostered an enormous new capacity to capture, analyze, and disseminate information. Indeed, it is the proliferation of information technology throughout the economy that makes the current period unique. The remarkable coming together of technologies that we label IT has allowed us to move beyond efficiency gains in routine manual tasks to achieve new levels of productivity in routine information-processing tasks that previously depended upon other facets of human input--computing, sorting and retrieving information, and acting on pieces of information. As a result, information technologies have begun to alter, fundamentally, how we do business and create economic value, often in ways that were not readily foreseeable even a decade ago. The essential contribution of information technology is the expansion of knowledge and its obverse, the reduction of uncertainty. Before this quantum jump in information availability, businesses had limited and less timely knowledge of customers' needs and of the location of inventories and materials flowing through complex production systems. In that environment, decisions were based on information that was hours, days, or even weeks old. Businesses found it essential, although costly, to carry sizable backup stocks of materials and to keep additional persons on their payrolls for making the necessary adjustments to the inevitable miscalculations and unanticipated shifts in demand for their products and services. At the macroeconomic level, the major contribution of advances in information technology and their incorporation into the capital stock is to reduce the number of worker hours required to produce the nation's output, our proxy for productivity growth. Echoing a debate that is as old as Adam Smith, some view the investment in new capital or the introduction of innovative production processes as a threat to our economy's capacity to create new jobs. However, because technological change spawns so many opportunities for businesses to expand the range and value of their goods and services, the introduction of new efficiencies has not led to higher unemployment. Rather, the recent period of technological innovation has created a vibrant economy in which opportunities for new jobs and businesses have blossomed. U.S. businesses and workers appear to have benefited more from these recent developments than their counterparts in Europe or Japan. Of course, those countries have also participated in this wave of invention and innovation, but they appear to have been slower to exploit it. The relatively inflexible and, hence, more costly labor markets of these economies are a significant part of the explanation. Businesses in Europe and Japan face higher costs of displacing workers and reallocating labor to more productive uses. Because the high rates of return offered by the newer technologies are largely the result of a reduction in labor costs per unit of output, the rates of return on investment in the same new technologies are correspondingly less there than in the United States. In the United States, labor displacement and reallocation are more readily countenanced both by law and by culture. Because our costs of dismissing workers are lower, the potential costs of hiring and the risks associated with expanding employment are less. The seeming result of significantly higher job dismissals has been, counterintuitively, a dramatic decline in the U.S. unemployment rate in recent years. One important lesson we have learned while living through decades of technological advance is that we cannot anticipate with any precision how innovations will be incorporated into our economic systems--what new forms of capital, new processes, and specific skills will be required to apply them. For example, in 1984, when the Bureau of Labor Statistics projected occupational employment for 1995, it correctly foresaw rapid gains in computer-related occupations, broadly defined. However, what it failed to predict was the extent to which advances in hardware and software would make technology so much more versatile, cheaper, and easier to apply that computer users would be able to assume tasks previously performed by programmers, computer operators, and data entry workers. The detailed professional occupational category with the largest underestimate of employment, not surprisingly, was computer engineers, computer scientists, and systems analysts. The demand for new computer applications will no doubt continue to spur demand for those with the creativity and the higher-level conceptual skills that will enable us to increasingly harness technology to produce greater economic value. To be sure, e-commerce is already becoming a potent force within and among businesses and between businesses and consumers. Perhaps more intriguing are those as yet unrealized opportunities for computers and information technology to further improve the accuracy of medical diagnoses and to complete the mapping of the human genome, or still unimagined opportunities for expanding our scientific knowledge more generally. The potential contributions of higher-level researchers in the computer and information technology fields for improving the quality of life are exceptional. And they likely will continue to include contributions that raise the productivity of less-skilled jobs and less-skilled individuals. Systems engineers, for instance, can design robots that replace human hands in many routine tasks, though such robots cannot as yet, for example, drive trucks. However, sophisticated satellite communications are now used to make truck drivers more efficient in moving goods to destinations of optimal use. In retailing, the development of bar-coding and scanning has improved the efficiency of salespersons and cashiers while processes that link the information between the checkout counter, shelves of inventories, and the factory floor have reduced businesses' uncertainty about customers' needs and shortened the lead times in satisfying those needs. Office clerical workers have seen an abundance of clever software improve their ability to effectively carry out their scheduling, recordkeeping, and communications tasks, and this in turn has lowered the costs of providing a wide range of business services. Clearly, technological advances make some wholly manual jobs obsolete--for example, switchboard operators and tenders of typesetting machines. But even for many other workers, a rapidly evolving work environment in which the skill demands of their jobs are changing can lead to very real anxiety and insecurity about losing their jobs. Despite the tightest labor markets in a generation, more workers currently report to a prominent sampling firm that they are fearful of losing their jobs than similar surveys found in 1991, at the bottom of the last recession. Our education and training systems have been feeling the pressures of a great number of these workers striving to keep up. Those pressures are likely to remain intense because I see nothing to suggest that the trends toward a greater conceptual content of our nation's output and, thus, toward increased demand for conceptual skills in our workforce will end. The rapidity of innovation and the unpredictability of the directions it may take imply a need for considerable investment in human capital. Workers in many occupations are being asked to strengthen their cognitive skills; basic credentials, by themselves, are not enough to ensure success in the workplace. Workers must be equipped not simply with technical know-how but also with the ability to create, analyze, and transform information and to interact effectively with others. Moreover, that learning will increasingly be a lifelong activity. The heyday when a high-school or college education would serve a graduate for a lifetime is gone. Today's recipients of diplomas expect to have many jobs and to use a wide range of skills over their working lives. Their parents and grandparents looked to a more stable future--even if in reality it often turned out otherwise. However one views the uncertainty that so many in our workforce are experiencing in their endeavor to advance, an economist can scarcely fail to notice a marketplace working efficiently to guide our educational system, defined in its widest sense, toward the broader needs of our economy. But this is not new. The history of education in the United States traces a path heavily influenced by the need for a workforce with the skills required to interact productively with the evolving economic structure. Early last century, advances in technology began to require workers with a higher level of cognitive skills, for instance the ability to read manuals, to interpret blueprints, or to understand formulae. Our educational system responded: In the 1920s and 1930s, high-school enrollment in this country expanded rapidly, pulling youth from rural areas, where opportunities were limited, into more productive occupations in business and broadening the skills of students to meet the needs of an advancing manufacturing sector. It became the job of these institutions to prepare students for work life, not just for a transition to college. In the context of the demands of the economy at that time, a high-school diploma represented the training needed to be successful in most aspects of American enterprise. The economic returns for having a high-school diploma rose, and as a result, high school enrollment rates climbed. At the same time, our system of higher education was also responding to the advances in economic processes. Although many states had established land grant schools earlier, their support accelerated in the late nineteenth century as those whose economies specialized in agriculture and mining sought to take advantage of new scientific methods of production. Early in the twentieth century, as the educators at Howard doubtless experienced, the content of education at an American college had evolved from a classically based curriculum to one combining the sciences, empirical studies, and modern liberal arts. Universities responded to the need for the application of science--particularly chemistry and physics--to the manufacture of steel, rubber, chemicals, drugs, petroleum, and other goods requiring the newer production technologies. Communities looked to their institutions of higher learning for leadership in scientific knowledge and for training of professionals such as teachers and engineers. The scale and scope of higher education in America was being shaped by the recognition that research--the creation of knowledge--complemented teaching and training--the diffusion of knowledge. In broad terms, the basic structure of higher education remains much the same today, and it has been one that has proven sufficiently flexible to respond to the needs of a changing economy. Certainly, if we are to remain preeminent in transforming knowledge into economic value, the U.S. system of higher education must remain the world's leader in generating scientific and technological breakthroughs and in preparing workers to meet the evolving demands for skilled labor. However, the pressure to enlarge the pool of skilled workers also requires that we strengthen the significant contributions of other types of training and educational programs, especially for those with lesser skills. The notion that formal degree programs at any scholastic level or that any other training program established today can be crafted to fully support the requirements of one's lifework has been challenged. We need to foster a flexible education system--one that integrates work and training and that serves the needs both of experienced workers at different stages in their careers and of students embarking on their initial course of study. Community colleges, for example, have become important providers of job skills training not just for students who may eventually move on to a four-year college or university but for individuals with jobs--particularly older workers seeking to retool or retrain. The increasing availability of courses that can be "taken at a distance" over the Internet means that learning can more easily occur outside the workplace or the classroom. Economists have long argued that a significant proportion of the work knowledge that one acquires in a lifetime is produced on the job. Several decades ago, much of that on-the-job training was acquired through work experience; today, businesses and labor unions are placing greater emphasis on the value of formal education and training programs--ranging from corporate universities to partnerships with community colleges and other providers--as well as relationships with public agencies, including welfare-to-work and school-to-work programs. These efforts recognize that technologically advanced learning must be grounded in real-world curricula that are relevant to changing business needs and that it be provided in flexible venues that open access to development of skills to as many workers as possible. Clearly, investing in human capital to complement physical capital is perceived by many businesses as adding to shareholder value. We are experiencing an extraordinary period of economic innovation and have witnessed its dynamic effects on productivity, real income, and job creation. During the past several years, workers across the wage distribution--not just at the upper end--have seen noticeable increases in the inflation-adjusted value of their wages. Real wage gains have picked up for workers with less than a college education. These recent gains have not reversed the rise in wage inequality that occurred during the 1980s and early 1990s between workers with a college education and those with a high-school diploma or less. Nonetheless, the leveling off in that disturbing trend is an encouraging sign of what we can achieve if we can maintain strong and flexible labor markets accompanied by low inflation. To reiterate a point that I made last week at the White House conference on the new economy, it is not enough to create a job market that has enabled those with few skills to finally be able to grasp the first rung of the ladder of achievement. More generally, we must ensure that our whole population receives an education that will allow full and continuing participation in this dynamic period of American economic history. At the policy level, we must work to configure monetary policies that will foster a continuation of solid growth and low inflation. And we, as a nation, must persevere in policies that enlarge the scope for competition and innovation and thereby foster greater opportunities for everyone. In such an environment, the efforts of businesses, labor leaders, educators, and workers to create practical solutions to the pressing need for skilled labor are most likely to succeed. I trust that your discussions today will further that goal.
Testimony of Patrick M. Parkinson Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics Hedge funds and over-the-counter derivatives Before the Committee on Banking and Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives April 11, 2000 I am pleased to be here today to discuss efforts to implement recommendations contained in the reports on hedge funds and OTC derivatives submitted to Congress last year by the President's Working Group on Financial Markets. Your letter of invitation requested that the Board's testimony focus on three issues: (1) financial netting legislation; (2) public disclosure requirements for hedge funds; and (3) the regulation of over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives transactions, including the Board's views on the bill that Chairman Leach has recently introduced. Financial Netting Legislation The Board strongly supports the Working Group's recommendations for amendments to the U.S. Bankruptcy Code to support financial contract netting. It commends this committee's efforts to enact those amendments. Enactment of H.R. 1161, the bill pending before this committee, would reduce uncertainty for market participants about the disposition of their financial market contracts in the event one of the counterparties becomes insolvent. This reduced uncertainty should limit market disruptions in the event of an insolvency, limit risk to federally supervised market participants, including insured depositories, and limit systemic risk. Public Disclosure by Hedge Funds The Board also supports the Working Group's recommendation that the very largest hedge funds be required to publicly disclose information about their financial activities, including meaningful and comprehensive measures of market risk, but excluding proprietary information on their strategies or positions. The recommendation is one of a larger set of recommendations by the Working Group intended to constrain excessive leverage in the financial system by making private market discipline more effective. The leverage of hedge funds is constrained primarily by the credit decisions of the large banks and securities firms that are their creditors and counterparties. It is of the greatest importance that those creditors and counterparties have timely and accurate information on the risk profiles of hedge funds, so that they can make appropriate decisions about the amounts and terms and conditions of the credit that they provide. Given the speed with which the risk profiles of hedge funds can change, quarterly public disclosures would not meet the needs of creditors and counterparties. Nonetheless, it would be useful to policymakers and to the general public. Evaluations of the role of hedge funds in our financial system and of appropriate public policies toward these institutions have been hampered by a lack of reliable data on their activities. The Board has been following the progress of Rep. Richard Baker's Hedge Fund Disclosure Act. The Board had been concerned about provisions of an earlier version of the bill that would have permitted collection and sequestration of proprietary information on hedge funds' strategies and positions. Such provisions could have created the perception that hedge funds were subject to prudential oversight, even though the bill provided no explicit authority for such oversight. Such a perception would be fraught with moral hazard that would weaken market discipline, contrary to the Working Group's goal in recommending public disclosure. The Board welcomed the manager's amendments to the earlier bill that deleted these troublesome provisions and thereby made clear that public disclosure, not prudential oversight, is the objective of the legislation. The Board supports the substantive provisions of the amended bill and commends this committee for its efforts to move this legislation forward. In the Board's judgment, however, the bill could be further improved by an amendment providing that the information be collected and disseminated by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) instead of the Board. Because of the SEC's broader responsibilities for public disclosure, such an amendment would underscore the purpose of the legislation. Regulation of OTC Derivatives The Board strongly supports modernizing the Commodity Exchange Act (CEA) by implementing the recommendations contained in the Working Group's November 1999 report. The primary focus of the Working Group's report was on OTC derivatives. OTC derivatives have come to play an extremely important role in our financial system and in our economy. In light of this, it is essential that we address the legal uncertainties created by the possibility that courts could construe OTC derivatives to be futures contracts subject to the CEA. These legal uncertainties create risks to counterparties and, indeed, to our financial system that simply are unacceptable. They have also impeded initiatives to centralize the trading and clearing of OTC contracts, developments that have the potential to increase efficiency and reduce risks in OTC transactions. To address these concerns, the Working Group recommended that financial OTC derivatives transactions between professional counterparties be excluded from coverage of the CEA. Furthermore, it recommended that such transactions between such counterparties should be excluded even if they were executed through electronic trading systems. Finally, the Working Group recommended that transactions that were otherwise excluded from the CEA should not fall within the ambit of the act simply because they are cleared. While the Working Group concluded that clearing should be subject to government oversight, that oversight need not be provided by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC). Instead, for many types of derivatives, oversight could be provided by the SEC, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Federal Reserve, or by a foreign financial regulator that the appropriate U.S. regulator determines to have satisfied appropriate standards. The Working Group recognized that implementation of these recommendations regarding OTC derivatives would blur some of the distinctions between OTC derivatives and exchange-traded futures and that this would aggravate existing concerns about regulatory disparities and resulting competitive imbalances between the OTC markets and the exchanges. Consequently, the Working Group called for a review of the existing regulatory structure for futures, particularly financial futures, to determine whether it is appropriately tailored to serve valid regulatory goals. Furthermore, the Working Group stated that enactment of its recommendations with respect to OTC derivatives should be accompanied by explicit authority for the CFTC to provide appropriate regulatory relief for exchange-traded futures. The report also concluded that the current prohibition on single-stock futures can be repealed if issues about the integrity of the underlying securities markets are addressed. The Working Group had envisioned that these recommendations would be implemented through amendments to the CEA. Chairman Leach recently introduced a bill that takes a different approach to implementing some, but not all, of the Working Group's recommendations. The bill also includes provisions that would enhance the Federal Reserve's authority to oversee clearing organizations that seek to organize as uninsured state member banks and would clarify the treatment of such clearing organizations in bankruptcy. The Board appreciates the efforts of this committee and believes that they enhance prospects for implementation of the Working Group's recommendations. Nonetheless, it believes that many of those recommendations can be fully implemented only through amendments to the CEA. The Board does support enactment of the provisions of Chairman Leach's bill that relate to clearing organizations that choose to organize under Federal Reserve supervision, which would complement the necessary modernization of the CEA.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice of Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, The CIBC World Markets Corporation, and CIBC World Markets Inc., all of Toronto, Canada, and CIBC Delaware Holdings Inc., New York, New York, to acquire all the voting shares of St. Anthony Bancorp, Inc., Cicero, Illinois. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application of Dime Bancorp, Inc., New York, New York, to acquire Hudson United Bancorp, Mahwah, New Jersey. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the following applications and notice: SierraCities.com, Inc., Houston, Texas ("SierraCities"), and its wholly owned subsidiary, FSF of Delaware, Inc., Wilmington, Delaware (collectively "Applicants"), under section 3(a)(1) of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act") (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1842(a)(1)) to become bank holding companies by acquiring Greenbelt Bancshares, Inc. and its subsidiary bank, Security National Bank of Quanah, both of Quanah, Texas; Applicants, under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1843(c)(8)) to retain certain nonbanking businesses, pursuant to sections 225.28(b)(1) and (3) of Regulation Y (12 C.F.R. 225.28(b)(1), (3)); and SierraCities, under section 4(c)(13) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. ï¿½ 1843(c)(13)) and the Board's Regulation K (12 C.F.R. 211) to retain certain foreign investments. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan Evolution of our equity markets Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate April 13, 2000 I am pleased to be here today to discuss the evolution of our equity markets and the appropriate role for policymakers in this period of rapid change. Publicly traded equities are a significant source of capital for firms, and equity markets are a key part of the process of allocating capital among competing uses in our economy. Through issuance of equities, firms enable broad sets of investors to share in the risks and rewards of economic activity. The pricing of existing capital assets plays an important role in directing investments in new capital assets. Today, equities constitute a substantial portion of the net worth of households, both direct holdings of shares and indirect holdings through mutual and pension funds. In addition, U.S. equity markets are a significant factor in the international competitiveness of our finance industry. For these reasons it is vital that our public policies foster equity markets that remain efficient, innovative, and competitive. In my remarks today, I shall be expressing my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board. I shall endeavor to set out a few broad principles that I believe should govern the evolution of our stock exchanges. Clearly, however, Chairman Levitt and his staff at the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) have enormous expertise that must be brought to bear on this issue, and they, along with the Congress, should lead the way in formulating and implementing appropriate public policies. Implications of Changes in Technology More powerful and functional computers and newer telecommunications technologies, in combination with deregulatory innovations by the SEC, have facilitated the development of new trading venues for equities. These new venues offer investors a wide range of alternatives for entering orders and executing trades. Some of the new trading mechanisms also offer speedier executions or greater anonymity, which are important to some types of investors. Many allow customer orders to be matched directly, without the traditional intervention of a specialist or market maker. As alternative trading venues proliferate and flourish, they have attracted increasingly larger volumes from the Nasdaq market and to a lesser extent from the other exchanges. This competition among trading systems in the short run has resulted in market fragmentation ï¿½ not all orders to buy and sell securities necessarily have the opportunity to interact with one another. Concerns that this fragmentation will have adverse implications for market efficiency and investor protection are, as I understand it, the prime motivations for this hearing. The prices established in equity markets, as I noted at the outset, are a device through which capital is allocated. Investors rely on them in making portfolio decisions. These prices should reflect the supplies and demands of participants across all markets at a given time. Fragmentation thus raises questions about the quality and completeness of the price discovery process and concerns that investors' orders to buy and sell securities may not be executed at the best price or the lowest cost. Fragmentation also creates the impression, and perhaps the reality, that separate pools of liquidity yield a lower volume of liquidity in the aggregate. Particularly in times of stress, liquidity simply may not be there or it may not be there in depth. But these concerns about fragmentation must be placed in perspective. Market structures are constantly evolving, and activity shifts in response to innovations in trading and the development of new financial instruments. In the long run, unfettered competitive pressures will foster consolidation as liquidity tends to centralize in the system providing the narrowest bid-offer spread at volume. Two or more venues trading the same security or commodity will naturally converge toward a single market. One market offering marginally narrower bid-ask spreads at volume will attract the business of others, improving its liquidity further, and reducing that of its competitors. This, in turn, will engender an even greater competitive imbalance, leading eventually to full consolidation. Of course, this process may not be fully realized if there are impediments to competition or if markets are able to establish and secure niches by competing on factors other than price. We need to be particularly careful, however, not to unintentionally and unnecessarily undermine sources of the extraordinary franchise values that have been built in to our equity markets, a process beginning with the Buttonwood Agreement of 1792 that founded what became the New York Stock Exchange. Participants in our equity markets have succeeded in concentrating a great depth of liquidity that is the envy of other nations and a symbol of the United States as the world's preeminent financial power. Yet our established markets are undergoing profound competitive pressures and challenges, which they cannot fail to meet if they are to survive. The very financial participants they serve are signaling that our exchanges may soon become noncompetitive, and their centralized liquidity could drift to other, presumably far more automated, venues. The Nasdaq, as I noted earlier, has seen significant volume migrate to other trading systems. The NYSE and regional exchanges, too, recognize that investors may increasingly choose to execute their trades elsewhere. Just as the market provides investors' valuations of the long-term prospects of individual equities trading on exchanges, the market also signals its assessment of the values of memberships in the exchanges themselves. It is evident from these evaluations that market participants appear to be increasingly discounting the earnings from seats on the NYSE itself relative to the earnings of the stocks that trade on it. Since 1996, for example, price-earnings ratios of NYSE stocks have risen by half. The ratio of seat prices to the underlying earnings from seat leasing has barely budged. This clearly implies uncertainty about the future of the exchange. It would be unfortunate if this prized institution symbolizing American financial hegemony allowed itself to become marginalized. But if it fails to respond to technological change, one centralized trading venue, even the NYSE, can be displaced by another as other trading systems take advantage of newer technology to offer greater efficiency or to provide new functions investors value more highly. The transition process clearly would result in fragmentation ï¿½ a necessary consequence of the process of competition in the provision of trading services. Obviously, if fragmentation can be avoided, it should be. But if we enter such a transition process, it probably cannot be avoided entirely. The Role for Policymakers What, in general, should be the role of policymakers in this cycle of competition, fragmentation, and consolidation? We would do well to borrow the advice offered to the medical profession and, first, do no harm. It has never proved wise for policymakers to try to direct the evolution of markets, and it strikes me as especially problematic at this juncture. The structure of our equity markets is extraordinarily dynamic; hardly a week goes by that a new trading venue is not announced or an enhancement to an existing system is not trumpeted. None of us can anticipate which of these venues will hit upon the combination of services that best meets the needs of investors. That can only be revealed as competition establishes winners and losers. In light of these judgments, I would caution against the implementation of a government mandate for any particular form of central limit order book. Given the pace of change in our markets, it is difficult to contemplate how a government mandate could be implemented; systems might well be obsolete before we were half-way through the planning process. As this technology-led market restructuring process plays out, there is a role for policymakers in facilitating the transition to a long-run equilibrium market structure. Change often proves controversial because entities currently earning above-market rates of return owing to dominance over a segment of a market will seek, not unexpectedly, to protect those returns. Many will argue that the rules, regulations, or market practices that give rise to such niches are critical for the continued functioning of markets or are in the best interest of investors. These same entities, however, will see the need for additional competition in areas where others are earning above market returns. It is the obligation of policymakers to cut through this underbrush and ensure that market participants and trading venues compete on as even terms as possible and that property rights of participants be scrupulously enforced. This suggests a re-examination of market practices and removal of current impediments to competition. The testimony by market participants over the last several weeks offers some suggestions, such as broadening access to the system by which orders are routed between trading systems. Clearly, all market participants recommend steps that are in their own self-interest; this, of course, is not surprising. However, the role of policymakers is to weigh the rationale for recommended practices and use regulatory policy to foster competition. There are other ways in which policymakers can facilitate the shift to a new equilibrium market structure through steps to make competition itself more effective. One area in which endeavors could well prove fruitful is enhancement of the transparency in markets. The SEC's request for comment on market fragmentation seeks suggestions to improve disclosures both by market centers and by brokers about the handling of orders and the execution of trades. Transparency is a fundamental organizing principle of markets. Buyers and sellers should be fully cognizant not only of the characteristics of goods being bought and sold but also of the costs and methods by which trading occurs. Only in this way will they be able to signal through their trading patterns the market venues that best fit their needs. Retail investors, in particular, should pay attention to costs other than commissions that may be buried in the contracts authorizing their transactions. Such costs could include delayed executions, failures to execute, or forgone profit if there is no opportunity for price improvement. Disclosure empowers investors to make explicit choices about those factors that affect the quality of trade executions and ultimately the returns on their investments. Investors also should be particularly aware of the liquidity characteristics of the systems with which they choose to deal. Despite the recent market volatility, the resiliency of our vastly expanded trading systems has not been fully tested, and there is a risk of complacency. If investors assume their everyday manner of dealing will always be possible in stressful conditions, such an assumption is unlikely to be realized. The Long Term Capital Management episode was a wake-up call to institutional investors about the risks of dealing in illiquid markets. The private-sector group that studied that event ï¿½ the Counterparty Risk Management Policy Group ï¿½ noted important deficiencies in the risk management systems of many market participants. Improvements to these systems should help market participants better assess the possible consequences of market illiquidity, whether in the equity markets or in other markets. But liquidity risk is not just an issue for institutional investors. Retail investors, too, need to evaluate the implications of their decisions to deal in particular trading systems. These investors need to exercise caution when dealing in illiquid markets, especially on a leveraged basis. Conclusion In conclusion, I would like to reiterate my confidence in competition as the fundamental guide to the organization of our markets. Although fragmentation has some undesirable consequences, it is an inevitable part of the competitive process. Fragmentation signals the value investors place on the services and functions offered by competing trading systems. In the long run, activity will migrate to the systems that best meet the needs of investors, absent impediments to competition. In the short run, policymakers should not attempt to anticipate the outcome of the competitive process. Rather, they should seek to remove impediments to competition and take judicious steps to mitigate the adverse effects of fragmentation through policies such as enhanced disclosure. Investors, too, can facilitate this evolutionary process by carefully evaluating the efficiency of the trading systems they use and the appropriateness of the trading strategies they undertake.
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan Technology and financial services Before the Journal of Financial Services Research and the American Enterprise Institute Conference, in Honor of Anna Schwartz, Washington, D.C. April 14, 2000 I am pleased to participate in today's conference and to join others in the justly deserved tributes to Anna Schwartz. She has been most interested, among a wide variety of other subjects, in the connections that economic and financial policies have to financial crises. As a consequence, I have decided to speak about technology and financial services, and particularly about risk management, issues that I have spent a good deal of time addressing in recent years. As a related matter, I will comment on supervision and regulation as we move into the twenty-first century, and of course, I shall find a way to touch on the role of central banks. Without doubt, the acceleration in technology that has produced such an extraordinary effect upon our economy in general has had a particularly profound impact in expanding the scope and utility of financial products over the last fifteen years. Information technology has made possible the creation, valuation, and exchange of complex financial products on a global basis heretofore envisioned only in our textbooks, and even that just in recent years. Derivatives are obviously the most evident of the many products that technology has inspired. But the substantial increase in our calculation capabilities has permitted the putting into place of a variety of other products and, most beneficially, new ways to unbundle risk. What is really quite extraordinary is that there is no sign that this process of acceleration in financial technology is approaching an end. We are moving at an exceptionally rapid pace, fueled not only by the enhanced mathematical applications produced by our ever-rising computing capabilities but also by our expanding telecommunications capabilities and the associated substantial broadening of our markets. All the new financial products that have been created in recent years contribute economic value by unbundling risks and reallocating them in a highly calibrated manner. The rising share of finance in the business output of the United States and other countries is a measure of the economic value added by the ability of these new instruments and techniques to enhance the process of wealth creation. The reason, of course, is that information is critical to the evaluation of risk. The less that is known about the current state of a market or a venture, the less the ability to project future outcomes and, hence, the more those potential outcomes will be discounted. Financial intermediation, although it cannot alter the underlying risk in holding direct claims on real assets, can redistribute risks in a manner that alters behavior. This redistribution of risk induces more investment in real assets, presumably engendering a higher standard of living. This occurs because financial intermediation facilitates diversification of risk and its redistribution among people with different attitudes toward risk. Any mechanism that shifts risk from those who choose to withdraw from it to those more willing to take it on increases investment without significantly raising the perceived degree of discomfort from risk borne by the public. By itself, more abundant real-time information should both reduce the uncertainties and lower the variances employed to guide portfolio decisions. At least part of the observed fall in equity premiums in our economy and others over the past five years may have resulted from a permanent technology-driven increase in information availability, which by definition reduces uncertainty and therefore risk premiums. And because knowledge once gained is irreversible, so too are the lowered risk premiums. But while financial intermediation, through its impetus to diversification, can lower the risks of holding claims on real assets, it cannot alter the more deep-seated uncertainties inherent in the human evaluation process. There is little in our historical annals that suggests that human nature has changed much over the generations. But, as I have noted previously, while time preference may appear to be relatively stable over history, perceptions of risk and uncertainty, which couple with time preference to create discount factors, obviously vary widely, as does liquidity preference, itself a function of uncertainty. These uncertainties are an underlying source of risk that are too often regarded as background noise and are generally not captured in our risk models. I have previously called attention to changing risk perceptions as a risk-management challenge in a different context when discussing the roots of the recent international financial crises. My focus has been on the perils of risk management when periodic crises--characterized by sharply rising risk premiums--undermine risk-management structures that fail to address them. During a financial crisis, risk aversion rises dramatically, and deliberate trading strategies are replaced by rising fear-induced disengagement from market activity. It is the general human experience that when confronted with uncertainty, whether in financial markets or in any other aspect of life, disengagement is the normal protective reaction. In markets that are net long, the most general case, disengagement brings falling prices. In the more extreme manifestation, the inability or unwillingness to differentiate among degrees of risk drives trading strategies to seek ever-more-liquid instruments that presumably would permit investors immediately to reverse decisions at minimum cost should that be required. As a consequence, even among riskless assets, such as U.S. Treasury securities, liquidity premiums rise sharply as investors seek the heavily traded "on-the-run" issues--a behavior that was so evident in the fall of 1998. While we can readily describe the process of sharp reversals in confidence, to date economists have been unable to anticipate it. Nevertheless, if episodic recurrences of ruptured confidence are integral to the way our economy and our financial markets work now and in the future, the implications for risk measurement and risk management are significant. Probability distributions estimated largely, or exclusively, over cycles that do not include periods of panic will underestimate the likelihood of extreme price movements because they fail to capture a secondary peak associated with extreme negative outcomes. Furthermore, joint distributions estimated over periods that do not include panics will underestimate correlations between asset returns during panics. Under these circumstances, fear and hence disengagement on the part of investors holding net long positions often lead to simultaneous declines in the values of private obligations, as investors no longer materially differentiate among degrees of risk and liquidity, and to increases in the values of riskless government securities. Consequently, the benefits of portfolio diversification will tend to be overestimated when the rare panic periods are not taken into account. The uncertainties inherent in valuations of assets and the potential for abrupt changes in perceptions of those uncertainties clearly must be adjudged by risk managers at banks and other financial intermediaries. At a minimum, risk managers need to stress test the assumptions underlying their models and consider portfolio dynamics under a variety of alternative scenarios. The outcome of this process may well be the recommendation to set aside somewhat higher contingency resources--reserves or capital--to cover the losses that will inevitably emerge from time to time when investors suffer a loss of confidence. These reserves will appear almost all the time to be a suboptimal use of capital, but so do fire insurance premiums--until there is a fire. More important, boards of directors, senior managers, and supervisory authorities of financial institutions need to balance emphasis on risk models that essentially have only dimly perceived sampling characteristics with emphasis on the skills, experience, and judgment of the people who have to apply those models. Being able to judge which structural model best describes the forces driving asset pricing in any particular period is itself priceless. To paraphrase my former colleague, Jerry Corrigan, the advent of sophisticated risk models has not made people with gray hair, or none, wholly obsolete. More fundamentally, technology may be affecting the underlying economics of financial intermediation. One of the profound effects of technology on financial services is that the increasing availability of accurate and relevant real-time information, by reducing uncertainty, reduces the cost of capital. That is to say, the cost of capital is lower for both lenders and borrowers and for banks in their role as both. It is important to a bank as a borrower because funding costs are critically tied to the perceived level of uncertainty surrounding the institution's condition. It is important in the role of lender because a decline in uncertainty resulting from a substantial increase in real-time information implies a reduction in what might be called "knowledge float"--the ability to maintain proprietary information and earn a rate of return from that information with no cost. As you know, financial intermediaries historically have been successful not only because they diversified to manage risk but also because they possessed information that others did not have. This asymmetry of information was capitalized at a fairly significant rate. But that advantage now is rapidly dissipating. We are going to real-time systems, not only with transactions but with knowledge as well. Financial institutions can respond to this disappearing advantage by endeavoring to preserve the old way of doing business--by keeping information, especially adverse information, away from the funders of their liabilities. But that, I submit, is a foolish policy that buys a dubious short-term gain with a substantial long-term cost. Moreover, inevitably and increasingly it will become more difficult to do. Whenever it becomes clear that the information coming out of an institution is somehow questionable, that institution will pay an uncertainty premium. Conversely, when companies write off errors, their stock prices almost invariably rise. The reason is the removal of uncertainty and the elimination of a shadow on the company's credibility. What does all this mean for financial supervision and regulation? If the supervisory system is to remain effective in fostering the safety and soundness of the country's financial system, it must adjust to the changing structure of that system. When wearing our supervisory hat at the Federal Reserve, we and our sister agencies are always working to move in a manner that facilitates and fosters innovation. We are in a dynamic system that requires not just us but our colleagues around the world to adjust as well. Today's financial products and rapidly changing structures of finance mean the old-fashioned, nineteenth- and twentieth-century presumption that a month-old balance sheet is telling us all we need to know about an institution's current condition is long since gone. Inevitably, therefore, we as supervisors are recognizing this reality and have been placing greater emphasis on how well internal risk models are functioning and whether the risk thus measured is being appropriately managed and offset with reasonable hedges. We are also scrutinizing how well an institution is able to tie its risk exposures to internal capital needs. We have a long way to go, but this is where competitive pressures and the underlying economic forces are pushing both financial intermediaries and the supervisory system. There is a broader and more difficult problem of risk management that central bankers confront every day, whether we explicitly acknowledge it or not: How much of the underlying risk in a financial system should be shouldered by banks and other financial institutions. Clearly, were we to require that bank risk-management systems, for example, provide capital to address all conceivable risks that could bring failure, the rates of return on capital would fall, and the degree of financial intermediation and leverage, as a consequence, would inevitably decline. The degree of leverage in financial systems is obviously tied to the degree of risk at the margin of lending. Before the creation of the Federal Reserve and, later, deposit insurance, banks were forced by the marketplace to hold 20 percent and more of their assets as capital if they wanted to sell their liabilities at minimum interest costs. By its actions in the marketplace and its chosen governmental structure, society reveals its preference for trading off leverage with its underlying risks and economic growth. Few, I presume, would argue that zero leverage is optimum. Fewer would argue that zero leverage is consistent with maximum growth. Yet the dangers of too much leverage are all too evident. In this context, how do we central bankers and other supervisors read our very amorphous directive to maintain financial stability and economic growth? We have all chosen implicitly, if not in a more overt fashion, to set our capital and other reserve standards for banks to guard against outcomes that exclude those once or twice in a century crises that threaten the stability of our domestic and international financial systems. I do not believe any central bank explicitly makes this calculation. But we have chosen capital standards that by any stretch of the imagination cannot protect against all potential adverse loss outcomes. There is implicit in this exercise the admission that, in certain episodes, problems at commercial banks and other financial institutions, when their risk-management systems prove inadequate, will be handled by central banks. At the same time, society on the whole should require that we set this bar very high. Hundred-year floods come only once every hundred years. Financial institutions should expect to look to the central bank only in extremely rare situations. I am obviously referring to far more adverse outcomes than I was alluding to in my earlier remarks on the need for private risk-management systems to adjust for crises in their estimates of risk distributions. However, where that dividing line rests is an issue that has not yet been addressed by the international banking community. Clearly, to choose the distribution of risk-bearing between private finance and government is to choose the degree of moral hazard. I believe we recognize and accept it. Indeed, making that choice may be the essence of central banking. In summary, then, although information technology by its very nature has lowered risk, it has also engendered a far more complex international financial system that will doubtless bedevil central bankers and other financial regulators for decades to come. I am sure that nostalgia for the relative automaticity of the gold standard will rise among those of us engaged to replace it.
Remarks by Governor Edward M. Gramlich At the Fair Housing Council of New York, Syracuse, New York April 14, 2000
Remarks by Governor Edward M. Gramlich At the Community Reinvestment Act Conference, San Francisco, California April 17, 2000 The Digital Divide The recent economic expansion has proved gratifying in many respects. During the past five years, in contrast to the preceding ten years, wages and labor income have risen across the board for low- and high-wage workers alike. Unemployment rates for minorities and for those without college education have dipped, for many groups to historic lows. Long-term unemployment is way down. State and local treasuries are flush with revenue, limiting the cuts in social spending that characterized earlier periods. Access of low- and moderate-income groups to credit has dramatically increased as well. As a result of the good economy, technological change, and innovative financial products, low-income credit has exploded in recent years. Between 1993 and 1998, conventional home-purchase lending to low-income borrowers increased by nearly 75 percent, compared with a 52 percent rise to upper-income borrowers. Conventional mortgages to African-Americans increased by 95 percent over this period and to Hispanics by 78 percent, compared with a 40 percent increase in all conventional mortgage borrowing. This expansion of credit has permitted many low-income and minority borrowers to realize their dream of owning a home and a chance to realize the capital gains that have so increased the wealth of upper-income households. Technology is at the root of both the overall economic changes and the expansion of credit to low- and moderate-income households. While technology holds the promise of spreading benefits to all Americans, low- and high-income alike, this spreading is not automatic. Until recently, technology had seemed to increase disparities in wage income. Lately that is no longer the case. Beyond this, many observers justifiably worry about what is known as the "digital divide," the gap between those who have the resources and skills required to access and use technology and those who do not. In a series of recent studies, the National Telecommunications and Information Administration of the Department of Commerce has found that location, income, and race are the primary factors identifying the technologically under-served. Households in rural areas are least likely to have access to computers and the Internet, followed by low-income minorities living in central cities. Follow-on studies show this divide more graphically. Census data from 1998 show that although more Americans now have access to telephones, computers, and the Internet, disparities in home-based Internet access continue to increase. Households with incomes of $75,000 and higher are five times more likely to have home computers than those at the lowest income levels, a gap that expanded by 29 percent between 1997 and 1998. White households are roughly two and one-half times more likely to have home-based Internet access than African-American and Hispanic households, a disparity that increased by 38 percent in the same one-year period. The gap between those at the highest and lowest education levels who can access the Internet at home increased 25 percent. Recognizing that there are enormous overall benefits to technology and the Internet and that innovations will naturally be adopted first by those with high incomes and educational achievement, one can still worry about this digital divide. As more and more routine business and interacting is done on the Internet, it becomes more likely that those who are not connected will be excluded from opportunities that are available to others. In this sense it is critical that public, private, and nonprofit sectors collaborate to design policies and programs that will enable all segments of the population to reap the benefits that technology offers. Today I want to discuss some challenges in this area, and also recount some positive experiences. Increased Competition, Broader Markets Technology has enabled free-market forces to operate at unprecedented levels through the efficient delivery and use of information -- the key to efficient market operation. Technology has significantly increased our capacity to obtain, store, and use data so we can make better decisions, both as professionals and as consumers. As information becomes more readily accessible, competition increases, resulting in more disciplined markets where the providers of goods and services are required to operate more efficiently in order to meet consumers' demand for the best product at the best price. The Internet has demonstrated the power of information on markets, and we have seen incredible opportunities emerge as this communications system has been transformed into a worldwide marketplace for delivering information and goods. Even the banking industry, traditionally known for its conservatism, has used technology effectively. For consumers, technology has fostered the creation of new delivery systems for financial services that have dramatically increased convenience and obliterated geographical limitations. Through automated teller machines (ATM), bank-by-phone services, and on-line banking, consumers can now conduct nearly any banking transaction at any time of the day or night, regardless of where their financial institution is actually located. For financial institutions, technology has provided complex databases that offer the ability to access and correlate information on their customers' saving and spending patterns, breeding new products and business strategies that have enabled banks to respond to consumer needs and to identify new market opportunities. Credit scoring is one example of how technology has revolutionized lenders' capacity for underwriting loans. Sophisticated computer programs have enabled creditors to quickly assess a borrower's creditworthiness by processing key data through complex statistical formulas and assigning numerical credit scores. This process has brought benefits to lenders, consumers, and regulators alike. For lenders, credit scoring decreases expenses associated with the time and expertise required to make a credit decision, enabling lenders to increase loans and reduce credit costs simultaneously. Since the evaluation criteria are standardized, these loans can be packaged and sold more easily in secondary markets, reducing an institution's interest rate risk, improving its liquidity, and further increasing its capacity to originate loans. Consumers obtain much quicker responses to loan requests, and they may be more likely to receive credit since computer models are much more objective than loan officers. Regulators also benefit from credit scoring. The predictive nature of the statistically based models mitigates risk and promotes safety and soundness. Uniformly applying underwriting criteria also promotes fair lending by curtailing the influence of personal biases on credit decisions. The Internet has played a significant role in shaping the new economy by enabling firms to communicate and conduct commerce on a global basis regardless of their location or asset size. The banking industry is using the Internet to expand customer bases, increase service, and reduce operating costs. For community groups, the Internet has provided a cost-effective medium for tapping into a multitude of resources, both financial and informational, to fund new programs, identify best practices, and recruit new partners. Challenges But there are challenges as well. One, particularly for a relationship-intensive business such as banking, is the perception that technology will become a substitute for personal contact. When conducting financial transactions, consumers and bankers often must interact personally. The Internet might seem hostile to personal interaction, but in fact banks have used it to establish and preserve interpersonal relationships, particularly for those customers who need extra assistance. They can reach underserved populations and build sustainable, mutually beneficial business relationships. A recent article in the American Banker illustrated the complementary roles that branches and the Internet play in delivering financial services. One banker noted that 80 percent of his Internet customers go to branches to purchase their financial products, while another said that sales of on-line accounts increased by five times when marketed through branch offices. Findings like these illustrate ways that the industry can leverage high-tech banking without sacrificing the personal touch. Another challenge involves credit scoring. While credit scoring has been instrumental in extending credit to new markets, it has potential unintended consequences. Bankers and regulators must recognize that strict use of credit scoring models could result in the extension of credit to only those clients whose financial lives fit neatly into predefined boxes. Since personal financial management behavior is influenced by culture and education, these formulas may not be able to incorporate nontraditional information that could demonstrate true creditworthiness. As regulators, bankers, and community developers, we must continue to challenge these models to ensure that they yield accurate predictions and remain free of discriminatory biases. A third challenge involves the protection of consumers' privacy. Fundamentally, information sharing is beneficial to markets and consumers. Data, when used appropriately, can enhance competition and service by matching new products and services to individual consumer needs and preferences. But the easy transmission of information on the Internet can lead to privacy abuses as well. Information sharing and protection of consumers' financial privacy are not necessarily mutually exclusive, but they can be. Again, vigilance is necessary. Rising to the Challenge The digital divide presents challenges, but some have met these challenges. The fundamental strategies used to address needs related to affordable housing, welfare-to-work, and microenterprise development have created new homeowners, employees, and small business owners. This in turn has opened new markets for financial services. These models can serve as the framework for addressing digital divisions. Community developers can play a pivotal role in meeting these challenges. With your local knowledge and leadership, you can help design programs that will best serve your communities' education and access needs. In addition to the traditional partners -- government, financial institutions, community organizations, and foundations -- the private sector should be enlisted to help close the digital divide. I would like to share with you a few examples of programs that helped close the digital divide, usually by bringing together many or all of these players. A national initiative by PowerUP provides underserved youth with computer access and training. It builds upon existing community infrastructures such as schools, community centers, and affordable housing communities. The goal is to establish 250 sites throughout the country partnering with groups like America OnLine, the Case and Waitt foundations, Sun Microsystems, Americorps, and the U.S. Department of Education. The National Urban League has five technology centers where residents of underserved neighborhoods can use computers and access the Internet. The Boys and Girls Clubs of America, in partnership with Microsoft, has established 15 technology centers housed in its local chapters. In this Federal Reserve District, Utah's American Express Centurion Bank has donated computer equipment, including modems, to affordable housing groups, shelters, youth resource centers, and self-sufficiency programs that assist underserved populations. Such donations have helped to equip a walk-in center and eight business offices that provide Native Americans with information on affordable housing and small business development. Here in San Francisco, OpNet, a public-private partnership, offers media-related computer skills training and job placement to provide career development opportunities to low-income individuals. To ensure that this training results in sustained employment, OpNet also provides counseling and support services to its students. The Greenlining Institute, partnering with AT&T and McCaw Cellular Communications, is creating a team of community leaders to develop strategies, products, and services to meet the telecommunications needs of the low-income, minority, and disabled communities. Projects include the design and marketing of products to facilitate access by the handicapped to wireless services, language translation facilities, and the expansion of neighborhood technology centers. The Digital Divide Network, a web site created by the Benton Foundation, the National Urban League, and several high-tech firms, plays a vital role as an information clearinghouse. This site identifies public-private initiatives that direct resources to communities in need of computers and educational programs and shares best practices for designing strategic collaborations. These are just a few examples of successful partnerships. There are many more. Conclusion While computers, the Internet, and technology have been responsible for enormous improvements in American life, there is clearly a digital divide. If not properly addressed, the digital divide can threaten a basic American goal-- equality of opportunity But potential problems also suggest potential opportunities. The ability to share information rapidly has led to notable advances for low-income and minority citizens--increased lending, credit scoring, ATM machines, and other specially tailored financial products. As the programmatic examples I mentioned illustrate, many community groups have recognized the challenges and risen to meet them. You and your colleagues have done well in this regard, but much remains to be done. As one final matter, let me encourage you to regard the Community Affairs Offices of the Federal Reserve System as your partners. It is through this network of twelve regional offices that we at the Fed seek to support our economic growth objectives by fostering cooperation among community organizations, government agencies, financial institutions, and other community development practitioners. We promote the flow of community development information through training workshops, conferences, publications, and a recently launched web site that links users to each of the Community Affairs Offices across the country. The Federal Reserve is already a valuable resource, and we hope to become even more so. I look forward to the future success of your partnerships.
Remarks by Governor Edward M. Gramlich At the University of Oregon, Eugene, Oregon April 20, 2000 Investment and Saving The American economy has been doing very well lately. The expansion that began in the early 1990s is now more than nine years old, the longest expansion in American history. Usually as expansions age, productivity growth drops, and inflation picks up. But in this expansion, just the reverse is happening. In 1999, productivity rose at a very high rate, unit labor costs barely increased, and core measures of price inflation were relatively stable. Stock market values rose so high that the earnings-price ratios on broad common stock indexes have dropped to almost the real rate of interest on Treasury bonds. Real wages rose across the board, for high- and low-wage workers alike. Unemployment rates fell to near historic lows, and to historic lows for minority groups. Budget surpluses rose to historic highs. Scholars will debate why and how all these good things happened. In particular: Why after twenty-five years of low productivity growth, did productivity suddenly pick up? Why after twenty-five years during which the noninflationary unemployment rate seemed to be around 6 percent, did this rate suddenly seem to drop to 5 percent or perhaps even lower? The answers to these mysteries are likely to be found in some combination of deregulation, the information technology revolution, competitive pressures flowing from increased globalization, and in recent years, the Internet. But some traditional factors should also be recognized--plain old investment and saving have been very high. In 1999, national saving was about 19 percent of gross domestic product (GDP), around the average level over the last four decades but higher than the saving ratio has been for fifteen years. Capital investment was 21 percent of GDP in nominal terms, nearly a historic high and again higher than the nominal investment ratio has been for fifteen years. Because of the declining relative price of capital investment, in real terms investment has risen even more. And because of a further rise in the share of investment comprising high-technology equipment and software, the productivity-enhancing impact of this investment was higher yet. The Presidentï¿½s Economic Report attributes one-third of the recent significant pickup in productivity growth to capital deepening, essentially reflecting the investment boom, with another, smaller amount due to improvements in the production of computers. Board staff economists Stephen Oliner and Daniel Sichel go even further, attributing two-thirds of the productivity pickup to the use of information technology together with improvements in the production of computers and semiconductors. In this talk I discuss four factors that have contributed to the rising importance of real capital investment. Two factors on the saving side, foreign capital inflows and government budget surpluses, have made possible the increase in investmentï¿½s share of GDP in nominal terms. Two factors from the investment side, the declining relative price of capital investment and the growing share of high-technology investment, explain why the productivity-increasing effect of this investment is particularly large. But the mere presence of an investment boom is not the end of the story, because investment is a notably cyclical component of overall spending. In the second part of the talk I mention some factors that may help sustain this investment boom. This leads to a discussion of the challenging role of monetary policy in smoothing cycles for both investment and aggregate demand. Saving A logical starting point is to discuss the saving that finances investment. In a closed economy, investment spending can be shown to be equal to national saving. In an open economy, investment equals the sum of national saving and the nationï¿½s net surplus of imports over exports. This import surplus represents the gap between the value of the nationï¿½s overall spending and its production, or the amount of its investment not financed by domestic saving. Alternatively, the import surplus can be thought of as the buildup of foreign claims on a nationï¿½s assets, or the degree to which foreigners purchase new domestic capital. Magnitudes over the last four decades are shown in chart 1. The graph is in nominal terms, deflated by nominal gross national product (GNP). The latter is a better deflator to use for national saving than GDP because GNP measures the total income earned by domestic citizens. The story of the graph is easily told. While national saving as a share of GNP, the solid line, has recovered from its lows in the early 1990s and is now roughly at its four-decade average, total capital investment has risen to nearly 21 percent of GNP, close to the peak for the period depicted. The difference is the foreign saving that is financing U.S. capital spending, or the U.S. import surplus. Because that import surplus is high, our nation has been able to finance much more investment than would have been the case were we relying solely on our own saving. Will this foreign source of funds for U.S. capital investment continue? Perhaps not. Models of capital investment are usually formulated in portfolio balance terms, and for the contribution of foreign saving to continue, foreigners would have to continue to build up their stocks of U.S. assets--most of which are denominated in dollars. These stocks are already at historic highs, and most economists figure that, at the very least, stocks will not continue rising indefinitely relative to GNP or relative to foreign wealth or income. Should the stock of foreign holdings of claims on U.S. assets level off, the implied foreign saving contribution to U.S. investment will decline toward zero, and the U.S. capital investment and saving ratios in chart 1 will converge. If part of the converging is done by investment, at least this component of the investment boom will be limited. The contribution of foreign saving to the U.S. investment boom rose as the U.S. economy grew more rapidly than foreign economies, hence simultaneously spreading aggregate demand to foreign countries and providing a higher return outlet for foreign saving. In either sense, the U.S. import surplus has helped to stabilize the world economy over the past few years. But now that foreign economies are recovering, U.S. exports may rise, cutting into the import surplus, and rates of return in foreign countries may rise, cutting into the flow of foreign saving to this country. A second source of financing is from the domestic economy. In chart 1, national saving recovered from its low in 1993 to a value of roughly 19 percent of GDP by 1999, close to its four-decade average. Chart 2 offers a more detailed look at national saving, splitting it into its private and public components. Private saving, the sum of saving by households and businesses, has tailed off lately, dropping to about 15 percent of GDP. The main reason for the decline is the large drop in household saving, presumably because households feel less need to save out of current income when stock market and housing values are rising. But government saving has prevented overall national saving from declining. Government saving has risen from less than zero to nearly 5 percent of GNP over the last seven years, more than offsetting the drop in private saving. The higher government saving reflects the first period of sustained federal surpluses since World War II. Will these federal government surpluses continue? The simple answer would seem to be no, that politicians will find a way to spend the money. But some new developments may suggest a different outcome. The federal surplus is made up of two components. One is the cash-flow surplus of the social security trust fund; the other is the surplus for all other programs, which I will call the general government surplus. The social security trust fund projects a long-term actuarial deficit. But because social security payroll taxes have been increased in advance of the retirement of the baby boomers, the systemï¿½s trust fund is likely to run a cash surplus of about $150 billion in fiscal 2000. Forecasts indicate that this surplus is likely to rise about $15 billion per year for the next few years. Although politicians on both sides of the political aisle know that changes in social security must be made to ensure the long-term actuarial solvency of the system, they have been at a stalemate on making actual changes. Almost any cuts in benefits, whether now or far in the future, are intensely criticized, as are increases in payroll taxes. The consequence is that no benefit or tax changes have been made, none are immediately likely, and social securityï¿½s cash surplus is likely to continue. The further consequence is that politicians do not want to be seen threatening social security in any way, and in todayï¿½s not entirely informed political atmosphere, even borrowing from social security by running a general government deficit has become viewed as threatening social security. Hence it is likely that at least until this political gridlock is resolved, the overall federal surplus should be at least as high as the presently forecast cash surplus of social security. Simply retaining this surplus will continue the level of government saving shown in chart 2. While the political dynamics of what I might call social security nonreform suggest that the overall federal surplus will be at least as high as the cash surplus of social security, several points should be kept in mind. First, in contrast to what one often hears in political debate, this stalemate does nothing to facilitate the programmatic changes that are necessary to deal with the nationï¿½s long-term social security problem. Some changes in program taxes or benefits or both still must be made. Second, if there is to be an actual constraint against running general government deficits, realistic projections do not show all that much revenue available for non-social security tax cuts or spending increases for some years. The Congressional Budget Office has made several budget projections this year, differing according to the future treatment of the spending caps, which lately have been widely ignored. The most realistic of these long-term projections, assuming present levels of real discretionary spending over the next decade, puts the projected general government surplus at $838 billion over the next ten years, which seems like a lot. But this budget projection assumes that spending appropriations will not rise at all in real terms, that commonly extended tax reductions will not be extended, and that the economy will avoid recessions for the entire ten-year period. Even under these generous assumptions, the general government surpluses are barely positive for the next six fiscal years, hitting the big numbers only later in the decade. As a final issue, if it is in fact true that the social security surpluses will accumulate because of the politics of nonreform, it will not be too long before the $3.5 trillion of outstanding federal debt will be paid off. Not permanently, because the same forecasts that show the debt being paid off also show it building back up later in the twenty-first century, when the U.S. population begins to age significantly. But it is possible that for a period of years the economy will be operating with little or no Treasury debt. Is this a problem? Basically no. Although private markets have used Treasury securities as their safe and highly liquid benchmark bonds, markets are innovative and will find a substitute. Already the so-called swaps market is filling this roll. Private investors are increasingly turning to this market as their preferred method of hedging risks. A related problem involves the ability of the Fed to provide for growth in currency and bank reserves, hence providing for growth in overall liquidity. Traditionally, the Fed has accomplished this reserve growth by adding to its holdings of Treasury securities, securities that may soon no longer be available. But the Fed has alternative ways to generate growth in reserves. The Federal Reserve Act authorizes the Fed to generate reserves through purchases of a range of other assets or through temporary repurchase agreements backed by such assets. The Fed could also expand the role of the discount window in supplying reserves. For those who have long championed higher national saving, such as me, the rise in government saving is welcome, as is the tentative political truce in favor of at least retaining the likely future social security surpluses. The United States is still a long way from being a high-saving country, and as chart 1 showed, national saving is now at average historical levels, not at high levels. But even this situation looks far more promising than it did a decade ago, even than it did a few years ago. Investment High investment ratios in nominal terms tell only part of the story. The long-term drop in relative prices of capital goods, due partly to computers but to other types of equipment as well, means that a dollar of nominal saving buys much more real capital than in the past. It is somewhat complicated to adjust for drops in relative prices. GDP price indexes are now chain-weighted, which means that the weights used to aggregate the components of real GDP are automatically updated to reflect recent changes in the relative prices of different components of GDP. Technically, this procedure generates a growth rate of real GDP rather than a level. To obtain levels, the Bureau of Economic Analysis selects a base year and sets real spending levels equal to nominal spending levels in that year. In all other years, real spending levels for individual components will not sum to real GDP. This makes it misleading to focus on the absolute level of investment ratios. Although the level of the real share of investment spending is not meaningful, one can still examine trends by creating an index of the real investment ratio. This index does not solve the adding-up problem, but it does prevent misinterpretation of the level of the ratio. Such an index is shown in chart 3. The top panel of the chart gives the ratio of business fixed investment in nominal terms to GDP in nominal terms. Business fixed investment is a more restrictive category of investment than the total investment shown in chart 1 because it omits residential investment and inventory investment. But the time pattern is reasonably similar to that shown for the nominal investment ratio in chart 1, with a slightly increased upward trend. Then the bottom panel shows this nominal ratio, indexed to 100 in 1960, and the ratio of real investment to real GDP, also indexed to 100 in 1960. The nominal and real ratios are similar until the early 1990s, though the real ratio does show a stronger trend because relative prices of capital goods have dropped over the period as a whole. But beginning in 1992, the real ratio takes off and reaches a record high in 1999. The last factor is the increasing importance of high-technology investment. This trend is shown in chart 4. The top panel of the chart shows an index of the ratio of real computer and software investment to real GDP. The bottom panel broadens this look by also including real communications investment in the numerator. Either way, the ratio of real high-technology investment to real GDP is soaring. It increased 400 times in the top panel and more than 50 times in the bottom panel. The changes have been especially sharp in the last few years. Because of high rates of depreciation and obsolescence for this high-tech equipment and software, these investments have very high gross rates of return and are particularly significant in contributing to overall productivity change. Oliner and Sichel have attempted to determine the effect of these changes on overall productivity, using a neoclassical production function analysis. They break capital into various information technology components (hardware, software, and communications) and estimate the contribution of each piece. They find that of the roughly 1percentage point increase in productivity growth rates in the second half of the 1990s, the use of information technology capital has added about 0.5 percentage points a year to the growth of labor productivity. But this does not tell the entire story because multifactor productivity, the production function residual, could be further influenced by productivity advances in the production of semiconductors and computers. They estimate that this second factor accounted for about 0.2 percentage points a year. Thus they find that information technology equipment has been responsible for about two-thirds of the recent pickup in overall productivity growth. Even this estimate does not count the effect of other types of capital investment, which have been present but have not increased in the late 1990s. And while productivity advances due to the Internet are included in their estimate, these effects could become much larger very soon. However productivity is explained, whether by overall real capital investment or more narrowly by real capital investment in information and communications technology, there has been a sharp pickup recently. Moreover, there is little doubt that at least some forms of capital investment have played a key role. Sustainability Investment is a notoriously cyclical component of spending. It is great that the economy is enjoying an investment boom now. A key question is whether this boom will last. Nothing in the nature of productivity shocks outlaws business cycles. Indeed, the higher investment goes now, the more we might expect it to recede later. Accelerator models of investment behavior work by having capital investors buy new equipment to produce higher levels of output. But once output stops growing, the desired capital stock stops growing as well, implying sharp declines in the level of investment. Is the U.S. economy merely enjoying a traditional accelerator-induced investment boom? At least two natural factors might tend to downplay accelerator fears. One natural factor is the extremely low level of inventory stocks, the usual activating device for typical accelerator-type business cycles in the past. One of the subtle effects of technology has been that it allows firms to manage inventories more closely, hence reducing the importance of inventory cycles. The second natural factor is the nature of this new capital investment. Board economists Stacey Tevlin and Karl Whelan show that much recent investment is propelled by the dropping level of relative prices and the high rate of depreciation. Essentially, declining relative prices have induced firms to buy high-technology capital, which depreciates rapidly, inducing firms to buy even more high-technology capital. While Tevlin and Whelan do find accelerator influences in this process, the investment accelerator is less of a factor than with traditional forms of investment. If their story is accurate, it is one of continued increases in a significant component of capital investment, with much less emphasis on the accelerator cycle. But even in view of these considerations, cycles in aggregate demand and capital investment have often occurred in the past and are certainly possible in the future. The investment accelerator may have been weakened, but it has by no means been abolished. This leads to policy considerations and specifically to challenges facing monetary policy. Modern textbook theories of what used to be called the assignment problem suggest that when an economy is open to international trade and capital flows, with flexible exchange rates, as is the U.S. economy, fiscal policy should be used to set the long-term or normal saving rate, and monetary policy should be used to stabilize the economy. Fiscal policy cannot have significant effects on overall output because fiscal shifts are systematically offset by exchange rate movements, leading to minimal changes in output but significant changes in national saving. For example, contractionary fiscal policy directly lowers consumption, lowering interest rates and currency values and raising net exports to fill the output gap. In the end, output is likely not to change much, but the composition of this output will shift in favor of net exports and higher national saving. This means that fiscal policy is not well-suited for conducting stabilization policy. Exactly the same open-economy forces mean that monetary policy is well-suited to conduct stabilization policy. Expansionary monetary policy works by stimulating domestic spending, driving down currency values, and further stimulating net exports. Whether intentionally or not, in recent years the United States has followed this textbook prescription almost perfectly. Fiscal policy has been contractionary, as evidenced by the high and growing budget surpluses, and has contributed to the moderately high levels of national saving, as shown earlier in chart 2. Monetary policy has let fiscal policy do its work in raising levels of national saving and investment and then has been aimed at keeping overall output near the level implied by the noninflationary rate of unemployment, the rate below which inflation begins to increase. The result has been an economy near full employment, with low and stable inflation, with high national saving and investment ratios, and with rapid productivity improvement. In this sense there are two keys to the sustainability of the investment boom. The first is whether recent investment increases are likely to have greater staying power, as suggested by Tevlin and Whelanï¿½s results, or are merely the product of an accelerator cycle. The second lies with the central bank. The goal of monetary policy, as always, is to try to ensure high employment and stable prices. The high employment goal should, at least in principle, guard against cyclical drops in investment demand; the stable price goal should guard against overheating and costly increases in inflation. The question is whether monetary policy can achieve these goals simultaneously. Two policy approaches have been proposed recently for dealing with this delicate balancing act. One favorite among academics is John Taylorï¿½s rule. This rule would have the Fed setting short-term interest rates equal to an equilibrium nominal short rate, plus a term of forcing up nominal rates if inflation rises and a term of forcing down nominal rates if unemployment rises. Another favorite among academics, and this time also many foreign central banks, is inflation targeting. Inflation-targeting central banks use their inflation target to anchor monetary policy. If inflation threatens, an inflation-targeting central bank would tighten policy until inflation is brought under control. It might appear that these inflation-targeting central banks would ignore unemployment, but in fact what most economists and central bankers mean by inflation targeting is a more flexible approach. Specifically, if recession threatens, most flexible inflation targeters would take action against recession to prevent inflation from dropping below its preset target. Under normal circumstances there might be little difference between following a Taylor rule approach to monetary policy or an inflation-targeting approach. Either way, the central bank will act against both impending inflation and impending recessions. In either case, if successfully done, monetary policy would be following its assigned role of stabilizing the economy, which in this context means preventing business cycles, and associated investment cycles. In either case, the big challenge facing the central bank is policy lags. If it takes time before monetary policy affects the economy, either a Taylor rule central bank or an inflation-targeting central bank will have to act sufficiently early, perhaps preemptively, to neutralize the cyclical shocks. Doing that in a time of forecasting uncertainty will not be easy. Conclusion There are many potential explanations for the recent good performance of the American economy, but saving and investment should certainly be included in the list. Increases in federal government surpluses have returned overall national saving ratios to average historical levels. Increases in the foreign financing of U.S. investment have made possible further increases in nominal investment ratios. Reductions in relative prices for capital equipment spending have led investment still higher in real terms. And compositional changes in favor of high-technology investment have boosted even further the productivity impact of this investment. Moreover, the strong driving force of lower capital goods prices, combined with rapid depreciation of the high-technology capital, leads to at least the possibility that this investment boom will prove more sustainable than in the past. If not, monetary policy will have to play its textbook role of stabilizing output at high but non-inflationary levels.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the proposal of Peoples Heritage Financial Group, Portland, Maine, to acquire Banknorth Group, Inc., Burlington, Vermont, and its banking and nonbanking subsidiaries. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced that it has issued a revision of its brochure, the Consumer Handbook to Credit Protection Laws . The new edition, the thirteenth, reflects recent changes in law and regulation. Topics covered in the handbook include: The cost of credit. Applying for credit. Credit histories and records. Correcting mistakes and resolving misunderstandings. Canceling a mortgage. Liability limits on lost or stolen credit cards. Electronic fund transfers. It also includes a directory of federal agencies and information on how to file a credit complaint. Copies of the revised brochure are available from Publications Services, Mail Stop 127, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, DC 20551. The first 100 copies are free. The brochure also is available on the Boardï¿½s web site at .
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced that it has reissued the brochure, A Guide to Business Credit for Women, Minorities, and Small Businesses . The guide explains the application process for small business loans and steps to take if a loan is denied. It also provides information on the Equal Credit Opportunity Act and lists sources for assistance in the application process. Copies of the brochure are available from Publications Services, Mail Stop 127, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, DC 20551. The first 100 copies are free. The brochure also is available on the Boardï¿½s web site at .
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Office of the Comptroller of the Currency U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission Agencies Announce Working Group On Public Disclosure The Federal Reserve Board, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) and the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) today announced that the Board has established a private-sector working group to develop options for improving the public disclosure of financial information by banking and securities organizations. The OCC and the SEC will participate with the Board in support of the effort. Walter Shipley, who recently retired as chairman of Chase Manhattan Bank, has agreed to chair the Working Group on Public Disclosure, made up of senior executives of banking and investment organizations. The other members of the working group are: Clemens Boersig, chief financial officer and member of the board, Deutsche Bank AG, Frankfurt, Germany. Dina Dublon, executive vice president and chief financial officer, Chase Manhattan Bank, New York. Douglas Flint, finance director, HSBC Holdings PLC, London. James Hance, vice chairman and chief financial officer, Bank of America Corp., Charlotte, N.C. Peter Hancock, chief financial officer and risk manager, J.P. Morgan & Co. Inc., New York. Ross Kari, executive vice president and chief financial officer, Wells Fargo Corp., San Francisco. Thomas H. Patrick, executive vice president and chief financial officer, Merrill Lynch and Co., New York. Lisa K. Polsky, managing director and chief risk officer, Morgan Stanley Dean Witter, New York. Marcel Rohner, member of the group managing board and chief risk manager, UBS AG, Zurich, Switzerland. Robert Rosholt, executive vice president and chief financial officer, Bank One Corporation, Chicago. Todd S. Thomson, chief financial officer, Citigroup, New York. Barry L. Zubrow, managing director and chief administrative officer, Goldman Sachs and Co., New York. The working group will evaluate the use of enhanced public disclosure as a means of improving the ability of markets to evaluate the risk exposure and risk-management practices of large, complex financial service organizations. It will describe industry best practices on disclosure and develop options for improving disclosure by these entities. A report on the groupï¿½s recommendations will be released to the public upon completion. In recent years, market participants, scholars and policymakers all have emphasized the utility of substituting increased market discipline for additional supervision and regulation. This issue will become more pressing as institutions take advantage of the opportunities in the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, particularly if the pace of financial industry consolidation continues. Effective market discipline depends on stakeholders of individual banking and securities organizations being provided with the information necessary to make informed judgments about the organizationsï¿½ risk exposure. Although banking and securities organizations already disclose a considerable volume of information, it would be beneficial to re-examine the content and scope of current practices and to look for further opportunities to improve disclosure and enhance market discipline. Media Contacts: Federal Reserve: Dave Skidmore (202) 452-2955 OCC: Sam Eskenazi (202) 874-5770 SEC: Chris Ullman (202) 942-0020