For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today requested comment on proposed revisions to Regulation E (Electronic Fund Transfers) to implement provisions of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLBA) requiring disclosure of automated teller machine (ATM) fees. Comment is requested by August 18, 2000. The GLBA amends the Electronic Fund Transfer Act by requiring ATM operators that impose fees on consumers who hold accounts at other institutions to post a prominent and conspicuous notice of that fact on or near the ATM. Before the consumer is committed to completing the transaction, ATM operators must also disclose the existence of and the amount of the fee, either on the screen of the ATM or on a paper notice. Many financial institutions that impose ATM fees already disclose the information required by the GLBA to satisfy existing regulatory and ATM network requirements. The Board's notice is attached.
For immediate release
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan Structural change in the new economy Before the National Governors' Association, 92nd Annual Meeting, State College, Pennsylvania July 11, 2000 I am pleased to have the opportunity to meet with you today and address the remarkable changes that have been occurring in our economy. The current economic expansion has not simply set a new record for longevity. More important, the recent period has been marked by a transformation to an economy that is more productive as competitive forces become increasingly intense and new technologies raise the efficiency of our businesses. With the rapid adoption of information technology, the share of output that is conceptual rather than physical continues to grow. While these tendencies were no doubt in train in the "old," pre-1990s economy, they accelerated over the past decade as a number of technologies with their roots in the cumulative innovations of the past half-century began to yield dramatic economic returns. As governors of our states, you have all been dealing with the practical effects of these shifts, which not only have increased prosperity but also are presenting important new challenges. The process of innovation is, of course, never ending. Indeed, the substitution of physical capital, in which new technologies are embodied, for manual labor is an ongoing trend that began nearly two centuries ago when work in craft shops shifted to factories and then to assembly lines. However, the development of the transistor after World War II appears in retrospect to have initiated a special wave of creative synergies. It brought us the microprocessor, the computer, satellites, and the joining of laser and fiber optic technologies. By the 1990s, these and a number of lesser but critical innovations had fostered an enormous new capacity to capture, analyze, and disseminate information. Indeed, it is the proliferation of information technology throughout the economy that makes the current period appear so different from preceding decades. This remarkable coming together of technologies that we label IT has allowed us to move beyond efficiency gains in routine manual tasks to achieve new levels of productivity in now-routine information-processing tasks that previously depended upon people to compute, sort, and retrieve information for purposes of taking action. As a result, information technologies have begun to alter significantly how we do business and create economic value, often in ways that were not foreseeable even a decade ago. One result of the more-rapid pace of IT innovation has been a visible acceleration of the process that noted economist Joseph Schumpeter many years ago termed "creative destruction"-- the continuous shift in which emerging technologies push out the old. Today our capital stock is undergoing an increasing pace of renewal through investment of cash flow from older-technology capital equipment and facilities into cutting-edge, more efficient vintages. This process of capital reallocation across the economy has been assisted by a significant unbundling of risks in capital markets made possible by the development of innovative financial products, many of which themselves owe their viability to advances in technology. At the microeconomic level, the essential contribution of information technology is the expansion of knowledge and its obverse, the reduction of uncertainty. Before this recent quantum jump in information availability, businesses had limited and less timely knowledge of customers' needs and of the location of inventories and materials flowing through complex production systems. In that environment, decisions were based on information that was hours, days, or even weeks old. Businesses, to protect production schedules, found it essential, although costly, to carry sizable backup stocks of materials and to keep additional persons on their payrolls for making the necessary adjustments to the inevitable miscalculations and unanticipated shifts in demand for their products and services. Of course, a great deal of imprecision persists, but the remarkable surge in the availability of real-time information has enabled businesses to reduce unnecessary inventory and dispense with labor and capital redundancies. Intermediate production and distribution processes, so essential when information and quality control were poor, are being bypassed or eliminated. There are no indications in the marketplace that the process of re-engineering business operations is slowing, although it has been difficult analytically to disentangle the part of the rise in output per hour that is permanent and that which is the consequence of transitory business cycle forces. The part based on information advances, of course, is irreversible. Having learned to employ bar code and satellite technologies, for example, we are not about to lose our capability in applying them. But until we experience an economic slowdown, we will not know for sure how much of the extraordinary rise in output per hour in the past five years is attributable to the irreversible way value is created and how much reflects endeavors on the part of our business community to stretch existing capital and labor resources in ways that are not sustainable over the longer run. I have stressed information technology's crucial role on the factory floor and in distribution channels. But technological innovation has spread far beyond that. Biotechnology is revolutionizing medicine and agriculture in ways that were unimaginable just a few years ago, with far-reaching consequences for the quality of life not only in the United States but also around the world. Even more intriguing are those as yet unrealized opportunities for computers and information technology to expand our scientific knowledge more generally. As I indicated earlier, the major contribution of advances in information technology and their incorporation into the capital stock has been to reduce the number of worker hours required to produce the nation's output, our proxy for productivity growth. Echoing a debate that is as old as Adam Smith, some view this so-called labor displacing investment and the introduction of innovative production processes as a threat to our economy's capacity to create new jobs. But because technological change spawns so many opportunities for businesses to expand, the introduction of new efficiencies has today, as in the past, created a vibrant economy in which opportunities for new jobs and businesses have blossomed. An intriguing aspect of the recent wave of productivity acceleration is that U.S. businesses and workers appear to have benefited more from the recent advances in information technology than their counterparts in Europe or Japan. Those countries, of course, have also participated in this wave of invention and innovation, but they appear to have been slower to exploit it. The relatively inflexible and, hence, more costly labor markets of these economies appear to be a significant part of the explanation. The elevated rates of return offered by the newer technologies in the United States are largely the result of a reduction in labor costs per unit of output. The rates of return on investment in the same new technologies are correspondingly less in Europe and Japan because businesses there face higher costs of displacing workers than we do. Here, labor displacement is more readily countenanced both by law and by culture. Parenthetically, because our costs of dismissing workers are lower, the potential costs of hiring and the risks associated with expanding employment are less. The result of this significantly higher capacity for job dismissal has been, counterintuitively, a dramatic decline in the U.S. unemployment rate in recent years. But one less welcome byproduct of rapid economic and technological change, and the necessary heightened level of potential job dismissal that goes with it, is the evident insecurity felt by many workers despite the tightest labor markets in decades. This anxiety stems, I suspect, from a fear of job skill obsolescence, and one very tangible measure of it is the pressure on our education and training systems to prepare and adapt workers to effectively run the new technologies. These pressures are likely to remain intense, even though they may wax and wane, because I see nothing to suggest that the trends toward a greater conceptual content of our nation's output and, thus, toward increased demand for conceptual skills in our workforce, will end. The rapidity of innovation and the unpredictability of the directions it may take imply a need for considerable investment in human capital. Even the most significant advances in information and computer technology will produce little additional economic value without human creativity and intellect. The heyday when a high school or college education would serve a graduate for a lifetime is gone; basic credentials, by themselves, are not enough to ensure success in the workplace. Today's recipients of diplomas expect to have many jobs and to use a wide range of skills over their working lives. Their parents and grandparents looked to a more stable future--even if in reality it often turned out otherwise. Workers must be equipped not simply with technical know-how but also with the ability to create, analyze, and transform information and to interact effectively with others. Moreover, learning will increasingly be a lifelong activity. Certainly, the notion that human and physical capital are complements is not new. Technological advance has inevitably brought with it improvements not only in the capital inputs used in production but also new demands on workers who must interact with that increasingly more complex stock of capital. Early in this century, these advances required workers with a higher level of cognitive skills, for instance the ability to read manuals, to interpret blueprints, or to understand formulae. Our educational system responded: In the 1920s and 1930s, high school enrollment in this country expanded rapidly, pulling youth from rural areas, where opportunities were limited, into more productive occupations in business and broadening the skills of students to meet the needs of an advancing manufacturing sector. It became the job of these institutions to prepare students for work life, not just for a transition to college. In the context of the demands of the economy at that time, a high school diploma represented the training needed to be successful in most aspects of American enterprise. The economic returns for having a high school diploma rose and, as a result, high school enrollment rates climbed. At the same time, our system of higher education was also responding to the advances in economic processes. Although many states had established land grant schools earlier, their support accelerated in the late nineteenth century as those whose economies specialized in agriculture and mining sought to take advantage of new scientific methods of production. Early in the twentieth century, the content of education at an American college had evolved from a classically based curriculum to one combining the sciences, empirical studies, and modern liberal arts. Universities responded to the need for the application of science--particularly chemistry and physics--to the manufacture of steel, rubber, chemicals, drugs, petroleum, and other goods requiring the newer production technologies. Communities looked to their institutions of higher learning for leadership in scientific knowledge and for training of professionals such as teachers and engineers. The scale and scope of higher education in America was being shaped by the recognition that research--the creation of knowledge--complemented teaching and training--the diffusion of knowledge. In a global environment in which prospects for economic growth now depend importantly on a country's capacity to develop and apply new technologies, our universities are envied around the world. The payoffs--in terms of the flow of expertise, new products, and startup companies, for example--have been impressive. Here, perhaps the most frequently cited measures of our success have been the emergence of significant centers of commercial innovation and entrepreneurship where creative ideas flow freely between local academic scholars and those in industry. Not all that long ago, it was easy to recite a relatively short list of places where these activities were clustered. But we have witnessed in recent years a great multiplicity of these centers of innovation. State support, both for the university system and for small businesses, has been an important element in the vitality of these centers. Certainly, if we are to remain preeminent in transforming knowledge into economic value, the U.S. system of higher education must remain the world's leader in generating scientific and technological breakthroughs and in preparing workers to meet the evolving demands for skilled labor. With two-thirds of our high school graduates now enrolling in college and an increasing proportion of adult workers seeking opportunities for retooling, our institutions of higher learning increasingly bear an important responsibility for ensuring that our society is prepared for the demands of rapid economic change. Equally critical to our investment in human capital is the quality of education in our elementary and secondary schools. As you know, the results of international comparisons of student achievement in mathematics and science, which indicated that performance of U.S. twelfth-grade students fell short of their peers in other countries, heightened the debate about the quality of education below the college level. To be sure, substantial reforms in math and science education have been under way for some time, and I am encouraged that policymakers, educators, and the business community recognize the significant contribution that a stronger elementary and secondary education system will make in boosting the potential productivity of new generations of workers. I hope that we will see that the efforts to date have paid off in raising the achievement of U.S. students when the results of the 1998-99 international comparisons for eighth graders are published. Whatever the outcome, the pressures to advance our education system will continue to be intense. As the conceptual share of the value added in our economic processes expands further, the ability to think abstractly will be increasingly important across a broad range of professions. Critical awareness and the abilities to hypothesize, to interpret, and to communicate are essential elements of successful innovation in a conceptual-based economy. As with many skills, such learning is most effective when it is begun at an early age. And most educators believe that exposure to a wide range of subjects--including literature, music, art, and languages--plays a considerable role in fostering the development of these skills. As you know, school districts are also being challenged to evaluate how new information technologies can be best employed in their curricula. Unfortunately, this goal has too often been narrowly interpreted as teaching students how to type on the computer or permitting students to research projects over the Internet. Incorporating new technologies into the educational process is indeed likely to be an important element in improving our schools, but it must involve more than simply wiring the classroom. Human capital--in the form of our teachers--and technology are complements in producing education output just as they are in other business activities. To achieve the most effective outcome from new technologies, we must provide teachers with the necessary training to use them effectively and to provide forums for teachers and education researchers to share ideas and approaches on how best to integrate technology into the curriculum. And we must create partnerships among the states, the school systems, labor and industry to develop appropriate standards and guidelines for the teaching of information technology in the classroom. A crucial concern today--and I know that the National Governors' Association is working hard to address this issue--is that the supply of qualified teachers will be insufficient to meet the demand. Indeed, a substantial number of teachers are scheduled to retire over the next decade, and how to replace them and meet the additional demand from rising enrollments is certain to be a significant challenge in the years ahead. Finally, the pressure to enlarge the pool of skilled workers also means that we must strengthen the significant contributions of other types of training and educational programs, especially for those with lesser skills. It is not enough to create a job market that has enabled those with few skills to finally grasp the first rung of the ladder to achievement. More generally, we must ensure that our whole population receives an education that will allow full and continuing participation in this dynamic period of American economic history. We need to foster a flexible education system--one that integrates work and training and that serves the needs both of experienced workers at different stages in their careers and of students embarking on their initial course of study. Community colleges, for example, have become important providers of job skills training not just for students who may eventually move on to a four-year college or university but for individuals with jobs--particularly older workers seeking to retool or retrain. The increasing availability of courses that can be "taken at a distance" over the Internet means that learning can more easily occur outside the workplace or the classroom--an innovation that may be particularly valuable for states with large rural populations for whom access to traditional classroom learning is more difficult. In summary, we are in a period of rapid innovation that is bringing with it enormous opportunities to enhance living standards for a large majority of Americans. Our ability to take advantage of these opportunities is not only influenced by national policies but is also determined importantly at the state level. States with more flexible labor markets, skilled work forces, and a reputation for supporting innovation and entrepreneurship will be prime locations for firms at the cutting edge of technology. Not all new enterprises will succeed, of course. But many will, and those that do will provide the impetus for further economic progress and expanding opportunities in their communities. Your leadership as policymakers will be a key element in promoting an environment in which you join with others in business, labor, and education to realize the potential that technological change has for bringing substantial and lasting benefits to our economy.
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan Global challenges At the Financial Crisis Conference, Council on Foreign Relations, New York, New York July 12, 2000 I would like to thank you for the opportunity to address this distinguished audience this evening. The issues you have raised these two days are as interesting and timely as they are challenging. The evidence in recent years has become increasingly persuasive that the greater is the degree of openness in cross-border trade in goods and services, the faster will be the rate of growth of an economy and eventually the higher its standard of living. What we do not know for sure, but strongly suspect, is that one major reason for the continued rapid growth in world trade is the accelerating expansion of global finance. This acceleration itself appears to require ever-newer forms and layers of financial intermediation. Certainly, the emergence of a highly liquid foreign exchange market has facilitated basic forex transactions, and the availability of a wider array of financial instruments has allowed the development of more complex hedging strategies that have enabled producers and investors to better allocate risk. This owes largely to the ability of derivatives and other modern financial products to unbundle complex risks in ways that enable each counterparty to choose the combination of risks necessary to advance its business strategy and to eschew those combinations that do not. More efficient allocation of risk facilitates portfolio investment strategies, enhances the lower-cost financing of real capital formation on a worldwide basis, and hence leads to an expansion of cross-border trade in goods and services and rising standards of living. Notwithstanding the demonstrable advantages of what can aptly be described as a new international financial system, the Mexican financial breakdown in late 1994 and the recent episodes in East Asia and elsewhere have raised questions about the inherent stability of this new system. More disturbing has been our inability to anticipate these crises in advance. Of course, something in the nature of such events may preclude their being foreseen, in that the market forces that produce a crisis would likely fend it off if it were anticipated. However, even if we are not able to readily forecast an erosion in the level of confidence, we may at least have the capacity to put preventive, financial shock-absorbing measures in place, thereby lowering the probability of the onset of crisis. With this motivation, those of us active in evolving global markets--whether as private sector participants or as policy officials--have been endeavoring to understand the sources of instability that have flared up at times in recent years. It certainly appears to be the case that many open emerging-market economies that have become active participants in the global economy over the past decade or so were exposed to a huge expansion in capital inflows that their economic and financial systems were not yet ready to absorb. These flows had been engendered by the increasing diversification out of industrial country investment portfolios, induced in part by significant capital gains prior to the onset of the crisis in East Asia. Net private capital inflows into emerging markets roughly quadrupled between 1990 and 1997. Such diversification was directed particularly at those economies in Asia that had been growing so vigorously through the 1970s, 1980s, and into the 1990s--the so-called "Asian tigers." In the event, these economies were ill prepared to absorb such volumes of funds, especially, as I shall shortly argue, because there were inadequate alternatives to banks for financial intermediation backup. More generally, there were simply not enough productive investment opportunities to yield the returns that investors in industrial countries were seeking. It was perhaps inevitable then that the excess cash found its way in too many instances into ill conceived and unwisely financed ventures, including many in real estate. What appeared to be a successful locking of currencies onto the dollar over a period of years in East Asia led, perhaps not unexpectedly, to large borrowings of relatively cheap dollars that, in turn, were lent unhedged, at elevated domestic interest rates that reflected unheeded devaluation risk premiums. When the extent of such unhedged dollar borrowings finally came to be recognized as excessive, as was almost inevitable, the exchange rate broke. Although it might seem that the full consequences were predictable, they were not. Problems with imprudently financed real estate investments emerge with chronic frequency around the globe without triggering the size of the collapse experienced in East Asia in 1997. In the case of the East Asian economies, the magnitude of the crisis became evident only when the normal economic buffers that are available to absorb shocks were so readily breached under pressure. It has taken the longstanding participants in the international financial community many decades to build sophisticated financial and legal infrastructures that buffer shocks and limit systemic fallout from market disturbances. Those infrastructures discourage speculative attacks against a well-entrenched currency because financial systems are robust and are able to withstand vigorous policy responses to such attacks. However, the institutions of the newer participants in global finance had not been tested, until recently, against the rigors of major league pitching, to use a baseball analogy. These recent crises have underscored certain financial structure vulnerabilities that are not readily assuaged in the short run but, nonetheless, will be increasingly important to address in any endeavor to build formidable buffers against financial stress. Among the most important, in my judgment, is the development of alternatives that enable financial systems under stress to maintain an adequate degree of financial intermediation even should their main source of intermediation, whether banks or capital markets, freeze up in a crisis. The existence of multiple avenues of financial intermediation has served the United States well in recent decades, especially during the credit crunch of the late 1980s and more recently when our capital markets froze up in 1998 following the Russian default. As I indicated in a World Bank/ IMF seminar last year, for a time following the Russian default not even investment-grade bond issuers could find reasonable takers. Although Federal Reserve easing in the midst of this turmoil doubtless contributed to improved conditions, it is not credible that our actions provide the whole explanation for the dramatic restoration of most, though not all, markets in a matter of weeks. The seizure appeared too deep seated to be readily unwound solely by a cumulative 75-basis-point ease in overnight rates. Arguably, at least as relevant was the existence of financial institutions, especially commercial banks, that replaced the intermediation function of temporarily disrupted public capital markets. In the United States, as corporate debt issuance fell under these circumstances, commercial bank lending picked up, helping to fill in much of the funding gap. Even though bankers also moved significantly to limit risk exposure, previously committed lines of credit, in conjunction with Federal Reserve ease, provided an important partial backstop to business financing. Conversely, when American banks seized up in 1990 as a consequence of a collapse in the value of real estate collateral, the capital markets, largely unaffected by the decline in values, were able to substitute for the loss of bank financial intermediation. Without the availability of financing through the capital market, the mild recession of 1991 likely would have been far more severe. Multiple sources of intermediation are not strictly an American phenomenon, of course. Sweden, for example, also has a corporate sector with a variety of nonbanking funding sources. The speed with which their financial system overcame an early 1990 real estate crisis offers a stark contrast with the long-lasting problems of Japan, whose financial system is the archetype of financial intermediation that relies almost exclusively on banks. This leads one to wonder whether East Asia's recent problems would have been less severe had those economies not relied so heavily on banks as their principal means of financial intermediation. One can readily understand that the purchase of unhedged short-term dollar liabilities to be invested in Thai baht domestic loans (counting on the dollar exchange rate to hold) would at some point trigger a halt in lending by Thailand's banks. But did the economy need to collapse with it? Had a functioning capital market existed, the outcome might well have been far more benign. Before the crisis broke there was little reason to question the three decades of phenomenally solid East Asian economic growth, largely financed through the banking system, so long as rapidly expanding bank credit outpaced lagging losses and hence depressed the ratio of nonperforming loans to total bank assets. The failure to have alternative forms of intermediation was of little consequence so long as the primary means worked. That is, the lack of a spare tire is of no concern if you do not get a flat. East Asia had no spare tires. The United States did in 1990 and again in 1998. Banks, being highly leveraged institutions, have, throughout their history, periodically fallen into crisis. When these institutions were the sole source of finance, their difficulties often pulled their economies down as well. One can wonder whether in nineteenth-century America, when banks were also virtually the sole intermediary, the numerous banking crises would have periodically disabled our economy as they did had alternative means of intermediation been available. Regrettably, even with our best efforts, multiple intermediation buffers and other long-term initiatives cannot be created and implemented overnight. Efforts in that direction fortunately are being furthered among a number of emerging economies. In the interim, it is essential that we employ the current period of relative international financial stability to address as best we can some of the more evident short-run potentials for crises. To repeat, we do not, and probably cannot, know the precise nature of the next international financial crisis. That there will be one is as certain as the persistence of human financial indiscretion. We can be reasonably sure that it will not be exactly the same as past crises. Crises never are the same because market participants do not, as readily as supposed, repeat their mistakes of the past. Therefore, we need flexible institutions that can adapt to the unforeseeable needs of the next crisis, not financial Maginot Lines that endeavor to fend off revisiting previous crises that will not be replicated. While we may not be fully knowledgeable about all of the ramifications of our new international financial structure, some characteristics have become increasingly apparent. First, there are no signs as yet that the globalization process is about to stop or, excluding the one-off effect of the introduction of the euro, even slow down perceptibly in the immediate future. The consequent risks are unavoidable. Thus, we need to proceed expeditiously with the tasks of designing and implementing those improvements in both the short-term and the long-term buffers that have a reasonable prospect of protecting the international financial architecture in the years ahead. Extensive efforts of recent years to bolster our international financial structure through enhanced regulatory supervision have too often proved ineffective. Fortunately, there are good reasons to believe that properly structured, the markets themselves can provide the self-correcting discipline that is so necessary to financial stability. However, for markets to perform this job, participants need to have information about counterparties and market leverage, for example, and this information must be relevant, timely, and accurate. A high level of transparency in the way domestic finance operates and is supervised is essential if investors are to make more-knowledgeable commitments and supervisors are to judge the soundness of such commitments by the financial institutions that they supervise. I find it difficult to believe, for example, that the crises in Thailand and Korea would have been nearly so virulent had their central banks published data prior to the crises on net reserves instead of the not very informative gross reserve positions only. Some private capital inflows would almost surely have been withheld, and policymakers would have been forced to make hard choices more promptly if evidence of difficulty had emerged earlier. Better information and greater transparency, however, are not enough. The right incentive structure has to be in place as well. Private capital markets are the fundamental building block of the capitalist system of resource allocation across activities and over time. Such markets can function properly only if investors bear the costs of their bad decisions and bad luck and reap the benefits of their good decisions and good luck. That is, if risky investments to emerging-market economies, for example, turn out poorly--as risky investments are wont to do on occasion--governments or international financial institutions should not endeavor to shield investors from loss. This is as it should be, since investors earn premiums to compensate for the risks of such investments. Efforts to bail out investors, no matter how well intentioned, run the danger of encouraging excessive risk-taking down the road by, in effect, over-compensating risk bearing. Despite the increased sophistication and complexity of financial instruments, it is not possible to take account in today's market transactions of all possible future outcomes. Markets operate under uncertainty. It is therefore crucial to market performance that participants manage their risks properly, and this is true at the national and official levels of both industrial and developing countries as well as at the level of individual private-sector firms. To the extent that policymakers in industrial or emerging economies are unable to anticipate or evaluate the types of complex risks that the newer financial technologies are producing, the answer, as it always has been, is less leverage--that is, less debt, more equity, and hence a larger buffer against adversity and contagion. The type of investment instruments issued also can help contain financial stresses. It is no doubt more effective to have mechanisms that allow losses to show through regularly and predictably than to have them allocated by some official entity in the wake of default. In the former case, the private sector will be better able to price risk, making the judgment about new credit decisions more informed. This is particularly so in the international arena, where national sovereignty severely limits the reach of national bankruptcy laws as well as the scope for any realistic hopes for international bankruptcy procedures. It is worth noting that many existing investment instruments already have such desirable properties. Capital losses on equities, for example, spread the costs of the Asian crisis across issuers and investors. From June 1997 through the trough of the crises in August 1998, emerging-market equity losses worldwide are estimated to have been more than $1 trillion. At the same time, the scope for downward revisions to dividends during a crisis allows issuing firms to cushion some of their cash-flow pressures. Moreover, over the same June 1997 to August 1998 period, losses to foreign investors in emerging-market fixed-income instruments amounted to $80 billion. I might note that with a flexible exchange-rate regime the value of investments in local currency debt will fluctuate with the value of major foreign currencies such as the dollar, allowing for additional regularity in price adjustment. Private-market processes have served this country and the world economy well to date, and we should rely on them as much as possible as we go forward. This is not to say that the official sector will have no role to play in the next global crisis, or the one after that. Official safety nets and interventions cannot be eliminated entirely. There are limits to the size and extent of the shocks that the private sector can manage, at least in the short run, without official assistance. However, official financial support should be kept to a minimum for reasons of fiscal prudence, resource allocation efficiency, and avoidance of moral hazard over the long run. There is, of course, in any economic system, the necessity for sound monetary and fiscal policies, the absence of which was so often the cause of earlier international financial crises. With increased emphasis on private international capital flows, especially interbank flows, private misjudgments within flawed economic structures have been the major contributors to recent problems. But inappropriate macroeconomic policies also have been a factor for some emerging-market economies. We may be in a rapidly evolving international financial system with all the bells and whistles of the so-called new economy. But the old-economy rules of prudence are as formidable as ever. We violate them at our own peril.
Testimony of Patrick M. Parkinson Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics H.R. 4541, the Commodity Futures Modernization Act of 2000 Before the Subcommittee on Finance and Hazardous Materials of the Committee on Commerce, U.S. House of Representatives July 12, 2000 I am pleased to be here to present the Federal Reserve Board's views on the Commodity Futures Modernization Act of 2000 (H.R. 4541). My testimony today will be quite similar to testimony that Chairman Greenspan and I presented last month to committees in the Senate and House, respectively. The Board continues to believe that such legislation modernizing the Commodity Exchange Act (CEA) is essential. To be sure, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) has recently proposed issuing regulatory exemptions that would reduce legal uncertainty about the enforceability of over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives transactions and would conform the regulation of futures exchanges to the realities of today's marketplace. These administrative actions by no means obviate the need for legislation, however. The greatest legal uncertainty affecting OTC derivatives is in the area of securities-based transactions, to which the CFTC's exemptive authority does not extend. Furthermore, as events during the past few years have clearly demonstrated, regulatory exemptions carry the risk of amendment by future commissions. If our derivatives markets are to remain innovative and competitive internationally, they need the legal and regulatory certainty that only legislation can provide. In my remarks today I shall focus on three of the areas that the legislation covers: (1) OTC derivatives; (2) regulatory relief for U.S. futures exchanges; and (3) repeal of the Shad-Johnson prohibition of single-stock futures. OTC Derivatives In its November 1999 report, Over-the-Counter Derivatives and the Commodity Exchange Act , the President's Working Group on Financial Markets (PWG) concluded that OTC derivatives transactions should be subject to the CEA only if necessary to achieve the public policy objectives of the act--deterring market manipulation and protecting investors against fraud and other unfair practices. In the case of financial derivatives transactions involving professional counterparties, the PWG concluded that regulation was unnecessary for these purposes because financial derivatives generally are not readily susceptible to manipulation and because professional counterparties can protect themselves against fraud and unfair practices. Consequently, the PWG recommended that financial OTC derivatives transactions between professional counterparties be excluded from coverage of the CEA. Furthermore, it recommended that these transactions between professional counterparties be excluded even if they are executed through electronic trading systems. Finally, the PWG recommended that transactions that were otherwise excluded from the CEA should not fall within the ambit of the act simply because they are cleared. The PWG concluded that clearing should be subject to government oversight but that such oversight need not be provided by the CFTC. Instead, for many types of derivatives, oversight could be provided by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Federal Reserve, or a foreign financial regulator that the appropriate U.S. regulator determines to have satisfied its standards. The provisions of H.R. 4541 that address OTC derivatives are generally consistent with the PWG's conclusions. At the margin, the provisions differ from those recommended by the PWG in terms of the range of counterparties covered by the exclusions. However, these differences reflect reasonable judgments regarding the types of counterparties that can protect themselves against fraud and unfair practices. Therefore, the Federal Reserve Board believes it would be appropriate to enact these provisions. Regulatory Relief for U.S. Futures Exchanges The PWG did not make specific recommendations about the regulation of traditional exchange-traded futures markets that use open outcry trading or that allow trading by retail investors. Nevertheless, it called for the CFTC to review the existing regulatory structures, particularly those applicable to financial futures, to ensure that they remain appropriate in light of the objectives of the CEA. In February, the CFTC published a report by a staff task force that provided a comprehensive review of its regulatory framework and proposed sweeping changes to the existing regulatory structure. Last month the CFTC issued a revised set of proposals for public comment. With some exceptions, the regulatory relief provisions of H.R. 4541 are consistent with the CFTC's proposals. Using the same approach as the PWG, the CFTC has evaluated the regulation of futures exchanges in light of the public policy objectives of deterring market manipulation and protecting investors. When contracts are not readily susceptible to manipulation and access to the exchange is limited to sophisticated counterparties, the CFTC has proposed alternative regulatory structures that would eliminate unnecessary regulatory burden and allow domestic exchanges to compete more effectively with exchanges abroad and with the OTC markets. More generally, the CFTC proposes to transform itself from a frontline regulator, promulgating relatively rigid rules for exchanges, to an oversight agency, assessing exchanges' compliance with more flexible core principles of regulation. The Federal Reserve Board supports the general approach to regulation that was outlined in the CFTC's proposals. For some time the Board has been arguing that the regulatory framework for futures trading, which was designed for the trading of grain futures by the general public, is not appropriate for the trading of financial futures by large institutions. The CFTC's proposals recognize that the current "one-size-fits-all" approach to regulation of futures exchanges is inappropriate, and they generally incorporate sound judgments regarding the degree of regulation needed to achieve the CEA's purposes. Similarly, the Federal Reserve Board generally supports the regulatory relief provisions of H.R. 4541. However, the CFTC has expressed concerns that the bill unduly restricts its authority to correct violations of the core principles of regulation. To facilitate expeditious passage of legislation, it thus may be prudent to address the CFTC's concerns about its enforcement authority. Single-Stock Futures The PWG concluded that the current prohibition on single-stock futures (part of the Shad-Johnson Accord) can be repealed if issues about the integrity of the underlying securities markets and regulatory arbitrage are resolved. The Board believes that such instruments should be allowed to trade on futures exchanges or on securities exchanges, with primary regulatory authority assigned to the CFTC or the SEC, respectively. However, the SEC should have authority over some aspects of trading of these products on futures exchanges. The scope of the SEC's authority can and should be resolved through negotiations between the CFTC and the SEC. The Congress should continue to urge the two agencies to settle their remaining differences. Whatever agreement they reach should then be incorporated through amendments to H.R. 4541. In any event, the bill should allow securities exchanges to compete with futures exchanges in listing single-stock futures. If it would facilitate repeal of the prohibition, the Federal Reserve Board is willing to accept regulatory authority over levels of margin on single-stock futures, as provided in H.R. 4541, so long as the Board can delegate that authority to the CFTC, the SEC, or an Intermarket Margin Board consisting of representatives of the three agencies. The Board understands that the purpose of such authority would be to preserve the financial integrity of the contract market and thereby prevent systemic risk and to ensure that levels of margins on single-stock futures and options are consistent. The Board would note that, for purposes of preserving financial integrity and preventing systemic risk, margin levels on futures and options should be considered consistent, even if they are not identical, if they provide similar levels of protection against defaults by counterparties, taking into account any differences in (1) the price volatility of the contracts, (2) the frequency with which margin calls are made, or (3) the period of time within which margin calls must be met. Conclusion H.R. 4541 reflects a remarkable consensus on the need for legal certainty for OTC derivatives and regulatory relief for U.S. futures exchanges, issues that have long eluded resolution. These provisions are vitally important to the soundness and competitiveness of our derivatives markets in what is an increasingly integrated and intensely competitive global economy. The Federal Reserve Board trusts that the remaining differences regarding single-stock futures can be resolved quickly, so that this important piece of legislation can be expedited through this Congress.
For immediate release
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among New Century Bancorp, the New Century Bank, both of Southfield, Michigan, the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, and the Michigan Office of Financial and Insurance Services. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today its approval of the application of Deutsche Hyp Deutsche Hypothekenbank Frankfurt-Hamburg AG, Frankfurt, Germany, to establish a representative office in New York, New York. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice by The Royal Bank of Scotland Group plc, Edinburgh, Scotland, to retain its interest in NatWest Group Holdings Corporation, New York, New York. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.