For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice of The Charles Schwab Corporation, San Francisco, California ("Schwab"), to become a bank holding company by acquiring U.S. Trust Corporation, New York, New York ("US Trust"), and its bank and nonbank subsidiaries, including United States Trust Company of New York, New York, New York. The Board also announced that Schwab's election to become a financial holding company would become effective upon the consummation of Schwab's acquisition of US Trust. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
Testimony of Governor Laurence H. Meyer Payment of interest on reserves and Fed surplus Before the Committee on Banking and Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives May 3, 2000 The Board of Governors appreciates this opportunity to comment on issues related to H.R. 4209, the Bank Reserves Modernization Act of 2000. The Board strongly supports the proposal in the bill to allow the payment of interest on the balances that depository institutions maintain in their accounts at Federal Reserve Banks. We have commented favorably on such proposals on a number of previous occasions over the years, and the reasons for that position still hold today. Historically, the issue of permitting interest to be paid on reserve balances has been linked to the repeal of the prohibition against paying interest on demand deposits. The Board is pleased that the House of Representatives has passed legislation that would ultimately permit the payment by financial institutions of interest on their customers' demand deposits. Assuming it becomes law, that legislation eventually will contribute considerably to the improved efficiency of our financial sector. Authorizing the Federal Reserve to pay interest on reserve balances held by depository institutions at Reserve Banks would also be important for increasing the economic efficiency of our banking sector. To help clarify this point, let me first give you some background information on reserve requirements. The Federal Reserve currently requires that depository institutions maintain required reserves equal to 10 percent of their transactions deposits above certain minimum levels. Reserve requirements may be satisfied either with vault cash or with balances held in accounts at Federal Reserve Banks. Excess reserves are reserve balances that depositories hold in Reserve Banks in excess of the balances needed to meet reserve requirements. Depository institutions may also arrange with their Reserve Banks to hold additional balances, called required clearing balances, that I will explain later. Depository institutions earn no interest on their vault cash, required reserve balances, or excess reserve balances. Paying interest on vault cash is not authorized in the proposed legislation and it is not advisable, because banks hold vault cash mainly for other business purposes, not to meet reserve requirements. Also, questions of equity would arise, because it would be administratively impossible for the Federal Reserve to pay interest on the currency holdings of the general public. However, paying interest on required reserve balances could eliminate some expenditures by the banking sector that are wasteful from the point of view of the overall economy. Depository institutions currently expend considerable resources to minimize their required reserve balances by developing and operating various programs, such as business and retail sweep programs, in order to minimize the balances recorded in their transaction accounts. From society's point of view, these expenditures produce no net benefits, and paying interest on required reserve balances would reduce the incentives for depository institutions to engage in these practices. Depository institutions have always attempted to reduce to a minimum the non-interest-bearing balances held at Federal Reserve Banks to meet reserve requirements. For more than two decades, some commercial banks have done so in part by sweeping the reservable transaction deposits of businesses into nonreservable instruments. These business sweeps not only have avoided reserve requirements, but also have allowed businesses to earn interest on instruments that are effectively equivalent to demand deposits. In recent years, developments in information systems have allowed depository institutions to begin sweeping consumer transaction deposits into nonreservable accounts. These retail sweep programs use computerized systems to transfer consumer transaction deposits, which are subject to reserve requirements, into personal savings accounts, which are not. Largely because of such programs, required reserve balances have dropped from about $28 billion in late 1993 to around $6 billion today, and the spread of such programs has not yet fully run its course. The payment of interest on required reserve balances would remove the incentives to engage in such reserve avoidance practices. If the bill becomes law, the Federal Reserve would likely pay an interest rate on required reserve balances close to the rate on other risk-free money market instruments, such as repurchase agreements. This rate is usually a little less than the interest rate on federal funds transactions, which are uncollateralized overnight loans of reserves in the interbank market. In light of the resources used by depository institutions to try to circumvent reserve requirements, some might question the reason for having such requirements. Indeed, reserve requirements have been eliminated in some other industrialized countries. Let me review the historical and current purposes served by reserve requirements. Although the word "reserves" might imply an emergency store of liquidity, required reserves cannot actually be used for this purpose, since they represent a small and fixed fraction of a bank's transaction deposits. I should also note that reserve requirements are quite different from capital requirements. Capital is a buffer against losses, and capital requirements are an important aspect of the prudential supervision and regulation of banks. Reserve requirements, by contrast, have no role in banking supervision and prudential regulation. Reserve requirements are a monetary policy tool. In the past, they have been employed to assist in controlling the growth of the money stock. In the early 1980s, for example, the Federal Reserve used a reserve quantity procedure to control the growth of the monetary aggregate M1. Indeed, the current structure of reserve requirements, with relatively high required reserve ratios on transaction deposits, which are included in M1, and zero or relatively low ratios on nontransaction deposits, which are not, was originally designed to aid the control of M1. For the most part, however, the Federal Reserve has looked to the price of reserves--the federal funds rate--rather than the quantity of reserves, as its key focus in implementing monetary policy. While reserve requirements no longer serve the purpose of monetary control, required reserves continue to play a valuable role in the implementation of monetary policy in the United States. They do so because reserve requirements induce a predictable demand for balances at Reserve Banks on a two-week average basis. As you know, depository institutions trade reserve balances among themselves every day at the interest rate called the federal funds rate. The Federal Open Market Committee sets a target for the federal funds rate that the Open Market Desk attempts to maintain. The predictability of the overall demand for reserves is important in helping the Desk determine the amount of reserves to supply through open market operations in order to achieve a given federal funds rate target. Because required reserve balances must be maintained only on an average basis over a two-week period, depositories have some scope to adjust the daily balances they hold for this purpose and this process helps stabilize the federal funds rate. For instance, if the funds rate were higher than usual on a particular day, some depository institutions could choose to hold lower reserve balances that day, and their reduced demand would help to damp the upward pressure on the funds rate. Later in the two-week period, when the funds rate might be lower, those institutions could choose to hold more reserves and make up the shortfall in their average holdings of reserve balances. This action would also help smooth out the funds rate over the two-week period. The Federal Reserve permits depository institutions to hold additional deposits in the form of required clearing balances, which are not included in total reserves. Under the Federal Reserve's required clearing balance program, depository institutions may hold credit-earning balances, not for meeting reserve requirements, but for assisting with clearing needs. The credits offset charges for Federal Reserve services, like check-clearing, used by the depository. This program helps to restrain volatility in the federal funds rate in a manner similar to reserve requirements because the clearing balance requirement is on a two-week average basis and because it is identified ahead of time. The volume of required clearing balances is limited, however, because the credits accumulate only to the level of charges that a depository institution incurs for Federal Reserve services. Under H.R. 4209, explicit interest could be paid on such balances. Thus, this constraint on the level of required clearing balances would be eliminated, a result that would potentially boost their benefit for the implementation of monetary policy. In addition to required reserve and required clearing balances, depository institutions also hold excess reserve balances in their accounts at Federal Reserve Banks. Their motive in holding excess reserves is mainly as a precaution against the chance that unpredictable payments out of their accounts late in the day might cause shortages of reserves to satisfy reserve requirements or might cause overnight overdrafts on their accounts. The Federal Reserve strongly discourages overnight overdrafts. If required reserve and required clearing balances dropped to very low levels, there would be increased risks of overnight overdrafts on the accounts of depositories in Reserve Banks. The remaining balances of depositories at Reserve Banks would be largely excess reserves held as a precaution against such overdrafts. It would be especially difficult to predict the level of balances depositories would need for this purpose from one day to the next. For example, on days when payment flows were particularly heavy and uncertain, or when the distribution of reserves around the banking system were substantially different than normal, depositories would need a higher than usual level of precautionary balances to avoid the risk of overdrafts. The uncertainties would make it harder for the Federal Reserve to determine the appropriate daily quantity of reserves to supply to the market. Thus, in such a scenario, the federal funds rate could become more volatile and often diverge markedly from its intended level. Moderate levels of volatility are not a concern for monetary policy, in part because the Federal Reserve now announces the target federal funds rate, eliminating the possibility that fluctuations in the actual funds rate in the market would give misleading signals about monetary policy. A significant increase in volatility in the federal funds rate, however, would be of concern because it would affect other overnight interest rates, raising funding risks for most large banks, securities dealers, and other money market participants. Suppliers of funds to the overnight markets, including many small banks and thrifts, would face greater uncertainty about the returns they would earn and market participants would incur additional costs in managing their funding to limit their exposure to the heightened risks. An example of significantly heightened volatility occurred in early 1991, just after the Federal Reserve reduced reserve requirements in order to ease funding costs to banks during the credit crunch period. Because of the cut in reserve requirements, many depository institutions found that their required reserve balances fell below the level of balances they needed to hold as a precaution against overdrafts owing to unpredictable payment flows; as a consequence, the federal funds rate became quite volatile for a while, with daily trading ranges averaging around 8 percentage points compared with about 1-1/2 percentage points in normal times. Since then, depository institutions have become much more adept at managing their reserve positions, in part by making greater use of required clearing balances, and as a result, their needs for day-to-day precautionary balances have declined considerably. A number of measures taken by the Federal Reserve also have helped to foster stability in the funds market, including improvements in the timeliness of account information provided to depository institutions, more frequent open market operations which are increasingly geared to daily payment needs rather than two-week-average requirements, a shift to lagged reserve requirements, which gives depositories and the Federal Reserve advance information on the demand for reserves, and improved procedures for estimating reserve demand. As a result of these steps taken by depository institutions and the Federal Reserve, the average level of volatility in the federal funds rate has not moved up, despite much lower levels of required reserve balances than in the 1991 episode. However, the limited effects on volatility of the spread of retail sweep programs to date may not preclude a more outsized reaction if reserve balances fall even lower. We expect required reserve balances to fall from their current level of around $6 billion to perhaps $4 billion, thereby increasing the risk of heightened volatility in the funds rate. As I previously mentioned, some industrial countries have managed to implement monetary policy successfully without reserve requirements. Those countries have avoided substantial volatility in overnight interest rates by using alternative procedures for the implementation of monetary policy. One approach, for instance, establishes a ceiling and a floor to contain movements of the overnight interest rate. The ceiling is set by the central bank's lending rate in what is called a Lombard facility; loans are provided freely to qualified banks but at an interest rate above the expected level of overnight market interest rates. Adopting a Lombard facility in the United States would involve changes in our discount window operations. For such a facility to function effectively as a ceiling for overnight interest rates, depository institutions would need to exhibit a greater willingness to make use of discount window loans than they have in the past. In some countries, a floor for overnight interest rates is established by the rate of interest a central bank pays on excess reserve balances; banks would not generally lend to other banks at an interest rate below the rate they could earn on a risk-free deposit at the central bank. For the Federal Reserve to be able to set a similar interest rate floor, it would need expanded legislative authority, for example, to pay interest on excess reserves. Under H.R. 4209, interest on excess reserves would be allowed. If interest were permitted to be paid on required reserve balances, adjustments in the procedures for implementing monetary policy and in the behavior of depository institutions might not be needed. Interest on required reserves would reduce banks' costs of offering transaction deposits and thus could boost their levels substantially, as some sweep programs were unwound. The unwinding would be larger if interest could also be paid on demand deposits, as eventually would be permitted by the legislation already passed by the House. The increased transaction deposits likely would bring required reserve balances above the level of daily precautionary needs for many institutions, thus helping to stabilize the federal funds rate, while also improving economic efficiency as previously noted. The magnitude of the responses to these measures, however, is uncertain. Some corporations may not find the interest paid on demand deposits high enough to induce them to shift a substantial volume of funds out of other liquid instruments. Also, some banks may retain consumer sweep programs in order to seek higher investment returns than the Federal Reserve would pay on riskless reserve balances. Because of the uncertainties involved, it is best for the Federal Reserve to be able to pay interest on any balances that depositories hold at Reserve Banks, not just on required reserve balances, and at differential rates to be set by the Federal Reserve, as the bill would allow. The ability to pay explicit interest on balances other than required reserve balances would provide additional tools that could be helpful for monetary policy implementation, if interest on required reserve balances resulted in an insufficient boost to the level of those balances. In any case, it is important that the Federal Reserve have a full monetary toolkit, given the inventiveness of financial market participants and the need for the Federal Reserve to be prepared for potential developments that may not be immediately visible. H.R. 4209 also includes a technical provision related to pass-through reserves. This provision would extend to banks that are members of the Federal Reserve System a privilege that was granted to nonmember institutions at the time of the Depository Institutions Deregulation and Monetary Control Act of 1980. It would allow member banks to count as reserves their deposits in affiliated or correspondent banks that are in turn "passed through" by those banks to Federal Reserve Banks as required reserve balances. The provision would remove a constraint on some banks' reserve management and would cause no difficulties for the Federal Reserve in implementing monetary policy. The Board supports it. The payment of interest on required reserve balances would reduce the revenues received by the Treasury from the Federal Reserve. The extent of the revenue loss, however, has fallen considerably on balance over the past ten to twenty years because of reductions in the level of such balances as banks have increasingly implemented reserve avoidance techniques and because of the generally lower level of interest rates as inflation has declined. Paying interest on required clearing balances would merely involve a switch to explicit interest from the implicit interest of earnings credits. It might, if anything, have a slight positive effect on the Treasury budget to the extent that the level of such balances increased with explicit interest, and the Federal Reserve was able to earn a higher return on investing the additional funds than it paid out in interest. Regarding interest on excess reserve balances, the Federal Reserve does not see an immediate need to use this additional tool for monetary policy. If it were used, Treasury revenues could be reduced, but probably only slightly, owing to the small amount of excess reserve balances, which have averaged a little over $1 billion in recent years, and the likelihood that the Federal Reserve would pay a rate well below the federal funds rate on them. Also, if the demand for excess reserves increased, any "spread" that the Federal Reserve earned on the higher excess reserves would be returned to the Treasury, further limiting the budgetary cost. The Committee has requested the Board's view on the possibility of transferring some of the capital surplus of the Federal Reserve Banks to the Treasury in order to cover the budgetary costs of paying interest on required reserve balances. Let me take a moment to explain the role of the surplus account of the Reserve Banks. The Federal Reserve System derives the bulk of its revenues from interest earnings on Treasury securities that it has obtained through open market operations. The System returns a very high proportion of its earnings every year to the Treasury. In 1999, it turned over $25 billion, or about 97 percent of its earnings. In most years, the System retains a small percentage of those earnings in its surplus account. The surplus account is a capital account on the Federal Reserve Banks' balance sheets. Since 1964, the Federal Reserve has followed the practice of allowing the surplus to rise to match increases in the paid-in capital of member banks. Each member bank is required by law to subscribe to the capital stock of its Reserve Bank in an amount equal to 6 percent of its own capital and surplus. The Board requires that half of that subscribed capital be paid in. The Federal Reserve's surplus account is currently about $6-1/2 billion, while its total capital amounts to $14 billion. As required by the omnibus appropriations legislation that passed at the end of the last Congressional session, the Federal Reserve will transfer $3.752 billion from its surplus account to the Treasury; that transfer is scheduled for May 10. After the transfer, the surplus will be $2.7 billion and total capital will be about $10.3 billion. Total assets of the Federal Reserve are around $600 billion. The surplus account has helped to provide extra backing for the issue of Federal Reserve notes. The Federal Reserve is required by law to hold certain specified assets, including Treasury securities, as collateral against the issuance of currency. The Federal Reserve buys Treasury securities, its main asset, in the open market as the counterpart to the surplus on its books. The extra margin of collateral for currency made possible because of the surplus was important in the past, because certain types of discount window loans could not be used as collateral. However, legislation signed into law last year expanded the assets of the Federal Reserve that could be used to back the issuance of currency to include all discount window loans. As a result, the importance of the surplus in providing a margin of excess currency collateral has greatly diminished. Traditionally, the Federal Reserve and virtually all other central banks have maintained an appreciable level of capital. For the Federal Reserve, some of that capital has been contributed by member commercial banks and some from earnings retained in the surplus account. Maintaining a surplus account may help support the perception of the central bank as a stable and independent institution by ensuring that its assets remain comfortably in excess of its liabilities. However, the need for capital in this case is limited by the modest variability of the Federal Reserve's profits, the safety of its primary asset, Treasury securities, and the substantial regular flow of earnings from its portfolio of securities. Indeed, in the abstract, a central bank with the nation's currency franchise does not need to hold capital. In the private sector, a firm's capital helps to protect creditors from credit losses. Creditors of central banks, however, are at no risk of a loss because the central bank can always create additional currency to meet any obligation denominated in that currency. Whatever the benefits of the surplus account, it should be emphasized that its maintenance is costless to the Treasury and to taxpayers. The Treasury has to issue more debt because of the surplus, but an exactly equivalent amount of Treasury debt is held by the Federal Reserve. The amount of Treasury debt held by the private sector is not affected by the existence or the level of the surplus. The Treasury pays interest on the portion of its debt held by the Federal Reserve, but those interest payments are then returned to the Treasury by the Federal Reserve on a weekly basis. For similar reasons, transfers of Federal Reserve surplus to the Treasury provide no true budgetary savings. Let me give you an example that illustrates this principle. First, imagine that the Congress wished to enact some new spending program that would cost $500 million. In the absence of any new revenues or reductions in outlays on other programs, the Treasury would need to issue $500 million of debt to the public to fund the expenditure. The annual interest cost on that debt, at a 6 percent interest rate, would be $30 million a year. Now suppose that, instead, the Congress decided to "finance" the spending program by transferring $500 million from Federal Reserve surplus to the Treasury. To obtain the funds to transfer to Treasury while maintaining the stance of monetary policy, the Federal Reserve would need to sell $500 million of Treasury securities from its portfolio to the public. The public would wind up holding $500 million of additional Treasury debt, and the government would increase its net interest cost by $30 million a year--exactly the same outcome as if the Treasury just sold the debt directly to the public. Thus, financing an additional $500 million outlay through a surplus transfer is exactly equivalent to borrowing from the public. For reasons illustrated by this example, the Federal Reserve has consistently stated that transfers of Federal Reserve surplus do not provide true budgetary revenues and indeed that mandating such transfers undermines the integrity of the federal budgetary process. The fact that budgetary rules count transfers of Federal Reserve surplus as revenues for the purpose of calculating the budget deficit is an anomaly of federal budget accounting. Over the years, Congress generally has concurred with this view, with a few exceptions. Congressional budget resolutions in 1996, 1997, and again this year noted that transfers of surplus have no real budgetary or economic effects. The 1996 and 1997 resolutions directed the Congressional Budget Office not to score any savings from legislation requiring transfers from the surplus account to the Treasury. The most recent budget resolution contains a provision to ensure that transfers of Federal Reserve surplus "shall not be used to offset increased on-budget spending when such transfers produce no real budgetary or economic effects." The Manager's statement explaining this provision states: "It has long been the view of the Committee on the Budget that transfers of Federal Reserve surpluses to the Treasury are not valid offsets for increased spending." In summary, the Federal Reserve strongly supports legislation to authorize the payment of interest on reserves. Such authorization, however, would have a budgetary cost. The transfer of Federal Reserve surplus would technically increase reported budget receipts, owing to a unified budget convention, but would not represent a true source of revenue to offset this cost.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the appointment of David J. Stockton as Director of the Division of Research and Statistics, effective July 3, 2000. Mr. Stockton, currently Deputy Director of the Division, will succeed Michael Prell, who will retire at the end of June, after 30 years of service in the Federal Reserve System and 13 years as Director of the Research Division. The Division of Research and Statistics is responsible for the analysis and forecasting of domestic economic and financial developments, supporting the monetary policy work of the Board and the Federal Open Market Committee. In connection with that activity, it produces a variety of statistical series, including the well-known indexes of industrial production and capacity utilization and the nation's flow of funds accounts. The Division also provides support for the formulation of policy in the areas of banking supervision and regulation, consumer protection, and community reinvestment. Mr. Stockton has been a member of the Division since 1981, following his doctoral work at Yale University. In 1987 he was promoted to Assistant Director and Chief of the Economic Activity Section. He subsequently was promoted to Associate Director in 1989 and Deputy Director in 1994. He has also served as Associate Economist to the Federal Open Market Committee for a number of years.
Remarks by Vice Chairman Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. At the 36th Annual Conference on Bank Structure and Competition, Chicago, Illinois May 4, 2000 Electronic Commerce, Banking, and Payments Over the past few years the topic of electronic commerce and banking has moved from the laboratory into the mainstream of our public discourse. This afternoon our panel has been asked to discuss the subject of alternative financial delivery systems. I would like to broaden this discussion a bit. The theme of my remarks will be that three types of variables--convenience, confidence, and complexity--are helping to shape the ongoing changes in electronic commerce and banking. I would then like to apply this theme briefly to the historical development of retail payment systems, in order to provide some insights into the changes in products and delivery systems that are now taking place. Finally, I would like to touch on the role of the central bank in addressing these developments and provide some information on the work of the Federal Reserve's Payments System Development Committee. Convenience, Confidence, and Complexity Electronic commerce is growing rapidly as our technologies for processing, analyzing, and transmitting vast quantities of data continue their extraordinary development. Consumer and business practices across a number of markets are changing, in some cases dramatically. In the end, there may be far-reaching and positive implications for the structure and efficiency of many of our markets. Three key sets of variables that are shaping electronic transactions and electronic commerce can be summarized under the headings of convenience, confidence, and complexity. Convenience refers to the capital, labor, time, and other real resources needed to conduct a transaction. Obviously, consumers and businesses wish to optimize the resources expended in conducting a transaction. Confidence refers to the trust that parties have in the elements of a transaction that generate risk to them. Financial, operational, security, and legal risks are relevant here as in many other contexts. Particular attention is currently being paid to the complex of "trust variables" relating to the authentication of transactions and parties, as well as to issues of privacy. Complexity is a shorthand reference to the ease with which the key features of a transaction can be standardized and automated and, ultimately, understood by the parties to the transaction. As we have now learned, however, it is not the good or service itself, sometimes called content, that necessarily has to be standardized in order to participate in electronic commerce. Rather it is the sales transaction and key related services that need to be standardized. There appear to be important tradeoffs among the convenience, confidence, and complexity variables that shape choices about electronic as well as other transactions. Greater convenience in transacting through open data communication networks, for example, may increase security and privacy risks and reduce user confidence. Greater complexity, in turn, may reduce the convenience of transacting electronically through data networks. One fundamental point, however, is that ongoing changes in technology are improving the terms of these tradeoffs, sometimes in several dimensions at the same time. For example, traditional constraints on the timing and location of economic transactions are being relaxed simultaneously and rapidly in a number of markets, leading to large potential gains in convenience. Through the use of the Internet and automated business systems, many markets can now be open twenty-four hours per day at very low marginal costs. Transactions can take place at much more convenient times tailored to the specific needs of individuals and businesses, with either immediate delivery of services in some cases or with later delivery in others. New technologies are also reducing the need for buyers and sellers to meet at one location as well as the need for computers and telephones to be tied to traditional wire networks. The result is that even some traditional retail markets increasingly seem ubiquitous and global. In addition, as convenience factors such as time and location are changing, significant efforts are being made to strengthen confidence in electronic transactions. Various encryption systems have been deployed. Developments in public key infrastructure are being closely followed. Considerable attention continues to be paid to strengthening the law governing electronic transactions. And privacy has reemerged as a crucial commercial and legal issue. Electronic Banking Electronic commerce involving banks is subject to the same forces as those affecting many other industries. New communications channels and devices, coupled with automated systems, allow a bank and its customers to transact an expanding range of business at virtually any time. According to recent statistics, nearly 40 percent of all U.S. banks now provide some form of web site through which they can communicate with customers, and nearly 15 percent provide web sites that can be used to conduct banking transactions. These numbers are growing rapidly. Of the banks with more than $500 million in assets, nearly 50 percent now provide web sites that can be used to conduct transactions. In parallel with the development of new transaction systems, there is an ongoing trend toward standardizing and automating banking products, including loan products, which traditionally required special attention and approvals along with thick files of documents. As in other industries, this combination of developments is calling into question the size of investments in traditional delivery mechanisms, which are now disparaged as "legacy systems" and "brick and mortar" investments. As in other industries, banks are increasingly examining both the relative importance of their various delivery channels and the degree to which their products and services are integrated across the channels. In this environment, banks are continuing to experiment with new technologies, services, and business models. It is natural that there is both uncertainty and intense market competition surrounding promising innovations. Because of the rapidly changing nature of electronic commerce, some of these innovations will undoubtedly press the very definitions of banking. Of course there are also risks, along with the new business opportunities. These risks will continue to require careful monitoring and management. To do otherwise would undermine the hard-won confidence that once lost is not easily regained. Payments Turning to payments, traditional payment mechanisms such as currency and checks have held the field against many challengers for more than a century. Undoubtedly the confidence that has been built up in traditional payment instruments has played a major role in their continuing success. Very interesting innovations, however, are being announced almost every day. Many of these innovations are being driven by efforts to improve the convenience of payment instruments and systems, including the timing and availability of electronic payments. It might be instructive to review briefly the history of retail payments to understand how the tradeoff among convenience, confidence, and complexity has worked. Looking back, the check was used in North America as long ago as colonial times. Businesses, in particular, were early users. The widespread use of the check by consumers did not occur in the United States until after World War II. Rising levels of income and restored confidence in the banking system led to the growth of deposit banking. Checks were used increasingly to make purchases over the counter as well as to pay bills. Checks allowed users to make payments for small as well as very large amounts at any time of the day, without needing to visit a banking office to obtain cash. Checks also allowed users to pay bills without visiting physical locations designated by service providers such as utility companies and other major billers. Thus checks offered more choices regarding the time and location for making payments and, at the same time, reduced the risk of theft and loss associated with cash payments. Ironically, innovations such as automated teller machines, which are not payment instruments but delivery mechanisms for cash, may well have supported the use of cash relative to checks or newer forms of electronic payments. ATMs initially offered a key banking service--cash withdrawals--around the clock. With the latest surge in deployments, ATMs seem now to be located on nearly every street corner. Over the longer term, the expansion of ATM networks and their integration into broad "point-of-sale" networks may ultimately improve the convenience of and increase the demand for on-line debit cards. In countries such as Canada and the United Kingdom, 20 percent or more of noncash transactions are now made by debit card over nationwide networks. Credit cards offer another interesting example. Credit cards began more than 75 years ago as store charge cards. These cards received a boost in the 1960s with the creation of branded bank cards and have since grown in popularity. The cards can be used on a 24-hour basis. Initially, the locations where they could be used were limited, but these have grown significantly along with overall credit card use in recent years. Consumers and merchants have now widely adopted credit cards to make payments arising from electronic commerce. There have also been efforts to make the use of credit cards over open networks more secure and to increase protections to cardholders. Other attempts at payment innovations also suggest that convenience, confidence, and complexity are important. The automated clearinghouse, designed to provide a very low cost electronic payment mechanism, has been very successful in automating many types of recurring payments. Early uses of the ACH, however, did not generally provide for flexible interfaces with consumers and businesses. To make an ad hoc electronic payment over the ACH, for example, would generally have required a special trip to a full-service banking office during regular business hours. From the standpoint of timing and location for making such types of payments, the check was clearly a superior instrument for consumers and many types of businesses. Some recent innovations such as point-of-sale check truncation and electronic bill payment systems now provide interfaces between the ACH and consumers and businesses that may significantly stimulate the use of the ACH over the longer term. In pilot tests of stored-value products, consumers have been able to use innovations such as stored-value cards only at very limited numbers of locations. There have been no real market tests yet of cards that can be reloaded at home computers or telephones. In theory, this capability could be equivalent to placing an ATM in every household. On balance, because consumers have not perceived the characteristics of stored-value cards to yet equal or improve on those of cash, it is no wonder that the cards have not done well commercially in early trials. However, providers of stored-value products have an incentive to make the use of those cards more attractive than cash in terms of the tradeoff among convenience, confidence and complexity. If they do that, it is quite possible that future tests will be more successful. Potential Lessons and Innovations Our experience with innovations in the payment system suggests several lessons. First and foremost, an innovation should have a "value proposition" that works for both providers and users. Providers must be able to earn a competitive return on the product, otherwise they will have no incentive to supply the innovation to the marketplace. For users, innovative products will need to offer combinations of convenience, confidence, and complexity in making payments that provide advantages over existing payment instruments and systems and to be competitively priced. Innovations that simply offer greater convenience but lower confidence may not be successful. Conversely, innovations that offer somewhat less convenience but improve confidence factors such as security and privacy may also be less than successful, at least initially. The final judgments in these cases, however, will have to be made by consumers and businesses in the marketplace as they weigh different variables against each other. Second, innovations in payment systems may provide new ways of doing business for providers and users that go beyond the process of payment itself. Electronic payment mechanisms, in particular, may lead to the combination of financial, payment, and other activities in new ways, particularly if data are brought together at one time and location for users. Indeed, new software offers low-cost opportunities to combine data and activities in ways that may not even have seemed practical a few years ago. Current electronic bill payment services and projects are one example. It is becoming increasingly convenient not only to make on-line bill payments but also to combine this activity electronically with financial analysis, cash and investment management, record management, and related functions. Third, electronic payment systems typically require a communications infrastructure along with technical, business, and legal rules in order to function effectively. The advent of the Internet and other types of network services may reduce the cost and complexity of putting such infrastructure in place. Relatively little new infrastructure was required to use the Internet and existing credit card networks as communication tools for making credit card payments to support electronic commerce, and growth has been rapid. Other innovations may also be able to build on the Internet and established payment networks, such as the ATM and ACH networks, in order to expand the range of payment options in electronic commerce. Fourth, economic "network effects" may be important in determining which innovations succeed or fail, at least in the short run. In general, one aspect of a network effect is that the value of a network to its users increases as more users join. We are familiar with this effect in the telephone and other communications markets. In payments, if too few consumers or merchants use a payment network or a new instrument, the system may not be sufficiently valuable to its users for it to become economically viable. To date, some innovations such as stored-value products may have been less than successful in part because of these effects. The Role of Government and the Federal Reserve Despite some of the challenges in shifting from a paper-based to a more electronic payment system, it is clear that the United States fundamentally has a safe and reliable retail payment system. As that system continues to evolve, the private sector will play the pivotal role in most innovations, while the Federal Reserve will also continue to play a strong and important role. In general, government, including the Federal Reserve, must continue to foster the safety and soundness of the payment and financial system, promote competitive markets, and ensure adequate levels of consumer protection. The Federal Reserve can also continue to modernize its existing payment services and work with the private sector to identify and, when appropriate, address barriers to payment-system innovation. Last July, the Board announced the formation of the Payments System Development Committee, which I co-chair with Cathy Minehan, the President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston. This new group is focusing on key medium- and long-term public policy issues surrounding the development of the retail payment system. In particular, the Committee is seeking to work with the public to identify barriers to the future development of the payment system and to recommend solutions to the Board and other authorities. During this year, the Committee is focusing on four important areas relating to retail and low-value commercial payments. First, we are attempting to learn from both Federal Reserve and private-sector experience with truncation and electronic check presentment, and to identify barriers to greater use of electronic technologies to collect checks. Second, we are assessing gaps in standards that may be inhibiting payment system innovation. Third, we are reviewing legal and regulatory issues, with an emphasis this year on the legal underpinnings for converting checks to electronic payments. Finally, we are examining the long-run strengths and weaknesses of the clearing and settlement systems for electronic payments. In addition, the Committee is following with great interest the many payment innovations that are currently taking place in the market. Most importantly, the Payments System Development Committee is seeking to foster communication with the public about the development of the retail payment system through meetings, workshops, and other forums. Conclusion Overall, a number of innovations are taking place in the retail payment system, along with very creative thinking by both traditional and nontraditional participants. Many of these innovations closely mirror much broader developments in electronic commerce and banking. Payment system innovations that improve efficiency and confidence are welcome developments. Because of the complex nature of our economy and the fundamental role of the market, many of these innovations will necessarily come from the private sector. A particularly important challenge for the Federal Reserve is to find effective ways to work with the private sector to identify and address genuine obstacles to innovation so that today's promise can give rise to tomorrow's achievements.
Remarks by Vice Chairman Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. At the New Economy Forum, Haas School of Business, University of California, Berkeley, Portola Valley, CA May 9, 2000 Conversation with Leaders of the "New Economy" Thank you for inviting me here today to discuss with you the "new" economy and its implications. As always, the views I will be expressing are my own and are not necessarily shared by other members of the Board of Governors or the FOMC. With my normal disclaimer out of the way, I'd like to turn to a brief review of the extraordinary performance of the U.S. economy over the past five years. Since 1995, real gross domestic product has grown, on average, more than 4-1/4 percent per year. This is significantly above the pace in the previous five years, and you have to go back to the decade of the 1960s to find even closely comparable periods of consistently robust economic expansion. In this environment, the unemployment rate has fallen to 4 percent, and the underlying rate of price inflation has slowed, on net, despite very high rates of resource utilization. Even the most optimistic of forecasters could not have anticipated such a favorable confluence of economic events. Productivity Growth and Cost Reductions So, what happened? As a policymaker, I'd like to think that well-executed monetary and fiscal policies played some role in creating an economic environment that was conducive to non-inflationary economic growth. Our economy has also benefited from past actions by the government to deregulate industries. The removal of unnecessary government regulation started more than twenty years ago, during the administration of President Ford, and gathered momentum during the Carter years. It has altered the business landscape. Deregulation allowed, indeed forced, businesses to focus more clearly on a marketplace that has become more competitive, with fewer constraints and increased flexibility. But the dominant force of late appears to have been a significant upshift in the rate of productivity growth. After increasing 1.6 percent per year from 1990 to 1995, output per hour in the nonfarm business sector--a conventional measure of productivity--has increased at an annual pace of about 2.6 percent since 1995. Cyclical forces--such as the inability of businesses to add to their payrolls as rapidly as they would have liked in response to the rise in demand--have probably played some role in these efficiency gains. But I suspect that longer-term, structural changes, reflecting the boom in capital spending and the revolution in information technology, probably have been more important. I will return to the evidence of this point shortly. Why are the growth rate of productivity and the sources of that growth so important to policymakers? Very simply, economic theory indicates that, over the long run, faster growth of labor productivity allows faster growth of real wages--that is, wages adjusted for inflation. Without faster growth in productivity, businesses faced with a nominal wage bill that is increasing faster than productivity would be tempted to pass those increased labor costs to consumers in the form of higher prices for goods and services in order to protect profit margins. Adding the growth rate of labor productivity, or output per hour, to the growth rate of the number of labor hours gives an approximation of the rate of increase in the economy's ability to create goods and services. Since labor hours tend to be determined in the long run by increases in the working-age population, growth in productivity is the focal point. Why then are the sources of productivity growth important? If that growth in productivity is due to a change that outlasts the business cycle, then economists and policymakers can have confidence that the productive potential of the economy has changed. Economists speak of that as "trend" productivity and the resulting growth rate as the "trend" growth rate. The structural changes that I mentioned above have had effects beyond increasing the rate of productivity growth. They have also enhanced the ability of businesses to reduce their operating expenses. In many industries, investments in information technologies have helped firms to cut back on the volume of inventories that they hold as a precaution against glitches in their supply chain or as a hedge against unexpected increases in aggregate demand. In fact, we have seen that the ratio of inventory to sales and inventory to shipments have both trended down since 1995. Product development costs have probably also been reduced through the use of better computer hardware and software, and new communications technologies have increased the speed with which firms can share information--both internally and with their customers and suppliers. This intense focus on cost reduction has been an important element in helping to head off the development of inflationary pressures in this expansion. Moreover, given intense competition and the resultant lack of pricing "leverage," ongoing programs to reduce costs have become a key part of corporate strategies to maintain or improve profit margins. Technology Change and Productivity Growth Bob Solow--the MIT economist who won the Nobel Prize in economics for his work on the theory of economic growth--once quipped that you can see computers everywhere except in the productivity statistics! That situation has recently begun to change, and we now have strong evidence that the productivity growth that our economy has experienced is in fact due in part to newer technologies. Research by two economists on the Board staff--Steve Oliner and Dan Sichel--sheds some light on the sources of this faster productivity growth. About one-half of the 1 percentage point increase in productivity growth over the 1995-1999 period can be attributed to so-called "capital deepening." As everyone here is well aware, providing your workers with more equipment improves his or her efficiency. Likewise, at the aggregate level, the high (and rising) levels of business investment raised the amount of capital per worker and thereby boosted productivity. It is also interesting to note that most of the capital deepening reflected greater spending by businesses on high-tech equipment: computers, software, and communications equipment. Another 1/2 percentage point of the pickup in productivity growth reflected technological innovations in the actual production of computer hardware and semiconductors as well as better management--perhaps assisted by these high-tech investments--of the nation's capital and labor resources. Oliner and Sichel estimate that, if one consolidates all the influences of high-tech investments, they account for about two-thirds of the acceleration in productivity since 1995. This research supports the view that fundamental changes are under way in our economy. But technological waves ebb and flow, and it is natural to ask whether we can count on such rapid productivity growth in the future. On this score, I am cautiously optimistic. But, as an economist, I need to see hard evidence of actual ongoing productivity gains or cost reductions in the economic statistics to truly believe that the world is continuing to change in a fundamental way. I am confident that the efficiency gains that have already been achieved are permanent: The investments have been made, the technologies are in place and are being disseminated, and production is proceeding apace. But I think that it is wise to get support for the assertions that all of the new technologies and business practices now coming to the fore will prove to be as revolutionary as some of their marketing materials suggest. Clearly, there is great potential to improve efficiency using Internet-based e-commerce strategies such as electronic marketplaces and business-to-business supply chain management. But no one really knows how big those productivity gains will be, how long they will take to be realized, and who will be the ultimate beneficiaries. Have not other technologies emerged over the past fifty years--such as the television, the jet engine, or even air conditioning--that were equally revolutionary? Indeed the transatlantic cable and telephone probably revolutionized communications as much as any other technology. The Internet has attracted the most media and public attention as a symbol of the new economy. It clearly improves communication, collapsing time and space, but are we overstating the potential benefits of this one, admittedly stunning, innovation? Does the Internet have the potential to continuously improve business processes, as some enthusiasts argue, and if it does, what conditions are required to achieve that? I hope that, given the expertise of the participants at this symposium, we can return to these and related questions in the discussion period. The Macroeconomic Implications of Faster Productivity Growth A step-up in the growth rate of technological change certainly would have important implications for economic activity and inflation. As I indicated above, the main reason policymakers and economists are interested in the growth rate of productivity is that understanding that rate gives a clear understanding of the economy's potential to supply goods and services. Where would we look for corroborating evidence of this improved growth rate in technological change? The most immediate effects would be on capital investment. A more rapid pace of technological change raises the real rate of return on new investments--perhaps significantly. Put another way, a more rapid pace of technological change makes investments in capital goods embodying the new technology more profitable. When businesses recognize the new technological possibilities, capital spending accelerates to take advantage of the new profit opportunities. Businesses can better produce more output with the same labor input. While supply-side effects are clear, a new higher level of productivity growth would also affect the demand side of the economy. The employment and income generated by business spending on capital goods boosts consumer spending and sets off another round of investment spending. Typically referred to by economists as "multiplier-accelerator" effects, such processes would continue as long as the real rate of return on a new capital project exceeded the real cost for capital for that project. This is the process through which an innovation on the supply side of the economy generates a comparable increase in aggregate demand. Theory also teaches that the increase in the rate of return on capital--even if generated by a rise in the growth rate of technical change--ultimately requires an increase in real market interest rates. Market interest rates must rise in order to maintain equilibrium between the demand for investment funds, which increases, and the supply of investment funds. And, indeed, we have seen that market interest rates, particularly for corporate issuers, have risen steadily for the last year or so. This somewhat abstract description of the effects of a step-up in the growth rate of technical change bears a striking resemblance to the developments in labor markets, prices of goods and services, capital investments, and fixed-income markets of recent years. But there's still an element missing. How does the performance of the stock market in recent years fit into this picture? A higher rate of technical change that raises the productivity and hence the profitability of capital should elevate the valuation of equities. But how much should stock values rise under those circumstances? Are stocks today overvalued, correctly valued, or undervalued? I certainly do not know, and I am not aware of anyone who does. As a result, I believe that it would be unwise--and indeed impossible--for the Federal Reserve to target specific levels of valuations in equity markets. However, equity markets obviously do have spillover effects on the real economy and, thus, need to be considered in assessing the aggregate balance of supply and demand. Given the efficiency and forward-looking nature of financial markets, even future technical innovations will have an immediate effect on equity valuations. Equity valuations in turn can influence consumer behavior. As you know, economists often speak of the "wealth effect," and econometric modeling indicates that consumers tend to raise the level of their spending between 2 and 5 cents for every incremental dollar of wealth over a period of two to three years. As a consequence, equity valuations can have a noticeable effect on consumption and on macroeconomic performance. Additionally, equity markets are a source of investment capital, and valuations in the stock market are one determinant of the cost of capital for businesses. To put a rough number on these influences, simulations by the Board staff using our econometric model of the economy suggest that wealth generated in the equity markets over the last four years added about 1 percentage point to the growth rate of real GDP. Some particularly enthusiastic observers of the "new" economy argue that inflationary pressures are no longer a risk. I firmly believe that we should recognize that, even in a high-productivity economy, stresses and imbalances might emerge. In the present context, the most obvious indication of an imbalance is the current account deficit, which is both large and growing. This means that we are financing investment with savings from overseas. The other indicator of an imbalance between demand and supply growth is the gradual decline in the unemployment rate over the last few years. It may be that this imbalance has served only to bring the unemployment rate to a new and lower sustainable rate, but it is also true that the wedge between demand and supply growth cannot continue indefinitely because, once pressures on limited resources rise sufficiently, inflation will start to pick up. Monetary Policy and the "New" Economy As I have said many times before, uncertainty about productivity trends is a major challenge in the design and implementation of monetary policy. As you can imagine, it is very difficult to infer the true structure of the economy through the interpretation of the twists and turns of incoming economic data. How do we know, for example, if unexpected developments are just temporary movements away from stable longer-run relationships or are manifestations of changes in the underlying economic structure? In many cases, this judgment is difficult to make with much confidence even considerably after the fact. In the meantime, we must bear in mind that the statistical relationships we work with, embodied in our econometric models, are only loose approximations of the underlying reality. The considerable uncertainty regarding statistical constructs such as the "natural" rate of unemployment or the "sustainable" rate of growth of the economy suggest, in my judgment, the need to downplay forecasts of inflation based solely on those variables. Some fog always obstructs our vision, but when the structure of the economy is changing, the fog is considerably denser than at other times. What should be done when such uncertainties seem particularly acute? When we suspect that our understanding of the macroeconomic environment has deteriorated, as evidenced by strings of surprises difficult to reconcile with our earlier beliefs, I think that the appropriate response is to rely less upon the future predicted by the increasingly unreliable old models and more upon inferences from the more recent past. That means we should weight incoming data more heavily than data from decades past in trying to make judgments about the new economy and, of course, act appropriately when trends become clear. But, even for those of us who take this more pragmatic approach, there are many serious challenges. Economic data are notoriously volatile, are easily affected by a variety of special factors, and are subject to revision as more reliable or more complete sources become available. For example, there are several estimates of the growth in real GDP in any particular quarter. The so-called "advance" estimate contains numerous assumptions about missing source data. One month later, the "preliminary" estimate is produced with a more complete information set. And, one month after that, the "final" estimate is generated. But that's not the end of the story. Once a year the GDP data are revised again to incorporate the results of source data that are only available annually. Thus, over this revision window, the picture painted by the GDP data can change significantly, and policymakers obviously need to be aware of this to avoid attaching too much significance to any one piece of data. Moreover, it is at uncertain times such as these that the wisdom underlying the institutional structure of the FOMC becomes most apparent. A committee with broad representation can bring a variety of perspectives and analyses to bear on difficult economic problems. In addition, the anecdotal reports that the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks bring from their Districts are especially valuable in the decisionmaking process because they afford a "real-time" sense of what is going on in the economy. Such diversity of information sources becomes particularly useful when our earlier assessment of the economy's structure has been drawn into question by surprises, even pleasant ones. Even in a period of some uncertainty, monetary policy authorities have an important responsibility to remain vigilant with regard to inflationary pressures. Since in the long run there is no tradeoff between unemployment and inflation, we know that keeping inflation low and stable and maintaining an obvious stance of vigilance vis a vis inflation, so that inflation expectations are also relatively low, is the main value that a central bank can add to this equation. Besides the issue of how monetary policy should respond to a productivity shock, questions have recently resurfaced about the effectiveness of any actions that the Federal Reserve might take. Some analysts note that economic growth has not slowed even though the FOMC has raised the federal funds rate five times over the past year, and they draw the conclusion that the central bank has lost its effectiveness. I do not share that view. There have always been lags between the initiation of a monetary policy action and its effect on the economy. And, as Milton Friedman pointed out many years ago, these lags are "long and variable." Unanswered Questions As I promised, I will now pose several questions about the new economy to this gathering. I can assure you that this will not be a multiple-choice test, and it will ultimately be up to your shareholders and the American people to grade all of our answers. First, what has been so special about the technological developments since 1995? How quickly have the innovations to computing and communications technology diffused throughout the economy? How much diffusion of the current technologies remains to be accomplished? Second, what makes the Internet unique in its potential to improve productivity, and is the potential greater than that of other recent technological developments? What are the potential benefits--and costs--of the adoption of the commercial and communication strategies required to fully use the Internet? Does the Internet have the potential to continuously improve business processes, as some enthusiasts argue, and if it does, what conditions are required to achieve that? Third, how have you used information technology or the Internet to improve productivity or reduce costs in your own businesses? How far along are you in this process? How important is spending on research and development to the long-run competitive position of your own business and the pace of innovation in your industry? Are new technologies emerging from R&D that have the realistic potential to increase productivity growth in the economy even further? Fourth, do the methods used to value the so-called dot-coms differ from those used to value "old economy" companies, and should they differ? How should gross margins be considered in valuing dot-coms? Do tools used to value direct-mail companies apply to dot-coms? Given recent volatility in equity prices and the IPO market, are venture capital funds less forthcoming? Will new ventures still emerge at the same pace in a period of equity market volatility? Concluding Remarks In conclusion, let me remind you that, while these are challenging times for monetary policymakers and financial market participants, the U.S. economy is enjoying a period of unprecedented prosperity. Technological developments associated with the information revolution are truly transforming the way we work and play. Our job at the Federal Reserve is to do our utmost to produce a stable economic environment without inflation so that these trends can continue. I look forward to discussing these issues with you.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Office of the Comptroller of the Currency Office of Thrift Supervision AGENCIES APPROVE FINAL REGULATIONS FOR PRIVACY OF CONSUMER FINANCIAL INFORMATION The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Office of Thrift Supervision today approved the issuance of final regulations implementing the provisions of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act governing the privacy of consumer financial information. The regulations resulted from an interagency effort. They impose three main requirements established by the Act: Financial institutions must provide initial notices to customers about their privacy policies, describing the conditions under which they may disclose nonpublic personal information to nonaffiliated third parties and affiliates. These notices must be accurate, clear, and conspicuous. Financial institutions must provide annual notices of their privacy policies to their current customers. These notices must be accurate, clear, and conspicuous. Financial institutions must provide a reasonable method for consumers to "opt out" of disclosures to nonaffiliated third parties. That is, consumers must be given a reasonable opportunity to "opt out" and a reasonable means to do so. Consumers may exercise their "opt out" option at any time. The regulations, which are identical in all substantive respects, apply to financial institutions for which the agencies have primary supervisory authority. The regulations limit disclosure by financial institutions of "nonpublic personal information" about individuals who obtain financial products or services for personal, family, or household purposes. Subject to certain exceptions allowed by law, the regulations cover information sharing between financial institutions and nonaffiliated third parties. The regulations are effective November 13, 2000, but in order to provide sufficient time for financial institutions to establish policies and procedures and to put in place systems to implement the requirements of the regulations, the time for full compliance with the regulations is extended until July 1, 2001. The agencies expect the regulations to be published in the Federal Register within the next two weeks. The published regulations may contain nonsubstantive changes from the versions approved by each agency today. Media Contacts: Federal Reserve: Rose Pianalto (202) 452-2955 OCC: Bob Garsson (202) 874-5770 FDIC: Phil Battey (202) 898-7303 OTS: Patricia Cinelli (202) 906-6688 Federal Reserve: Rose Pianalto (202) 452-2955 OCC: Bob Garsson (202) 874-5770 FDIC: Phil Battey (202) 898-7303 OTS: Patricia Cinelli (202) 906-6688
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Office of the Comptroller of the Currency Office of Thrift Supervision AGENCIES PROPOSE RULE ON DISCLOSURE AND REPORTING OF CRA-RELATED AGREEMENTS The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the Office of Thrift Supervision jointly announced today their request for comment on a proposed rule implementing section 711, CRA Sunshine Requirements, of the recently enacted Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act. Section 711 establishes annual reporting and public disclosure requirements for certain written agreements between insured depository institutions or their affiliates and nongovernmental entities or persons (including business entities) made pursuant to, or in connection with, the fulfillment of the Community Reinvestment Act of 1977 (CRA). The proposed rule would implement the requirements of the statute. Section 711 exempts from coverage all agreements with nongovernmental entities or persons that have not had a contact concerning the CRA with the relevant banking organization or a banking agency. Certain types of loans and loan commitments also are exempt from coverage. The proposed rule would implement the exemptions in the statute. Consistent with the statute, the proposed rule seeks to implement the disclosure and reporting requirements of section 711 in a manner that limits potential burden. For example, the proposed rule would establish simple reporting procedures where possible and would allow nongovernmental entities or persons to use reports that they have prepared for other purposes-such as tax returns and financial statements-if these reports provide the information required by the Act. The agencies will accept comments on the proposed rule until July 21 . A copy of the proposed rule is attached. Media Contacts: Federal Reserve: Dave Skidmore (202) 452-2955 OCC: Bob Garsson (202) 874-5770 FDIC: Phil Battey (202) 898-6993 OTS: Bill Fulwider (202) 906-6913 Federal Reserve: Dave Skidmore (202) 452-2955 OCC: Bob Garsson (202) 874-5770 FDIC: Phil Battey (202) 898-6993 OTS: Bill Fulwider (202) 906-6913
Remarks by Vice Chairman Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. At the Cleveland Millennium Conference 2000, Cleveland, Ohio May 11, 2000 Economic Policy for Our Era: The Ohio Experience What Makes an Economy World-Class? A world-class economy, as I understand the term, is an economy that successfully competes at the international level. I doubt whether there are many places in this nation that have as clear a perspective on the world economy as does northeast Ohio. One-quarter of the nation's manufacturing output is produced in an area that lies within a half day's drive from Cleveland. The region generates more than 40 percent of the nation's transportation equipment, 30 percent of its industrial machinery, and 44 percent of its metals--industries that make up an important part of the nation's re-energized trade sector. Consider that Ohioans exported more than $2,200 in merchandise per person in 1997. About one in four dollars of metalworking machinery production, of which this region is a major contributor, was exported. Steel mill producers in Ohio--another of your revitalized industries--have more than doubled their export volumes since the mid-1980s. And in the transportation equipment industry, the foreign-owned Honda assembly plant in Marysville, Ohio, which produced roughly one-half million cars in 1998, is the largest automobile assembly plant in North America. Today, I would like to offer some observations, from the perspective of a policymaker, on the events that have already transformed much of the national and regional economies and that are continuing to reshape business around the globe. Specifically, I want to reflect on the changing role of economic policy in our current environment of rapidly improving communications and expanding markets. To sustain the gains that this region and other regions have made in the past decade and to best ensure our continued global competitiveness, we need to fashion economic policy that, above all else, helps to facilitate communication through efficient and effective markets. Recent Economic Developments The national economy is enjoying an impressive period of prosperity. National income, after adjusting for inflation, has grown about one-third since 1991--or by about 3 percent per year. U.S. joblessness has fallen to a level not seen in thirty years, and wealth is being created at a pace rarely seen. Growth in this region has been even more impressive. On a per capita basis, Ohioans have seen 5 percent more income growth than the nation during the past eight years. Economic strength is also reflected in local labor market indicators. After many years of subpar performance, and occasional periods of outright decline, the net growth of jobs in the region has kept pace with the exceptional U.S. average. Even more telling has been the remarkable pattern of the local unemployment rate. After averaging more than 1 percentage point above the national average in the 1980s, joblessness in the Cleveland area fell under the U.S. average in 1990 and has remained at, or below, the national benchmark every year since. The recent prosperity of the region reverses the previous twelve-year period of economic decline relative to the nation in a rather dramatic way. This decline, not so flatteringly referred to by some as the "rust-bowl era," took its toll on labor and business alike. After peaking in the early 1970s, the population of the six county area surrounding and including Cuyahoga County declined annually for nearly two straight decades. But since 1990, more families have been arriving than leaving, which can be due only to this area's rejuvenated economy. What accounts for this remarkable reversal in economic fortune? As I have said recently, on the national level, and in this region as well, the dominant force of late appears to have been a significant upshift in the rate of productivity growth. Having increased 1.6 percent per year from 1990 to 1995, output per hour in the nonfarm business sector--a conventional measure of productivity--has risen at an annual pace of about 2.6 percent since 1995. Cyclical forces--such as the inability of businesses to add to their payrolls as rapidly as they would have liked in response to the rise in demand--have probably played some role in these efficiency gains. But I suspect that longer-term, structural changes, reflecting the boom in capital spending and the revolution in information technology, probably have been more important. Through this increase in productivity, our national economy has successfully prepared itself to take advantage of the rapid globalization that has characterized the current economic expansion. While private decisions rightly deserve primacy in any discussion of the current economic climate, they were taken against the backdrop of important policy decisions. I believe that this productivity increase might not have occurred were it not for the policy adjustments that were made starting in the late 1970s and continuing even today. Furthermore, the opening of many nations' economies to our goods and services reflects, in my judgment, the fact that the world's policymakers have, in general, abandoned the economic policies that were found to be counterproductive. In the end, free trade, deregulation, sound fiscal policy, and sound monetary policy have all played a role in the strength of the U.S. economy. These same factors are emerging as equally important in other economies. Economic Prosperity, Trade, and Global Integration In economics, nothing is more fundamental than trade. Trade allows us individually, and as a nation, to devote our scarce resources to their most advantageous uses and then exchange our products with others to satisfy our diverse preferences. This process allows specialization, and it is what gives rise to the existence of markets. The lifeblood of trade is communication. Communication allows us to find the most profitable outlets for our products and suppliers for our needs and wants. The greater our capacity to communicate, the greater our ability to specialize, the broader our expanse of markets, and the more prosperous we become. These are not new ideas. They have been our understanding of how nations become wealthy since being described by Adam Smith more than two hundred years ago. Today, we are experiencing a great technological revolution--a communications revolution. The proliferation of microprocessors and other innovations of the past several decades has dramatically lowered the costs of getting and transmitting information. Predictably, the new communications technology has brought with it a growth of new markets. This great expansion of markets has allowed the U.S. economy to improve its allocation of resources by shifting them to their most internationally competitive uses. It also seems probable that these new communications technologies have brought greater openness in global markets by helping us to break down the complex and unproductive network of artificial trade barriers that characterized much of the previous century. The role of international trade and finance in bringing renewed prosperity in the past decade to the economy of Ohio is noteworthy. From 1987 to 1997, Ohio's exports grew 60 percent faster than exports overall in the United States--and U.S. export growth was very strong indeed. By 1997, the state had jumped from being the eleventh highest export state to being the seventh. And in 1996, the Cleveland area ranked twenty-third in the top seventy export communities in the nation. This region's influence in the world economy appears to be still growing as its capital base expands. Data from the U.S. Bureau of the Census indicate that, between 1982 and 1996, the amount of new capital added in Ohio industry grew as a share of all U.S. capital additions. Specifically, while U.S. industry was adding about 4 percent per year to its stock of industrial capital, Ohio was adding capital to its industry at a 5 percent clip. In 1998 and 1999, slightly more than 2,100 new major projects were begun in Ohio, which puts the state among the top five states in attracting and expanding business. Moreover, about 6 percent of these business expansions were financed by foreign investors, of which slightly more than one-third were Asian investors and about one-half were European. The Ohio Department of Development estimates that 851 foreign-owned corporations provided only slightly less than one in twenty jobs in the state last year. Almost 75 percent of the foreign establishments were in the manufacturing sector, where trade opportunities have been the greatest. And the single largest regional concentration of foreign-owned businesses in the state was in Cuyahoga County, with 145 establishments. What has this investment wrought? Today, output per hour in the region's manufacturing sector is hardly reminiscent of the economy of fifteen years ago. In industrial machinery manufacturing, for example, new capital expenditures almost doubled between 1987 and 1996, well in excess of the national average. At the same time, the productivity of Ohio industrial machinery workers jumped from more than 10 percent below the national average to more than 10 percent above the national average. This story can be repeated for a number of industries throughout the region. The Cost of Growth Economic transformation has not come without cost. Between 1977 and 1987, U.S. industry reduced production jobs in manufacturing by 1.4 million workers. More than 200,000--or 15 percent--of those jobs were in Ohio. Of those job losses, over half were centered in two industries--primary metals manufacturing and industrial machinery manufacturing--each losing more than 50,000 jobs over the decade. In fact, the region's new competitiveness could probably not have occurred were it not for the dramatic changes this area's economy experienced in the 1980s. Is economic progress possible that does not make obsolete the methods and practices of the earlier, less efficient economy? In his 1950 book Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy , economist Joseph Schumpeter described capitalism as a system "that incessantly revolutionizes the economic structure from within, incessantly destroying the old one, incessantly creating a new one." Schumpeter saw that economies continually bounce from one growth path to another, all the time remaking themselves. He coined the phrase "creative destruction" to describe this process. Simply put, economies are constantly under competitive pressure to re-invent themselves. As they move toward higher levels of productivity, they necessarily make other production technologies obsolete. Schumpeter cautioned that economic policymakers who fail to appreciate the relationship between the relentless churning of the competitive environment and wealth creation will end up focusing their efforts on the methods and skills that are in decline. In so doing, they establish policies that are aimed at protecting weak, outdated technologies, and in the end, they slow the economy's march forward. In retrospect, we can tell that some economic policies of the past century have inadvertently, or in some cases intentionally, done just that. They have had the effect of directing or misdirecting economic growth by either substituting policymakers' judgment regarding the distribution of an economy's assets for the combined wisdom of individuals or allowing markets to send false signals. In the long run, such policies were destined to fail. The Economic Policies of the Last Century A very broad reading of economic history reveals that policymakers in many countries during the last century attempted to manipulate trade and other forms of economic activity by altering, artificially, the measures of value, that is, prices. One such policy followed by some countries during the last century was known as the "beggar thy neighbor" policy, the manipulation of the exchange rate in order to boost a country's exports. Trade restrictions were also often used to protect domestic industries from imports. A final example from the international sphere is the system of global fixed exchange rates that emerged following the Second World War. To blunt market forces, fixed exchange rates were usually accompanied by capital controls that tried to manage the inflows--and more importantly the outflows--of a nation's investment funds. Ultimately, this system of global fixed exchange rates worked poorly and could not withstand the market forces that emerged in the 1970s. In a similar spirit, some economies used taxes or other incentives to promote one industrial activity or discourage another. Obviously, the most egregious form of this policy was in planned economies. But many democratic economies, as they recovered from various wars and other national traumas, nationalized entire industries. In our society, we never found that degree of government intervention appropriate, but we did regulate some business decisions for certain industries, such as electric power distribution and airlines, attempting to overcome the "natural monopoly" or "excessive competition" characteristics perceived in these industries. Finally, some central banks in the past engaged in policies that artificially altered the path of domestic prices in their effort to regulate their business cycles. If the monetary authority wanted more growth above trend, it lowered money-market interest rates by expanding the stock of money. Such policies were expected to bolster demand and encourage an acceleration of growth. There was the misunderstanding that somehow a long-run tradeoff existed between inflation and unemployment. But it gradually became understood that inflation eroded investor and consumer confidence and distorted behavior, both because the average of prices gave a constantly depreciating reading of the values it was supposed to represent and because relative prices provided an inaccurate reflection of comparative worth. Monetary policies that intended to create growth through the inflation of prices ended up impeding markets and reducing economic prosperity. We now know that there is no long-run tradeoff between inflation and unemployment. The U.S. experience of the last several years has also taught us that low and stable inflation is the underpinning for sustainable growth and that sustainable growth fosters the maximum creation of jobs over time. Emergence of the Communications Era In recent decades, trade restrictions, "beggar thy neighbor" policies, and the pursuit of a supposed long-run tradeoff between inflation and unemployment have all been called into question and generally rejected. In part because of the communications revolution and the substantially reduced costs of transacting from great distances, businesses have sought more globally integrated production processes, and investors have required the development of financial instruments to facilitate their demand for international portfolio diversification. Such developments have put enormous pressure on policymakers to loosen their grip or abandon policies that led to the misallocation of resources. Tariffs have been reduced, and restrictions on the flow of goods have been eased. Controls on the flow of investment capital have been eliminated in most industrialized countries, and they are rapidly coming down in many developing nations as well. In some cases, these changes were more or less forced upon the nations that adopted them. But in many instances the policies have been liberalized because of the realization that markets allocate resources more effectively than governments. Trade is flourishing, gaining great momentum in the ten years since the fall of the Berlin Wall. Total trade with foreigners now accounts for about one-quarter of total U.S. national output--more than twice the share of the period between 1920 and 1970 and the largest trade share for the U.S. economy in more than a century. Not coincidentally, the economy has been expanding at a strong and steady rate. In addition, our economy has benefited from past actions by the government to deregulate industries. The removal of unnecessary government regulation started more than twenty years ago, during the administration of President Ford, and gathered momentum during the Carter years. It has altered the business landscape. Deregulation allowed, indeed forced, businesses to focus more clearly on a marketplace that has become more competitive, with fewer constraints and increased flexibility. If economic policy is to play a constructive role in building a new world economy, policymakers must increasingly focus on policies that eliminate barriers to communication and allow the market to work most efficiently and effectively. They must develop approaches that do not hinder "creative destruction" but appropriately cushion its impact on workers and communities. They can encourage the information revolution by fostering policies and approaches conducive to giving investors and consumers the information they require to make informed decisions. For example, the Federal Reserve and the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision have strongly supported initiatives to improve the quality of national and international disclosure practices. Credible financial statements and other disclosures are key means for communicating a company's operating results and its overall health, as well as for making more transparent various operating activities. Regarding monetary policy, central banks around the world are now endeavoring to provide stability to their domestic price levels. In some cases, this focus on price stability was undertaken in order to return credibility to the central bank after a period of unacceptable inflationary pressures. The Federal Reserve, with our mandate, must also seek to facilitate the transmission of the information that the price level is meant to convey. By maintaining a stable purchasing power for money, workers and firms will more clearly see the values being attached to their opportunities and more effectively make judgments about the allocation of their resources. This is a monetary policy that does not attempt to alter the information being transmitted by the marketplace but to increase its clarity and consistency. The increased openness of Federal Reserve decisions--reflected in announcement policies aimed at more rapid and transparent dissemination of Federal Open Market Committee decisions--also needs to be appreciated as a way to facilitate the communication to and within the marketplace in order to promote the most effective policy possible. Policies for a Communications Era--A Local Perspective This perspective on economic policy extends beyond the establishment of the national monetary policy that occupies much of my time. A popular bumper sticker says, "Think Globally, Act Locally." Good advice. Indeed, this simple maxim describes one of the great strengths of the Federal Reserve System. Although many tend to think of the Federal Reserve as a Washington-centric institution, it is, in fact, a structure of twelve independent regional Reserve Banks, one of which is just a few blocks from here, teamed in harness with the Board of Governors in Washington. Reserve Banks have always had an important role in channeling regional economic information into the deliberations of national economic policy. Today, they take those responsibilities a step further. In closing, let me give a few examples of some of the local programs that are conceived in this spirit. The latest data from the U.S. Census Bureau indicate that Cleveland and Northeast Ohio lag behind other metropolitan areas in small business growth. Linked by a desire to improve the success rate of small business, the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, the U.S. Small Business Association, and the Greater Cleveland Growth Association's Council of Smaller Enterprises in 1997 started the Access to Capital Initiative. The purpose of the initiative was to narrow the gap between the need for and the availability of startup and expansion capital in Northeast Ohio. This collaborative, comprehensive approach to identifying gaps and barriers to capital access and developing a strategic, community-based plan to address those deficiencies has led to the creation of the Access to Capital Network. The network will be an umbrella organization that will link small and midsize businesses to the region's provider of capital and business assistance, primarily through an easy-to-use, interactive software system available free at its web site. The Cleveland Reserve Bank has also worked with community organizations throughout the Fourth Federal Reserve District to develop resources to promote microenterprise. Microenterprises are very small businesses of less than five employees. These businesses can potentially grow and make greater contributions to the local economy if they can find the capital to do so and if they have adequate access to the technical advice that is often provided to them by community-based organizations. The Cleveland Fed provides technical expertise to these community-based organizations and helps them establish partnerships with financial institutions and other community stakeholders. These are not policies that hope to provide preferential access to financial markets, and they are not directed at particular enterprises. Instead, they are designed to provide the forums, contacts, and skill sets necessary to form the relationships that facilitate business growth. More generally, the Federal Reserve hopes to promote a better understanding among policymakers, community leaders, and private-sector decisionmakers about the resources that support successful economic development. Conclusion As an economic policymaker, I believe that "Building a World-Class Economy" isn't at all about trying to manufacture various economic outcomes. Fortunately, most policymakers have come to recognize that their role in building world-class economies is to help develop the infrastructure through which people communicate. We need to provide the public with the tools that allow them to judge value accurately and to see opportunities with the greatest clarity. Economic policy, including monetary policy, has to be an integral part of the communications revolution that is sweeping the world. These are the policies appropriate for our era.
Remarks by Vice Chairman Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. Before the Florida Council of 100, Washington, D.C. May 12, 2000 Economic Policy for Our Era: The Florida Experience Today, I would like to offer some observations, from the perspective of a policymaker, on the events that have already transformed much of the national and regional economies and that are continuing to reshape business around the globe. Specifically, I want to reflect on the changing role of economic policy in our current environment of rapidly improving communications and expanding markets. In order to sustain the gains that Florida and other regions have made in the past decade, and to best ensure our continued global competitiveness, we need to fashion economic policy that, above all else, helps to facilitate communication through efficient and effective markets. Recent Growth Trends The national economy is enjoying an impressive period of economic prosperity. National income, after adjusting for inflation, has grown about one-third since 1991--or about 3 percent per year. The rate of U.S. joblessness has fallen to a level not seen in thirty years, and wealth is being created at a pace rarely seen. Growth in Florida has been even more impressive. Florida has always had a large service sector because of the tourism and medical industries. The recession associated with the Gulf War had a disproportionate impact on Florida's growth, and your state started the decade with a slightly deeper recession than the rest of the Southeast and the nation as a whole. In early 1992, the state began to systematically outperform the nation overall, and that has continued to the present. Year-over-year employment growth in Florida has outstripped that of the rest of both the Southeast and the United States since 1992. The recent job growth and prosperity of the state has been powered by two components of services, tourism and back-office type business services. There was a dramatic surge in service-sector growth beginning in 1997 that was associated with expansions of capacity in Orlando and, to a lesser extent, Miami. The more recent surge has been mainly the movement of back-office corporate functions, such as call centers, into the state, which have relocated mostly to the northern metropolitan areas of Tampa, Jacksonville, and Tallahassee. These service industries depend importantly on modern communications, a theme to which I will return shortly. Florida also has significant international exposure, with approximately one-half of Florida's exports going to Latin America. Brazil and Mexico are two major trading partners. The export mix from Florida includes computer and communications equipment as well as industrial chemicals and fertilizers. In the service sector, south Florida, as the gateway to Latin America, continues to attract the interest of banking organizations from around the world. In the state, foreign banks from twenty-three countries compete with domestic banks in the areas of international private banking, trade finance, and correspondent banking. What accounts for this remarkable reversal in economic fortune? As I have said recently, on the national level, and possibly in Florida as well, the dominant force of late appears to have been a significant upshift in the rate of productivity growth. Having increased 1.6 percent per year from 1990 to 1995, output per hour in the nonfarm business sector--a conventional measure of productivity--has risen at an annual pace of about 2.6 percent since 1995. Cyclical forces--such as the inability of businesses to add to their payrolls as rapidly as they would have liked in response to the rise in demand--have probably played some role in these efficiency gains. But I suspect that longer-term, structural changes, reflecting the boom in capital spending and the revolution in information technology, probably have been more important. Through this increase in productivity, our national economy has successfully prepared itself to take advantage of the rapid globalization that has characterized the current economic expansion. Although private decisions rightly deserve primacy in any discussion of the current economic climate, they were taken against the backdrop of important policy decisions. I believe that this productivity increase might not have occurred were it not for the policy adjustments that were started in the late 1970s and are continuing even today. Furthermore, the opening of many nations' economies to our goods and services reflects, in my judgment, the fact that the world's policymakers have, in general, abandoned the economic policies that were found to be counterproductive. In the end, free trade, deregulation, sound fiscal policy, and sound monetary policy have all played a role in the strength of the U.S. economy. These same factors are emerging as equally important in other economies. Economic Prosperity, Trade, and Global Integration In economics, nothing is more fundamental than trade. Trade allows us individually, and as a nation, to devote our scarce resources to their most advantageous uses and then exchange our products with others to satisfy our diverse preferences. This process allows specialization, and it is what gives rise to the existence of markets. The lifeblood of trade is communication. Communication allows us to find the most profitable outlets for our products and suppliers for our needs and wants. The greater our capacity to communicate, the greater our ability to specialize, the broader our expanse of markets, and the more prosperous we become. These are not new ideas. They have been our understanding of how nations become wealthy since being described by Adam Smith more than two hundred years ago. Today, we are experiencing a great technological revolution--a communications revolution. The proliferation of microprocessors and other innovations of the past several decades has dramatically lowered the costs of getting and transmitting information. Predictably, the new communications technology has brought with it a growth of new markets. This great expansion of markets has allowed the U.S. economy to improve its allocation of resources by shifting them to their most internationally competitive uses. It also seems probable that these new communications technologies have brought greater openness in global markets by helping us to break down the complex and unproductive network of artificial trade barriers that characterized much of the previous century. The role of international trade and finance in bringing renewed prosperity to our economy in the past decade is hard to overemphasize. Total trade with foreigners now accounts for about one-quarter of the total U.S. national output--more than twice the share of the period between 1920 and 1970 and the largest trade share of the U.S. economy in more than a century. The Cost of Growth Economic transformation has not come without cost. Between 1977 and 1987, U.S. industry reduced production jobs in manufacturing by 1.4 million workers. Is economic progress possible that does not make obsolete the methods and practices of the earlier, less efficient economy? In his 1950 book Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy , economist Joseph Schumpeter described capitalism as a system "that incessantly revolutionizes the economic structure from within, incessantly destroying the old one, incessantly creating a new one." Schumpeter saw that economies continually bounce from one growth path to another, all the time remaking themselves. He coined the phrase "creative destruction" to describe this process. Simply put, economies are constantly under competitive pressure to re-invent themselves. As they move toward higher levels of productivity, they necessarily make other production technologies obsolete. Schumpeter cautioned that economic policymakers who fail to appreciate the relationship between the relentless churning of the competitive environment and wealth creation will end up focusing their efforts on the methods and skills that are in decline. In so doing, they establish policies that are aimed at protecting weak, outdated technologies, and in the end, they slow the economy's march forward. In retrospect, we can tell that some economic policies of the past century have inadvertently, or in some cases intentionally, done just that. They have had the effect of directing or misdirecting economic growth by either substituting policymakers' judgment regarding the distribution of an economy's assets for the combined wisdom of individuals or allowing markets to send false signals. In the long run, such policies were destined to fail. The Economic Policies of the Last Century A very broad reading of economic history reveals that policymakers in many countries during the last century attempted to manipulate trade and other forms of economic activity by altering, artificially, the measures of value, that is, prices. One such policy followed by some countries during the last century was known as the "beggar thy neighbor" policy, the manipulation of the exchange rate in order to boost a country's exports. Trade restrictions were also often used to protect domestic industries from imports. A final example from the international sphere is the system of global fixed exchange rates that emerged following the Second World War. To blunt market forces, fixed exchange rates were usually accompanied by capital controls that tried to manage the inflows--and more importantly the outflows--of a nation's investment funds. Ultimately, this system of global fixed exchange rates worked poorly and could not withstand the market forces that emerged in the 1970s. In a similar spirit, some economies used taxes or other incentives to promote one industrial activity or discourage another. Obviously, the most egregious form of this policy was in planned economies. But many democratic economies, as they recovered from various wars and other national traumas, nationalized entire industries. In our society, we never found that degree of government intervention appropriate, but we did regulate some business decisions for certain industries, such as electric power distribution and airlines, attempting to overcome the "natural monopoly" or "excessive competition" characteristics perceived in these industries. Finally, some central banks in the past engaged in policies that artificially altered the path of domestic prices in their effort to regulate their business cycles. If the monetary authority wanted more growth above trend, it lowered money-market interest rates by expanding the stock of money. Such policies were expected to bolster demand and encourage an acceleration of growth. There was the misunderstanding that somehow a long-run tradeoff existed between inflation and unemployment. But it gradually became understood that inflation eroded investor and consumer confidence and distorted behavior, both because the average of prices gave a constantly depreciating reading of the values it was supposed to represent and because relative prices provided an inaccurate reflection of comparative worth. Monetary policies that intended to create growth through the inflation of prices ended up impeding markets and reducing economic prosperity. We now know that there is no long-run tradeoff between inflation and unemployment. The U.S. experience of the last several years has also taught us that low and stable inflation is the underpinning for sustainable growth and that sustainable growth fosters the maximum creation of jobs over time. Emergence of the Communications Era In recent decades, trade restrictions, "beggar thy neighbor" policies, and the pursuit of a supposed long-run tradeoff between inflation and unemployment have all been called into question and generally rejected. In part because of the communications revolution and the substantially reduced costs of transacting from great distances, businesses have sought more globally integrated production processes, and investors have required the development of financial instruments to facilitate their demand for international portfolio diversification. Such developments have put enormous pressure on policymakers to loosen their grip or abandon policies that led to the misallocation of resources. Tariffs have been reduced, and restrictions on the flow of goods have been eased. Controls on the flow of investment capital have been eliminated in most industrialized countries, and they are rapidly coming down in many developing nations as well. In some cases, these changes were more or less forced upon the nations that adopted them. But in many instances the policies have been liberalized because of the realization that markets allocate resources more effectively than governments. Trade is flourishing, gaining great momentum in the ten years since the fall of the Berlin Wall. Total trade with foreigners now accounts for about one-quarter of total U.S. national output--more than twice the share of the period between 1920 and 1970 and the largest trade share for the U.S. economy in more than a century. Not coincidentally, the economy has been expanding at a strong and steady rate. In addition, our economy has benefited from past actions by the government to deregulate industries. The removal of unnecessary government regulation started more than twenty years ago, during the administration of President Ford, and gathered momentum during the Carter years. It has altered the business landscape. Deregulation allowed, indeed forced, businesses to focus more clearly on a marketplace that has become more competitive, with fewer constraints and increased flexibility. If economic policy is to play a constructive role in building a new world economy, policymakers must increasingly focus on policies that eliminate barriers to communication and allow the market to work most efficiently and effectively. They must develop approaches that do not hinder "creative destruction" but appropriately cushion its impact on workers and communities. They can encourage the information revolution by fostering policies and approaches conducive to giving investors and consumers the information they require to make informed decisions. For example, the Federal Reserve and the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision have strongly supported initiatives to improve the quality of national and international disclosure practices. Credible financial statements and other disclosures are key means for communicating a company's operating results and its overall health, as well as for making more transparent various operating activities. Regarding monetary policy, central banks around the world are now endeavoring to provide stability to their domestic price levels. In some cases, this focus on price stability was undertaken in order to return credibility to the central bank after a period of unacceptable inflationary pressures. The Federal Reserve, with our mandate, must also seek to facilitate the transmission of the information that the price level is meant to convey. By maintaining a stable purchasing power for money, workers and firms will more clearly see the values being attached to their opportunities and more effectively make judgments about the allocation of their resources. This is a monetary policy that does not attempt to alter the information being transmitted by the marketplace but to increase its clarity and consistency. The increased openness of Federal Reserve decisions--reflected in announcement policies aimed at more rapid and transparent dissemination of Federal Open Market Committee decisions--also needs to be appreciated as a way to facilitate the communication to and within the marketplace in order to promote the most effective policy possible. Policies for a Communications Era--A Local Perspective This perspective on economic policy extends beyond the establishment of the national monetary policy that occupies much of my time. A popular bumper sticker says, "Think Globally, Act Locally." Good advice. Indeed, this simple maxim describes one of the great strengths of the Federal Reserve System. Although we tend to think of the Federal Reserve as a Washington-centric institution, it is, in fact, a structure of twelve independent regional Reserve Banks, teamed in harness with the Board of Governors in Washington. Florida is in the Sixth Federal Reserve District, which is headquartered in Atlanta but has two Branches in Florida. Reserve Banks have always had an important role in channeling regional economic information into the deliberations of national economic policy. Today, they take those responsibilities a step further. In closing, let me give a few examples of some of the local programs that are conceived in this spirit. The Atlanta Reserve Bank and the Board of Governors, along with nine other federal agencies and regulators, earlier this year hosted a conference to discuss rural housing and economic development activities. The conference, entitled "Bridging the Gap: Financing Affordable Housing in Rural Florida, Georgia and Alabama," was held in Maitland, Florida, and was attended by seventy-five community development practitioners. The conference focused on rural economic development opportunities, particularly those housing programs designed to serve low- and moderate-income families, and on the ways to identify program and administrative funding sources necessary to take advantage of these opportunities. In addition, the Atlanta Reserve Bank last year hosted a conference for financial institutions, local community development corporations, local municipalities, and others to roll out the community profiles that the Reserve Bank had prepared and to discuss programs and opportunities to address local needs. The profiles included demographic and statistical information about these communities. Currently, the staff of the Atlanta Reserve Bank are conducting extensive outreach to the same communities to assess the program and to identify current needs and emerging issues. Conclusion As an economic policymaker, I believe that building a world-class economy isn't at all about trying to manufacture various economic outcomes. Fortunately, most policymakers have come to recognize that their role in building world-class economies is to help develop the infrastructure through which people communicate. We need to provide the public with the tools that allow them to judge value accurately and to see opportunities with the greatest clarity. Economic policy, including monetary policy, has to be an integral part of the communications revolution that is sweeping the world. These are the policies appropriate for our era.
For immediate release The Federal Open Market Committee voted today to raise its target for the federal funds rate by 50 basis points to 6-1/2 percent. In a related action, the Board of Governors approved a 50 basis point increase in the discount rate to 6 percent. Increases in demand have remained in excess of even the rapid pace of productivity-driven gains in potential supply, exerting continued pressure on resources. The Committee is concerned that this disparity in the growth of demand and potential supply will continue, which could foster inflationary imbalances that would undermine the economy's outstanding performance. Against the background of its long-term goals of price stability and sustainable economic growth and of the information already available, the Committee believes the risks are weighted mainly toward conditions that may generate heightened inflation pressures in the foreseeable future. In taking the discount rate action, the Federal Reserve Board approved requests submitted by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Cleveland, Richmond, and San Francisco. The discount rate is the rate charged depository institutions when they borrow short-term adjustment credit from their district Federal Reserve Banks.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today approved actions by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Chicago, Kansas City, and Dallas increasing the discount rate at those banks from 5-1/2 percent to 6 percent effective immediately. The Federal Reserve Board also today approved action by the Board of Directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis increasing the discount rate at that bank from 5-1/2 to 6 percent effective Thursday, May 18, 2000.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today that the Consumer Advisory Council will hold its next meeting on Thursday, June 22. The meeting will take place in Dining Room E, Terrace level, in the Board's Martin Building. The session will begin at 8:45 a.m. and is open to the public. The Council's function is to advise the Board on the exercise of its responsibilities under the Consumer Credit Protection Act and on other matters on which the Board seeks its advice. Time permitting, the Council will discuss the following topics: Gramm-Leach-Bliley CRA Sunshine Regulation Credit Card Disclosures in Solicitations Predatory Lending Reports by committees and other matters previously considered by the Council or initiated by the Council members may also be discussed. The Board invites comment from the public on any of these matters. The Board's notice is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of a consent Order against the Korea Exchange Bank, Seoul, Korea, its Los Angeles Agency, and its Chicago, Broadway, New York, and Seattle Branches. The Order was issued jointly with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the California Department of Financial Institutions, the Illinois Office of Banks and Real Estate, the New York State Banking Department, and the Washington Department of Financial Institutions. A copy of the Order is attached.
Testimony of Stephen R. Malphrus Staff Director for Management The "I Love You" computer virus and the financial services industry Before the Subcommittee on Financial Institutions of the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate May 18, 2000 Chairman Bennett and Members of the Subcommittee, I am pleased to have this opportunity to participate in today's panel on our recent experience with the so-called "I love you," or "Love Bug," computer virus. First, Mr. Chairman, I had the pleasure of working with you when I served as Chair of the Financial Sector Group of the President's Council on Year 2000 Conversion. I am grateful for the leadership and support you provided to the work of the Financial Sector Group and the President's Council. Clearly the public-private sector partnership you helped forge was key to our nation's successful conversion to the new century. As you know, the Love Bug virus was launched from the Far East, and it attacked computers around the world running Microsoft Outlook for Windows. To review what we know, the Love Bug virus, or in the taxonomy of computer science, the "worm," entered computers through e-mail messages. Once a message was opened, the virus was able to reproduce itself by finding address lists stored by the computer's owner and then sending itself to the addressees. If an addressee opened the attachment, a similar replication occurred, enabling the virus to spread rapidly. We understand that the virus was designed to steal Internet passwords. The virus was able to modify operating system files as well as certain sound and picture files residing in the infected computers. It had the effect of degrading network performance by inundating e-mail server systems and some web pages. Variants of the virus in some cases had a major impact on the data and program files of some computer networks, although we did not experience that in the Federal Reserve. Like many organizations, the Federal Reserve System received hundreds of Love Bug e-mail messages. However, the virus had no impact on our critical business functions or information systems. Indeed, the delivery of key financial and central bank services by the Federal Reserve was unaffected. In the weeks following May 4, we contacted industry trade organizations as well as a number of the institutions we supervise, and they reported the virus did not impair critical retail or wholesale banking services. Indeed with the help of various public- and private-sector information-sharing programs, the virus was quickly detected, isolated, and immunized through a variety of standard operating procedures that have been implemented by the Federal Reserve and financial institutions. May 4 Love Bug Attacks Because the virus started in the Far East, it was identified before most U.S. public and private institutions opened for business. The Federal Reserve became aware of the virus on the morning of Thursday, May 4, through reports from Microsoft. By approximately 8:30 a.m., major news wire services also contained fairly accurate details about how to identify the virus, although the type of damage inflicted on computer hardware and files and the manner in which the virus spread were still unclear. Throughout the day, we also received reports from the FBI's National Infrastructure Protection Center (NIPC), from InfraGard, and from anti-virus software vendors. Financial institutions that have foreign offices, particularly those with operations in Asia, had the earliest warning and were able to take steps to inform employees worldwide and to shield their e-mail systems, in many cases before opening for business. As a precaution, many institutions shut down external, and in some instances internal, e-mail systems. These institutions also quickly alerted industry trade organizations and business partners about what they knew of the virus. The global nature of commerce helped many financial institutions learn about the virus before many of the monitoring services issued an alert. At the Federal Reserve, we immediately began to implement our standard virus incident response procedures. The fact that our employees were already trained to recognize and report suspicious e-mail messages, such as those that typically are virus carriers, was a tremendous asset in limiting the spread of the virus internally - only a handful of messages were opened. As a preventive measure, at about 9:30 a.m., we shut down our e-mail systems to incoming mail from the Internet, and subsequently through our intranet, until we received and installed an anti-virus patch, or antidote, from our software vendors. (An antidote cannot be produced until the particular virus is analyzed, and systems are at risk until an antidote is installed.) In accordance with Federal Reserve System policy, line management responsible for information security convened Systemwide conference calls to discuss the virus and to coordinate actions to contain it. During the day, the CERT and other virus-response centers provided information about how the virus spread and measures to contain the virus. We began installing anti-virus patches in the afternoon, and as an example, the Board of Governors re-opened its e-mail systems to outside mail by 5:00 p.m. Financial institutions reported they were able to reopen e-mail systems at various times during the day, and most e-mail systems were open by the beginning of business the following morning. Federal Reserve's Procedures for Responding to Viruses and Other Malicious Attacks on Our Information Systems When the Love Bug struck, the Federal Reserve had state-of-the-art procedures and controls in place for responding to and managing cyber-related incidents including computer viruses. The procedures were effective in managing this incident and limiting the spread of the Love Bug virus. In addition to training our employees in how to identify and deal with suspicious messages, the Federal Reserve has implemented several layers of security protections. These include incident response teams, virus-detection software that screens e-mail messages and mailboxes for viruses, and, on some systems, we are operating "integrity checking tools" that detect changes in operating systems and software. We have an ongoing communications program with senior executives regarding the operational risks associated with information systems. Effective lines of communication are also in place linking IT professionals across the Federal Reserve System to each other and with our vendors and organizations, such as the FBI and CERT. Impact of Love Bug Virus on Federal Reserve and Financial Institutions Other than impeding office communications and diminishing productivity because of the temporary halt in receiving and sending e-mail messages, the virus had minimal impact on the Federal Reserve's business operations and no impact on our critical financial and central bank services. Our electronic payment services are protected from e-mail viruses because they do not operate on the automation systems that support our Internet and electronic mail services. Our payment systems operate on proprietary software systems and use a closed network rather than the public Internet. Fedwire - our large-value funds transfer application - and our other key payment systems are accessible only through dedicated devices and require specific hardware, software, and communications facilities to process transactions. Moreover, all of these communication systems are fully encrypted. If for some reason the Love Bug virus was able to operate on a device linked to one of our payment system applications, the device might, at worst, be temporarily disabled. An infected terminal, however, could be recovered by using contingency procedures. The Federal Reserve did experience some negative effects from the Love Bug attack. While our e-mail systems were disconnected, we used fax machines and telephones to complete routine communications. This proved to be inconvenient for some employees. In addition, our Information Technology staff had to devote time to communicating with employees and business partners about appropriate screening and containment measures and to perform work to apply software patches to immunize our e-mail systems and recover machines that had been infected by the virus. In short, a virus of this nature can be disruptive to an organization's electronic communications and knowledge-sharing activities. The financial institutions we supervise reported a similar experience. Word about the virus spread almost as quickly around the globe as did the virus, and companies were able to alert employees and to shield e-mail systems early in the business day. Even when e-mail systems became infected, the virus was not able to spread to critical banking systems. Financial institutions conducted business as usual, and ATMs and other retail and wholesale payment and settlement systems were unaffected. Although there were some minor disruptions in commerce, we have not identified any measurable effect on the economy - in large part because commercial transactions are not generally conducted using e-mail-based information systems. Various news services have estimated the cost of the virus - in terms of lowered productivity and labor costs to manage the virus and recover from damage - in the range of $5 billion to $15 billion worldwide. At this time, however, we view those numbers as "guestimates." Lessons Learned Although the Federal Reserve's detection and response procedures were adequate and worked well, we see the incident as an opportunity to identify lessons learned so that we can continue to improve our virus response processes. Our information-security program is based on a process of continuous improvement and a post incident review is standard practice in the Federal Reserve. We want to ensure that we operate in the most secure environment possible and that we are prepared to respond to cyber-related incidents in a consistent, coordinated manner. With respect to the financial institutions we supervise, the Federal Reserve is integrating our information technology examination program into safety and soundness assessments to ensure the inherent business risks created by technology are properly managed. One benefit of Y2K is that senior executives and board of directors of financial institutions have a better understanding of the linkage between operations risk and credit, market, liquidity, reputational, legal, and other forms of risk. This will serve the industry well in addressing new operational risks posed by rogue software, such as viruses. In addition, we are committed to participating in initiatives that promote information-system security and that assist in the rapid identification and analysis of new viruses and other forms of cyber attacks. The Federal Reserve is an active participant in numerous public- and private-sector activities to protect the critical infrastructure. For example, we receive information from the NIPC and we will also be participating in the financial services information sharing and assessment center. We also plan to work more closely with our anti-virus software vendors to convey the urgency of producing antidotes to new viruses in an even more timely manner. Our financial institutions report a renewed commitment to training, particularly institutions in which virus-screening capabilities are somewhat limited because of lessor reliance on e-mail systems. Moreover, to avoid having to shut down e-mail systems even briefly, some larger institutions plan to investigate more robust filters that can be deployed in the period following the spread of a virus and before their anti-virus software vendors produce an antidote patch. As a result of the Love Bug virus, there is an increased awareness in the financial sector that today's most commonly used desktop products (web browsers, e-mail, and the like) are generally not designed to resist future virus strains. Financial institutions also believe that the software industry needs to take additional steps to ensure that their products are appropriately secure. It is essential that desktop products used to support critical business functions are secure and engender confidence in their use. In the future, we anticipate that desktop products will increasingly be employed to deliver retail financial services over the Internet. Conclusion Computer viruses and other malicious attacks by software hackers present an ongoing threat. Although the Love Bug virus was limited in the damage that it caused, future viruses may be more difficult to contain. Because viruses put us into a defensive mode, good information security processes and controls are critical - and those employed by the Federal Reserve were effective in detecting and responding to the Love Bug virus. In my opinion, if electronic commerce is to flourish, there must be a high degree of confidence by all parties to transactions that the systems and networks are as secure as possible. There is a need to focus on measures that can be implemented to contain viruses while antidotes are being developed. These include measures to share information more effectively, to analyze new viruses quickly, to distribute fixes more efficiently, and to recognize new, innovative viruses as they occur. Finally, public- and private-sector information-security initiatives, including early warning, analysis, information on, and containment, should be supported and broadened. Up to this point, much of the focus on new threats to computer systems has focused on national security and criminal aspects of the problem. From my perspective, the discussion should be expanded to include the broader risks presented by the growth of electronic commerce. One of the reasons our nation's Year 2000 efforts were so successful was that leaders in the public and private sectors recognized that technology issues presented significant business risks and they worked together to meet the challenge. The work of the Department of the Treasury in supporting the goals of Presidential Decision Directive 63 is a good step in helping the financial sector to address new forms of operations risk. Finally, in my view, the model implemented to address Y2K could be helpful in strengthening programs to address the risks to the public infrastructure on which the financial services industry relies: telecommunications, power, water, transportation, and public safety. Mr. Chairman, this concludes my statement, and thank you for asking me to appear today. I would be happy to answer any questions you or Members of the subcommittee may have. Footnotes ANSIR (Awareness of National Security Issues and Response) is the NIPC center that provides automated, unclassified advisory, alert, and warning information concerning physical and cyber threats to private-sector security professionals. InfraGard is an FBI initiative to provide a private- and public-sector information-sharing mechanism in support of critical infrastructure protection. The FBI plans to open InfraGard chapters in all fifty-six FBI field districts. The CERT (Computer Emergency Response Team) coordination center was chartered in 1988 by the U.S. Department of Defense to work with the Internet community to respond to computer security problems, raise awareness of computer security issues, and prevent security breaches. CERT/CC is part of the Networked Systems Survivability Program in the Software Engineering Institute, a federally funded research and development center at Carnegie Mellon University. See, for example, APBnews.com, "The Bug that Ate $10 Billion" (May 8, 2000); Kathleen Ohlson, Computer World, " 'Love' Virus Costs Approaching $7 Billion" (May 9, 2000); Jesse J. Holland, Associated Press writer, "Computer Virus Hits Fed Agencies" (May 11, 2000).
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today approved action by the Board of Directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York increasing the discount rate at that bank from 5-1/2 percent to 6 percent effective immediately.
Remarks by Vice Chairman Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. Before the Independent Community Bankers of America, Washington, D.C. May 22, 2000 Community Banks: Opportunities and Challenges in the "Post Modernization Era" It's a pleasure to be here today to discuss with you the opportunities for community banks in our evolving financial system and the challenges they face in this highly competitive environment. Clearly, our banking system has helped support the economic prosperity we are seeing today. Businesses and families have benefited from technological and other innovations as our banking system has made credit available to those that could make the best use of those funds. Despite rapid consolidation among banking institutions, thousands of smaller institutions continue to serve communities throughout the United States. This diversity in our banking system has helped ensure that credit continues to flow not only to the largest and most prominent borrowers, but also to small businesses and consumers with specialized circumstances and needs. Significantly, community banks have played an important role in filling the gaps created by some of the larger, nationwide institutions in which decisions to extend credit to smaller borrowers tend to be less customized and less responsive to local situations and needs. Community Banks' Input to Policy Community banks have also provided valuable insights to the Federal Reserve regarding their local economies, customer behavior, and emerging issues. These localized observations have become even more important as consolidation has moved the centralized management of larger organizations farther and farther from their customers and markets, making it more difficult for them to fully understand micro conditions and trends. This is why the Federal Reserve has continued to rely, in part, on community banks to fill in the gaps in our understanding of economic conditions. On an ongoing basis, we receive impressions from community bankers through their membership on Reserve Bank boards and through their participation on the Federal Advisory and the Consumer Advisory Councils. The Federal Reserve also has the advantage of supervising a broad array of institutions that provide us, from a hands-on perspective, insights into local lending conditions and emerging issues. More than 90 percent of the Federal Reserve's roughly 1,000 state member banks can be characterized as community banks, which provides us a close-up view regarding economic conditions at local levels. Some of these observations are made on an ad hoc basis through our contacts with supervisory staff, and others are made through our formal quarterly examiner surveys on credit standards and other issues. You may also be surprised to learn that smaller community banks are becoming increasingly important sources of localized information on credit conditions. With the advent of interstate branching and the consolidation undertaken in the past decade, the physical location of an institution's headquarters has become a less reliable indicator of where its credit exposures lie. For this reason, regulatory Call Reports submitted by larger organizations are less useful indicators than they once were of conditions in a particular metropolitan area, or even a state. In contrast, information reported by smaller community banks is likely to be more revealing in terms of local economic conditions, as the loans extended by these organizations are more likely to be made to individuals and businesses in nearby communities. Though not comprehensive, community bank regulatory Call Reports provide a needed window on local trends. Through all these avenues--advisory councils, regulatory reports, examiner surveys, and supervision--information flows to the Board of Governors. That information in turn is used directly and indirectly in our deliberations regarding economic policy as well as supervisory and regulatory initiatives. Without that flow of information and hands-on contact with community banks, the Federal Reserve would be more susceptible to being out of touch with local concerns and conditions and would be less informed and less productive. This would clearly hinder the central bank from reaching its goals of achieving maximum sustainable long-term growth for the economy by maintaining low and stable inflation and promoting a safe, sound, competitive, and accessible banking system. Community Bank Challenges Community banks also provide an important service to customers. Their ability to tailor banking products and services to the needs of the individuals and small businesses they so ably serve is well understood. However, while community banks obviously add value in several ways, they do face challenges today--and they will have to fit into an evolving financial system in the post-Gramm-Leach-Bliley world. First, community banks are feeling the same intense competitive pressures that larger banks are feeling. Bank holding companies in every asset tier below $1 billion in assets have seen their return on assets fall from 1998 to 1999. For example, the group of bank holding companies with assets between $500 million and $1 billion has seen its ROA erode from 1.18 percent to 1.07 percent. Similarly, the group with assets between $300 million and $500 million has experienced a decline in ROA from 1.14 percent to 1.07 percent. One outgrowth of this competition and erosion of return is the tendency for loan officers to grant loans on the basis that the current exceptionally strong financial conditions are the most likely, and perhaps nearly guaranteed, scenario going forward. Financial intermediaries with strong credit cultures know that in analyzing risk, they must test assumptions and evaluate how borrowers might perform under more stressful conditions. Pricing competition has also been fierce, which has hurt margins. To make up for some of this margin erosion, some banks, both large and small, have been going after loans to potentially riskier credits. Of course, these loans should carry higher yields to compensate for having more risk. However, to the extent bank managements are not evaluating their income on a risk-adjusted basis, they are deluding themselves and their boards into thinking that profits are improving, when in fact, greater embedded losses may be growing beneath the surface of ostensibly sound loan portfolios. These losses, of course, emerge in force under more stressful conditions. Furthermore, when the additional credit risk is concentrated in a particular market or loan class, it increases the risk of failure. The late 1980s and early 1990s are a vivid illustration of the perils of weakening underwriting standards and credit concentrations. I should note that despite these lessons, many community banks have been expanding commercial real estate and construction lending as never before. In particular, for banks with less than $1 billion in assets, commercial and construction loans accounted for 12 percent of assets in 1990. Today, this concentration stands at nearly 17 percent of assets. There is also anecdotal evidence that some banks are offering long-term permanent financing, which had been avoided historically. Commercial real estate markets appear to be healthy now, but they are cyclical in nature and therefore must be approached with caution. Fortunately, better risk management and higher capital levels mitigate concern somewhat, and the industry is to be commended for developing those tools. As a supervisory response, we are stepping up oversight of those individual institutions that have higher concentrations of commercial and construction loans, especially in markets in which growth has been particularly strong and those in which vacancy rates appear to be rising. The good news is that, by and large, commercial real estate markets, while clearly strong, do not appear to be suffering from overbuilding and the unreasonable plans of developers that were seen in the past. We all recognize that by definition community banks hold concentrations of credit risk within the areas they serve, which only heightens the need to diversify loan types as much as possible, to establish covenants and other safeguards that might mitigate losses, and to hold strong levels of capital. Again, the positive story is that community banks, by and large, appear to have a solid capital base, which has remained strong during the course of this expansion. At the same time that credit risk may be rising largely unseen within bank loan portfolios, interest rate risk also appears to be on the uptick. That risk is arising from both the asset and the liability sides of community bank balance sheets. The eroding level of core deposits has made many banks more dependent on large time deposits and wholesale funds, which are more responsive to interest shocks, than on customer deposits, for which rate changes can be managed to the bank's advantage. Further, asset maturities have been steadily lengthening over the past decade. Previously, conventional wisdom among community bankers was that taking on assets having longer maturities, such as fixed-rate mortgage loans and pass-throughs, was undesirable and entailed too much interest rate risk. Today, there appears to be a marked change in attitude regarding interest rate risk. For example, the portion of assets maturing in more than five years among banks having less than $1 billion in assets was just 12 percent in 1990. As of year-end 1999, that proportion had risen substantially, to more than 20 percent of assets. Shrinking interest margins for many institutions as rates have risen, as well as the results of our surveillance screens, further confirm the rising levels of interest rate risk. Consequently, we are scrutinizing more carefully the management of interest rate risk and have found that most banks appear to be fully aware of and responsive to the need to understand and manage the risk they are taking. In addition to the credit risk and market risk arising from competitive pressures, what of the pressures that might arise from the Gramm-Leach-Bliley-Act? Although the act is a long overdue and welcome reform of existing laws, as you know, much innovation has already been undertaken by banks themselves. While banks will now be able to create fully diversified financial holding companies with insurance, brokerage, and banking operations, many banks have already chosen a simpler route. By partnering with various insurance firms and brokerage and mutual fund firms, banks of all sizes have been able to offer their customers a broad array of products. However, now with the Gramm-Leach-Bliley-Act, those wishing to attempt to manage the attendant start-up costs or undertake the risk of acquisitions can do so. Nevertheless, partnering arrangements will always be an attractive, and not necessarily less profitable, option, particularly for smaller organizations. Why then are more than three-quarters of the more than 240 FHC filings we have received from banks having less than $1 billion in assets? Some anecdotal evidence suggests that community banks wish to have their options open as opportunities present themselves in the future. There also seems to be an appetite for minor tinkering with activities on the margin, rather than a stampede into new business lines through large-scale acquisitions. That seems a prudent route to take given the risks involved in undertaking any new activity. Despite community banks' proven ability to compete against larger firms and to lure away the customers of larger institutions as those firms consolidate, some pundits would suggest that community banks are a dying breed. In fact, it occurs to me that with the avalanche of financial products and service choices now available to consumers, community banks are well positioned to fill a void that technology or specialized marketing techniques are unable to fill. Clearly, some of the more sophisticated customers of larger banks will gravitate toward slick technology and the ability to independently select and purchase various products, perhaps over the Internet with no human contact. However, there is always going to be a customer segment that prefers human contact or that requires a more specialized response to meet individual circumstances. As our world becomes more complex, the need for more handholding and educating customers can be expected to increase. As customers learn from their banker during this process, their loyalty and the importance of their loyalty may grow. At the same time, a more educated consumer who can take charge of his or her financial future can only improve the community at large and enhance the likelihood that the fruits of our economic prosperity will reach a wider spectrum of people. Supervising Community Banks Given the opportunities, as well as pressures and risks, how can supervisors work to increase the probability that community banks remain sound, continue to fulfill their economic function, and support their communities? The Federal Reserve System has been working on several fronts to make sure that we are more effective and less burdensome in the supervisory process. For example, today the Federal Reserve has assigned examiners to act as "central points of contact" for most state member banks. These examiners are expected to maintain ongoing knowledge of the bank and its business and to cultivate key management contacts. This arrangement permits more tailored planning of our on-site review and provides a better avenue for you to ask questions or convey concerns. We are also responding to your desire to have single, rather than multiple, on-site examinations. Previously, we have performed specialized information technology and trust exams at times other than when the broad safety and soundness exams were conducted; we are now working to integrate these into one comprehensive review that should be less burdensome. An integrated review should also improve our analysis of an institution's overall condition and quality of management. We are also considering ways of performing our compliance examinations in a less-burdensome fashion now that the CRA exam frequency has been extended for eligible banks. To ensure that the Federal Reserve's limited supervisory resources are focused on the right institutions, we also have for some time maintained an extensive off-site surveillance system to identify banks that are weak or that have the potential to deteriorate significantly. These institutions are identified by looking at a combination of financial and examination rankings and are subject to closer monitoring in between on-site examinations. If off-site data suggest that significant deterioration has occurred, an on-site visit may take place, or the timing of a regularly scheduled safety and soundness examination may be moved up. Alternatively, if investigation suggests that the cause for triggering a surveillance screen is relatively benign or is being properly addressed, we may make no change to our supervisory strategy for the bank. This approach allows us to better tailor our supervisory responses to individual institutions experiencing significant change or evidencing deterioration and promotes more directed and effective on-site examinations. A growing area of potential burden is the presence of multiple and overlapping regulators for a single bank or holding company, including state banking departments, the FDIC, OCC, OTS, and the Federal Reserve. For financial holding companies, these issues are compounded by the added presence of federal securities and state insurance regulators. Fortunately, I think we in the regulatory community have made some progress on community holding companies with multiple charters or with branches in more than one state. The implementation of the State/Federal Protocol in 1996 was a key initiative in making supervision across state lines more "seamless." For smaller organizations, generally those having less than $500 million in total assets, we are working with the states on alternate-examination programs, and where we do work jointly, we are attempting to work as one coordinated team. At the federal level for multiple charter organizations, we are working on joint supervision plans and reviews with the FDIC, OCC, and OTS, so that information requested and the amount of time spent within the organization is as streamlined as is practicable. As you may be aware, on a more fundamental level the Federal Reserve's overall approach to supervision is essentially split into two programs, one for community and regional organizations and one for larger, more complex organizations. The large complex companies are receiving a more continuous level of oversight given the rapidly shifting risk profiles that can result from their operations, while well-capitalized and well-managed regional and community organizations receive a greater degree of off-site monitoring and less frequent on-site visitations. Of course, these two programs are flexible and really reflect a continuum, with the supervision of some of our medium-sized institutions blending the two programs. Given the differences between the two groups, we are also considering a bifurcated approach to capital. The current efforts under way by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision that would make the Basel Accord more sensitive to the underlying risk of bank portfolios is directed at the operations and risk profiles of internationally active banks. As such, it entails a level of complexity that may not be necessary or practical for domestic institutions with more basic risk profiles. That incompatibility with domestic community banks has prompted discussions about implementing a second, more basic or streamlined capital adequacy standard. While these discussions are still very preliminary, such efforts would seem to be fully compatible with our initiatives to more carefully calibrate our regulatory and supervisory approach to the individual risk profiles of the institutions we supervise. Having better and more timely information about the nature and volume of risk that banking organizations are undertaking is key to ensuring that our supervisory program, approaches, and regulations are indeed well suited for particular institutions. As one effort toward that end, the banking agencies will soon be publishing proposals to revise the regulatory Call Report. First, we will propose the elimination of many items that are either outmoded or serve little purpose in today's environment. Second, we will propose new Call Report items that better reflect the activities that are growing in prominence in banking organizations. For example, we will propose collecting more comprehensive securitization balances and related exposures as well as more detail on noninterest income, including servicing, securitization, venture capital, and insurance revenues. Institutions that are not engaged in sophisticated securitization activities need report nothing, while those engaged in the activity should have such information available both for their own risk-management purposes as well as for regulators. It is through these types of disclosures that we will be better able to ask you the right questions during the examinations. Part of that will involve knowing in advance the activities your bank is undertaking so that examiners with the right skill set are on-site. More relevant regulatory reporting will facilitate those efforts. You may also be aware of the Federal Reserve's promotion of improved disclosure as a complement to our supervisory approach and capital adequacy standards. With the significant complexity in financial markets today and the added organizational complexity available through financial reform legislation, the marketplace will be further challenged to collect and interpret meaningful information on financial institutions. It is our belief that more complete and analytically useful disclosures can help the marketplace to interpret risk profiles and price debt and equity more appropriately. As a consequence, banks that are undertaking imprudent risk are more likely to be chastened by adverse market reactions to their strategies. Toward this end, the Federal Reserve has established a private-sector working group to develop options for improving the public disclosure of financial information by large, complex banking and securities organizations. The group's report will be released to the public upon completion and describe industry best practices and develop options for improving disclosure. Conclusion In conclusion, community banks not only provide the obvious benefit of delivering a wide range of financial services to customers at the local level, but they also serve as one of the many valuable conduits of information for the central bank. These are times of both opportunity and challenge for all banks, regardless of the size of the institution. I have highlighted the risks that often emerge during a very long expansion but have also noted that we, as regulators, have reminded you of these risks and that you, as bank managers, appear to be mindful of these challenges and, in general, ready to meet them successfully. With rapid changes taking place in the economy, community banks will need to continue to adapt to both the opportunities and the new ways that risks appear and customize their products and services for a customer base that is also attempting to adapt to change. I am confident that as we experience astonishing changes in the economy in the decades to come, community banks will continue to thrive and benefit both businesses and consumers, and by doing so, serve the nation.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today requested additional comment on deposit deadlines and pricing practices for automated clearing house (ACH) transactions. Comments are requested by July 25, 2000. Based upon comments received in response to its request for comment in May 1999, the Board has concluded that the Federal Reserve Banks' deposit deadlines and pricing practices for ACH transactions they exchange with private-sector ACH operators should be modified and now is requesting comment on specific modifications that it is considering. The Board believes that adopting these modifications would enhance competition in the provision of ACH operator services to depository institutions. The Board's notice is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today that it is seeking nominations for seven appointments to its Consumer Advisory Council. The Council advises the Board on the exercise of its responsibilities under the Consumer Credit Protection Act and on other matters on which the Board seeks advice. The group meets in Washington, D.C., three times a year. The seven new members will be appointed to serve three-year terms beginning in January 2001. Nominations should include the following information about nominees: Complete name, title, address, telephone and fax numbers Organization name, brief description of organization, address, and telephone number Past and present positions Knowledge, interests or experience related to community reinvestment, consumer protection regulations, consumer credit, or other consumer financial services Positions held in community and banking associations, councils, and boards. Nominations should also include the complete name, organization name, title, address, telephone and fax numbers for the nominator. Letters of nomination with complete information must be received by August 1, 2000, and should be mailed (not sent by facsimile) to Sandra F. Braunstein, Assistant Director, Division of Consumer and Community Affairs, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, D.C. 20551. The Board's notice is attached.
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan Evolving challenges for bankers and supervisors Before the National Association of Urban Bankers, Urban Financial Services Coalition, San Francisco, California (via videoconference) May 25, 2000 It is a pleasure to discuss with you the evolving challenges for bankers and supervisors posed by financial reform and continuing technological and financial innovation. Today the nation is enjoying the longest-running economic expansion in its history. The expansion has not only been unprecedented in its duration, but also in its strength. Clearly the rapid technological innovation of the past decade has played a strong role in the expansion's endurance by improving labor productivity and opportunities for businesses to efficiently expand their output of goods and services. Economic growth has also been supported by the strength and stability of our banking system, which recently recorded its eighth consecutive year of record earnings. The agility with which our banking system recovered from the severe difficulties of the late 1980s and early 1990s to fulfill a critical intermediary role is a testament to its resilience. However, as our economy continues to evolve rapidly, banking organizations will need to continue to adapt to the changing needs of businesses and consumers. In particular, with the passage of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, our financial services industry will be better able to meet those demands in the decades to come through prudent innovation. As an example of innovation and adaptation, I note that your own organization is widening its scope to invite membership from the entire financial services industry. Broadening your reach to include insurance, brokerage, and other financial services not only reflects market realities but should also assist in your endeavors to improve the economic development of underserved communities and promote the professional growth of your members. While innovations and adaptations in our economy have helped create and prolong the prosperity we are now enjoying, they also bring to bear new challenges. Today I would like to provide a brief overview of what I think are the key challenges, risks, and opportunities faced by bankers and their supervisors. To start, I would like to shift your attention from the vibrant economy and exceptional banking conditions to some of the risks that are always present. For example, the lax standards, excesses, and fraud present in the recent few recent bank failures show that even as most banks post record profits, the deposit insurance fund can still experience disproportionate losses from undisciplined institutions. The high cost of recent failures reinforces lessons of the past for banks and supervisors, including the need for continuous vigilance against causes of bank failure such as fraud, credit concentrations, and rapid entry into new and unfamiliar activities. In addition to these risks, institutions face the challenge of fighting both complacency and competitive pressures with regard to their lending practices. There are some recent indications that the industry is aware of these challenges. The most recent Federal Reserve Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey suggests that banking organizations are becoming more sensitized to risk and are continuing to firm their lending practices. In particular, the percentage of domestic banks tightening standards on commercial and industrial (C&I) loans was the largest since the November 1998 survey. In addition, risk premiums on C&I loans have also risen. While firming loan standards and terms is one technique for managing credit risk, sound risk-management systems also involve testing the performance of borrowers under more stressful conditions to reveal weaknesses. When strong conditions largely mask the susceptibility of marginal borrowers, stress testing is invaluable for revealing the magnitude of portfolio risk posed by more challenging economic conditions. Other factors that are important for strong asset quality include maintaining adequate pricing amidst fierce competition from other banks and nonbanks alike. Some organizations are responding to these pressures by moving lower on the credit quality spectrum in a reach for higher nominal yields. In a special question added to the latest lending survey, banks indicated that demand for C&I loans has somewhat strengthened as below-investment-grade borrowers have found unfavorable conditions in the high-yield bond market and have turned to banks as an alternative. The majority of banks reporting additional demand from these borrowers also indicated that they were fairly receptive to these customers. While lending to higher-risk borrowers presents opportunities, banks must ensure that their risk-management systems can properly discern the difference between nominal and risk-adjusted yields, identify credit concentrations, and allocate enough capital and reserves to offset the higher risk of these loans. Banks without these safeguards, as well as limits and adequate tracking and reporting to senior management and their boards, have in the past experienced significant problems and sometimes failure. Credit quality issues are not the only areas of supervisory focus. The trend of narrowing interest margins at many banks has been coupled with lengthening asset maturities and declining core deposits. The erosion in bank core deposits is to some extent attributable to competitive pressure from the marked rise in equity values and mutual funds. In addition, as runoff of lower-cost deposits has been replaced with higher-cost funding from capital markets, pressures on interest margins and liquidity have intensified. Moreover, the decline in stable core deposits and the steady rise in average asset maturities has resulted in higher levels of interest rate risk, a trend evident in our surveillance screens. Banking organizations with strong risk management systems will of course carefully evaluate how these asset/liability trends are affecting their performance and risk profile and take mitigating steps as appropriate. As competitive pressures have intensified, large and small banks alike have sought solutions by broadening the variety of products they offer and delivering them through innovative delivery channels such as the Internet. Interestingly, though conventional wisdom would suggest that smaller community banks would be at a disadvantage in the competitive financial services arena, this has not been the case. By forging cooperative alliances with technology, insurance, brokerage and other firms, community banks have kept up with larger organizations in providing their customers with the diversity of financial tools and products they demand without the attendant fixed start-up costs. Moreover, while larger organizations may have some advantage over smaller banks through their brand identity and larger budgets for technology and marketing, community banks are more likely to have a comparative advantage in understanding the diverse needs of their customer base and in their ability to respond quickly with personalized service. More fully recognizing and responding to customer needs is particularly important when viewed in the context of trends in wealth formation in our economy. The Federal Reserve's most recent Survey of Consumer Finances suggests that although the current economic expansion resulted in broad gains in median household wealth between 1995 and 1998, families with low-to-moderate incomes and minorities do not appear to have fully benefited. For example, median net worth declined over this period for families with incomes below $25,000, and medians for non-whites and Hispanics were little changed. In addition, lower-income families were less likely to own homes, which constitute the bulk of the value of assets for those below the top quintile according to income. Despite these troubling indications, there were some encouraging signs. In particular, the share of families with incomes below $25,000 fell from 41 percent in 1995 to 37 percent in 1998, and more families within that lower-income group reported that they had a checking account. Moreover, homeownership rates among minorities have risen. For example, according to U.S. Census data, homeownership rates among blacks rose from 43 percent in 1995 to 48 percent in the first quarter of 2000, suggesting that some progress has been made in access to credit for minorities. Although breaking down the barriers that have produced disparities in income and wealth is not simple, promoting equal access to credit for sound borrowers is one step in the right direction. As I have said previously, discrimination is against the interests of business--yet business people too often practice it. To the extent that market participants discriminate, they erect barriers to the free flow of capital and labor to their most profitable employment, and the distribution of output is distorted. In the end, costs are higher, less real output is produced, and national wealth accumulation is slowed. By removing the non-economic distortions that arise as a result of discrimination, we can generate higher returns to both human and physical capital. Banking and other lending organizations that develop expertise to tap, educate, and encourage underserved customers are likely to provide better and more informed access to credit and expand profit opportunities. In that regard, many banks are well equipped to tailor their services to individual customer circumstances in a personalized setting and to educate customers about various products and services that could help them achieve their financial goals. In today's more complex world, the diversity of financial product choices facing consumers is truly astonishing. Similarly, banks are now also facing much broader choices, especially when one considers the opportunities presented by the passage of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act. By modernizing our banking laws and making them more consistent with marketplace realities and the needs of consumers, the financial services industry will be able to grow and innovate with far fewer artificial constraints. How various financial service providers choose to take advantage of the act will be one of the more interesting dynamics as our financial system evolves in the years ahead. Clearly, many franchises can succeed by continuing to focus on traditional banking. Organizations that decide to depart from past successful strategies by expanding into new activities should do so only after careful consideration. As of mid- May, 270 domestic banking organizations and 17 foreign banking organizations had filed to become financial holding companies. Of those, roughly three-quarters had less than one billion dollars in assets. I suspect that many of these organizations are not intending to immediately launch into full-scale brokerage, venture capital, or insurance activities, but rather are looking to keep their options open and retain flexibility should opportunities present themselves. If true, that is encouraging, for it is one thing to gain FHC status and begin cautiously experimenting with these new powers, and quite another to take on the risks related to full-scale acquisitions or extremely rapid growth of new businesses. Whichever configuration financial firms choose, translating the traditional and new financial powers into longer-term economic value for customers and shareholders will be the leading challenge in the coming decades. In this changing environment, supervisors will be challenged to adapt and refine their programs to accommodate both innovations in traditional banking and new activities permitted by the act. The supervisory strategy for addressing banking innovations of the past decade has been a risk-focused approach that moves well beyond earlier, one-size-fits-all examinations to achieve what we believe is a more effective and less burdensome process. The risk-focused approach has also been tailored to distinguish between larger, more complex banking organizations, on the one hand, and the more traditional regional and community organizations on the other. The large, complex companies are receiving a more continuous level of oversight given the rapidly shifting risk profiles that can result from their operations, while well-capitalized and well-managed regional and community organizations receive a greater degree of off-site monitoring and less frequent on-site visitations, consistent with statutory mandates. I should emphasize that these programs are not meant to be implemented in a rigid fashion; institutions that have characteristics that fall somewhere in the middle of the two programs would be flexibly accommodated through adjustments to our supervisory plan for the institution. That kind of flexibility will be essential with the emergence of smaller financial holding companies and the expanded range of permissible activities. Clearly, these two broad supervisory programs will need further customization or segmentation to respond to the evolving diversity of our supervisory caseload. Another area where supervisors are attempting to more appropriately align risks with regulatory approaches is capital. You may be aware that the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and Regulation is working to refine and improve the risk-based capital measure to make it more sensitive to the underlying risks of various banking activities. As you might surmise, those efforts are likely to result in a revised framework that is geared toward the kinds of exposures and risk-management systems typical of internationally active institutions. For these organizations, the benefits from more precisely aligning risks with capital charges, we trust, will outweigh the substantial costs of added complexity. However, for community banks with traditional exposures, the costs of such a complicated framework will likely outweigh any benefits, and hence it will be impractical to implement. This has led to the consideration of a dual or bifurcated approach to capital that parallels our approach to supervision. Such an approach would recognize the potential tension between the complexity and cost of the next version of the international capital standards and the more limited needs of smaller, more traditional banks. Implementing a second, more streamlined capital adequacy standard for qualifying domestic institutions would seem to have merit. Discussions on such an approach are only preliminary, but the arguments for continuing to more fully calibrate our supervisory and regulatory approaches to the nature and risk profiles of the institutions we supervise are compelling. Capital standards and the supervisory process are two of the three key tools regulators use to get their job done. The third tool, disclosure, holds promise for yielding benefits to our financial system both domestically and globally. In past decades, the business of banking was fairly opaque but straightforward, with banking risks largely embedded in the credit judgments inherent in the loan portfolio. Today, with the explosion in financial innovation that has created various derivative, securitization, insurance, and other structured products and the greater diversity in activities permitted by the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, not only are risks more opaque, but even when revealed, sometimes difficult to interpret. Fortunately, the same technology and financial techniques that have created this added complexity can also be harnessed to produce more meaningful disclosures that allow markets to analyze risks and exert discipline on those that would take on imprudent levels of exposure. While not a panacea, improved disclosure can complement the supervisory process and regulatory capital, and obviate more intrusive investigations, holding out the promise of less supervisory intervention. Recently, the Federal Reserve, in collaboration with the Securities and Exchange Commission and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, established a private-sector working group to review industry best practices and develop options for improving the public disclosure of financial information by large, complex banking and securities organizations. Enhanced disclosures are also being pursued through regulatory reporting. A proposal to be released shortly will eliminate less meaningful items on the Call Report and request additional information on activities of growing significance for some institutions, including loan servicing, securitizations, venture capital, and insurance. More relevant regulatory disclosures should not only improve transparency but should also help our off-site monitoring and tailoring of our supervisory program. In closing then, we live in a fascinating period in American history, in which rapid change will force business and government to continuously reevaluate previously held assumptions and adapt to change. There is no static, optimum model either for financial service providers or for financial regulators, as both are engaged in a continuously evolving process. I am optimistic that recent financial reforms and continuing innovations will translate into more useful financial products and services to a broader spectrum of consumers and businesses and, in turn, fuller participation by all segments of our society in the kind of economic progress we have experienced to date.
Remarks by Vice Chairman Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. Before the National Association of Urban Bankers, Urban Financial Services Coalition, San Francisco, California May 26, 2000 Umbrella Supervision: Emerging Approaches Thank you for inviting me here today. I would like to discuss with you the opportunities and challenges we face under the Gramm-Leach-Bliley financial modernization legislation, addressing in particular some of the legislation's implications for supervising financial conglomerates. I believe we can all agree that Gramm-Leach-Bliley, or GLB as it seems to be called, offers exciting opportunities for banking organizations to expand their lines of business and their range of customer services. These opportunities potentially could lead to rewarding organizational synergies. While benefits may be substantial, from a supervisory perspective, GLB means the Federal Reserve, as the umbrella supervisor, needs to reassess its supervisory regime to ensure it remains applicable and appropriate for financial conglomerates. GLB states quite clearly, for example, what the Federal Reserve cannot do in its role as umbrella supervisor, yet it is remarkably silent in detailing what we can, or should, do in this role. In these remarks I intend to highlight how the Federal Reserve is interpreting our supervisory responsibilities for financial holding companies and to outline our general strategy for overseeing them in the years ahead. Overview of the Legislation As you know, GLB permits certain bank holding companies to affiliate with securities firms and insurance companies. Expanded permissible activities for these holding companies include securities underwriting and dealing, insurance agency activities and insurance underwriting, acting as a futures commission merchant, and merchant banking. The Federal Reserve Board and the Secretary of the Treasury have the authority to determine whether other activities are financial in nature or incidental to financial activities and hence permissible for these holding companies to engage in. To take advantage of the new powers, a bank holding company must become a financial holding company (FHC), which requires that each of its subsidiary banks is well-capitalized and well-managed and that all of its insured subsidiary banks maintain a Consumer Reinvestment Act (CRA) rating of at least satisfactory. In January and March, the Board issued implementing regulations governing the process of attaining FHC status. Essentially, a bank holding company files a declaration with the appropriate Reserve Bank certifying that it meets the statutory criteria. The Federal Reserve verifies the claim, and, as long as there are no discrepancies or supervisory concerns, the FHC status is approved. As of mid-May, 270 domestic banking organizations and 17 foreign banking organizations had filed to become financial holding companies. Objectives of the Umbrella Supervisor So, as noted earlier, financial holding companies are simply a subset of bank holding companies that are authorized to engage in an expanded range of activities. Nonbank subsidiaries of financial holding companies that are engaged in securities, commodities, or insurance activities continue to be supervised by their appropriate "functional regulator." Each functional, bank, or thrift supervisor retains its responsibilities for individual subsidiaries. As the umbrella supervisor, the Federal Reserve will evaluate the consolidated strength and activities of financial holding companies to ensure that their financial condition does not threaten the viability of subsidiary depository institutions. The Federal Reserve will focus on a holding company's consolidated risk-management process and its overall capital adequacy. Consolidated oversight of such organizations is important because the risks associated with a broad range of financial activities can cut across legal entities and business lines. Even if individual subsidiaries are considered to be financially strong and well managed by bank, thrift, or functional regulators, their risk profiles may change when they are amalgamated into a consolidated organization. The sum of the parts does not always equal the whole. In conducting our oversight, our specific goal will be to assess how a company's activities might affect the safety and soundness of its affiliated depository institutions. The rationale for umbrella supervision is that most large and sophisticated financial services companies take an umbrella or consolidated approach to managing their risk. As a practical matter, the Federal Reserve expects all FHCs to evolve toward comprehensive, consolidated risk management in order to measure and assess the range of their exposures and the way those exposures interrelate. I think it is worth noting here that although one may think of FHCs as large, complex financial institutions, most bank holding companies that have declared themselves to be financial holding companies are in fact smaller organizations. Of the approximately 270 domestic FHC declarations that have been received to date, roughly three-quarters are organizations with less than $1 billion in assets. And of these, 42 percent have less than $150 million in assets. As some of these smaller organization begin to expand into less traditional activities, their consolidated risk management strategies will become more important. Umbrella supervision is not intended to impose bank-like supervision on FHCs as a whole, or on either regulated or nonregulated nonbank subsidiaries of FHCs. Rather, it seeks to balance the objective of protecting the depository subsidiaries of increasingly complex organizations engaged in a greater number of interrelated activities and incurring different risk with the objective of not imposing an unduly duplicative or onerous burden on the nonbank entities that are part of the organization. The legislation clearly intends that functional regulators, primary bank and thrift supervisors, and the umbrella supervisor will respect each other's responsibilities and will acknowledge and make use of each other's expertise. To achieve the objectives I mentioned, umbrella supervision requires strengthened relationships between primary bank and thrift supervisors and the umbrella supervisor and enhanced relationships with functional regulators and foreign nonbank supervisors. Finally, the Federal Reserve needs to place greater reliance on recent initiatives that promote a more risk-focused supervision process and market discipline--two trends that the Federal Reserve has actively pursued in recent years. So what does this outline of umbrella supervision really mean in practice? How is umbrella supervision different from the bank holding company supervision of two-and-a-half months ago, that is, pre-GLB? And, from your point of view, how will it affect banking organizations directly? In just a moment I will try to put more meat on the bones. But let me say first that the Federal Reserve has been supervising bank holding companies for many years. Some of these organizations are quite complex and have been engaged in a wide range of sophisticated activities. The framework for umbrella supervision that the Federal Reserve is implementing builds on that bank holding company supervisory role in a way that is consistent with GLB. The new legislation provides, around the edges, direction as to how some aspects of supervision must be carried out. But ultimately, our longstanding objectives of ensuring the financial viability of associated depository institutions and the federal insurance fund remain unchanged. Umbrella Supervision in Practice The activities of the Federal Reserve as the umbrella supervisor fall into three broad categories: information gathering and assessment, ongoing supervision, and promotion of sound practices and improved disclosure. First let me address information gathering. In this regard, the Federal Reserve will interact closely with, and obtain information from, the primary bank and thrift supervisors and the functional regulators as well as from FHC senior management and boards of directors. To gain an understanding of how risk-management and internal control policies and procedures established at the consolidated level are being implemented, we will use a combination of information gathering and assessments. For example, we will conduct regular examinations of an FHC's centralized risk-management and control processes in coordination, as appropriate, with the primary bank, thrift, and functional regulators. Examiners may conduct targeted transaction testing, when appropriate, to verify that risk-management systems are adequately and appropriately measuring and managing areas of risk for the organization and to confirm that laws and regulations within the jurisdiction of the Federal Reserve are being followed. We will have periodic discussions with FHC senior management and boards of directors and with personnel responsible for centralized management and control functions such as heads of business lines, risk management, internal audit, and internal control. The interplay between organizational and regulatory structures makes relationships with other regulators quite important. More than in the past, the Federal Reserve will need to coordinate its activities with those of other regulators and to work with them to understand the risk profiles of the individual regulated entities and their relation and importance to the FHC's overall risk profile. The Federal Reserve will review and discuss the examination findings of primary bank, thrift, and functional regulators, together with other relevant information, to arrive at a consolidated assessment of an FHC's financial condition and risk profile, the effectiveness of its risk management, and the implications of its activities for affiliated depository institutions. The Federal Reserve will also make available to other supervisors pertinent information regarding the financial condition, risk-management policies, and operations of an FHC that will have a direct effect on individual regulated subsidiaries within the organization. In addition, the Federal Reserve will participate in the sharing of information among international supervisors to ensure the consolidated supervision of an FHC's global activities and to minimize material gaps in supervision. Many relationships have already been established, and we expect international cooperation and communication to continue to evolve. In addition to consulting with management and other regulators, the Federal Reserve will review internal audit and management reports and publicly available information (including market information on equity and debt prices of the consolidated organization) as well as reports and data collected by other regulators. To minimize regulatory burden on the company, this material will be gathered, to the extent practicable, from the parent organization, from functional regulators, and from publicly available sources. As you can tell, great emphasis will be placed on information gathering. However, there is a role for ongoing supervision. Supervision on a day-to-day basis and in the normal course of business will focus on understanding the group's structure, its major business activities, and how well it is managed. This process will require close coordination among the regulators associated with the FHC. The Federal Reserve will need to be kept apprised of material changes at the individual entity level that may ultimately have an important effect on the overall structure of the organization. And by the same token, the Federal Reserve will consult with appropriate functional regulators concerning significant applications, proposals, or transactions by an FHC that involve a functionally regulated entity. With regard to examinations and reporting, the Federal Reserve, consistent with GLB, will rely to the fullest extent possible on reports that an FHC's subsidiaries are otherwise required to file with federal or state authorities and on the examinations of an FHC's subsidiaries by their appropriate regulators. We will also rely on routinely prepared management reports, publicly reported information, and externally audited financial statements. GLB places some limitations on our ability to obtain reports directly from a functionally regulated subsidiary. If the Federal Reserve requires a specialized report from a functionally regulated subsidiary, we will first request it from the subsidiary's functional regulator. If the requested report is not made available in a timely manner by the functional regulator, we may under certain circumstances seek it directly from the functionally regulated subsidiary. One circumstance may be when the report is necessary to assess a material risk to the FHC or any of its affiliated depository institutions. Other circumstances may be when the report is needed to assess compliance with laws enforced by the Federal Reserve or to assess the FHC's systems for monitoring and controlling risks that may pose a threat to an affiliated depository institution. General limitations similar to those on the Federal Reserve's ability to obtain reports also apply to defining when the Federal Reserve may or may not directly examine a functionally regulated subsidiary. In any case, we will first seek to obtain the needed information from the appropriate functional regulator. If the information is not provided or an examination is still determined to be necessary, we will coordinate such actions with the functional regulator. It may also be appropriate, when working with a functional regulator or with another associated supervisor, to participate in joint examinations so as to minimize regulatory burden. For subsidiaries of an FHC that are not functionally regulated, the Federal Reserve will obtain information directly from the subsidiary, as appropriate and necessary, to assess the financial condition of the organization as a whole. Part of the overall assessment of an FHC will include an analysis of the consolidated capital adequacy of the organization. Consolidated capital adequacy is particularly important to ensure that undercapitalization at the parent level does not create problems for depository subsidiaries. Capital adequacy will be assessed in relation to the risk profile of the overall organization. We will review the overall risk assessment and related capital analysis process that the FHC uses internally to determine the adequacy of the company's consolidated capital position. The review will include consideration of present and future economic conditions, plans for future business development, possible stress scenarios, and internal risk controls and audit procedures. The Federal Reserve's responsibility for assessing the consolidated capital adequacy of the FHC is aimed, in particular, at any potential negative effects on affiliated depository institutions. The legislation is quite clear, however, that functional supervisors of regulated entities within an FHC will continue to set and enforce applicable capital requirements for the entities within their jurisdictions. The Federal Reserve may not establish separate capital adequacy requirements for functionally regulated subsidiaries that are in compliance with their respective individual capital requirements. In reaching a consolidated assessment, we will rely heavily on the functional regulators' analyses of the capital adequacy of functionally regulated subsidiaries. We do need to keep in mind, however, that the different regulatory capital regimes for banking, securities, and insurance entities established by their respective regulators reflect varying definitions of the elements of capital and varying approaches to asset and liability valuations. This is another instance in which the sum of the parts may not adequately reflect the condition of the whole. Another area that will be particularly important from the umbrella supervisor's perspective is intra-group exposures and risk concentrations. Again, the Federal Reserve's focus will be on the potential impact of such exposures on depository subsidiaries of an FHC. Accordingly, we will work closely with the appropriate bank or thrift supervisors to monitor and ensure compliance by the insured depository institutions with sections 23A and 23B of the Federal Reserve Act. To achieve this end, the Federal Reserve plans to begin collecting data from depository institution subsidiaries of FHCs (and BHCs generally) on their covered transactions with affiliates and subsidiaries. Intra-group exposures may be significant at large, complex FHCs, especially those that operate their businesses on global lines that cut across legal entities within the firm. One of the key factors in overall risk assessment is an evaluation of risk exposures to the same counterparty by more than one legal entity in the organization. Functional regulators will continue to monitor any restrictions on intra-group exposure that may apply to the entities they regulate. The Federal Reserve, to the fullest extent practicable and appropriate, will support functional regulators in this regard. In particular, the Federal Reserve will seek to understand and monitor related-party exposures at the group level, including exposures in such areas as servicing agreements, derivatives, and payments systems, with an important focus on the extent to which a depository institution subsidiary's risk management is dependent on transactions with affiliates. We will also take into account whether capital or income is being improperly transferred within the group and whether intra-group transactions are being used as a means of supervisory arbitrage. It has long been the approach of the Federal Reserve to promote sound practices for banking organizations--and that is my third topic. It is particularly important that the Fed continue this focus on sound practice in its role as umbrella supervisor over potentially very complex institutions. As a foundation, the Federal Reserve monitors developing trends in risk and management practices across the FHC population through regular discussions with FHC management centered around specific issues and emerging risks; regular meetings with primary banking and functional regulators to explore issues of mutual interest and concern; interagency working groups or specialty teams to gain early insight into risks that cut across legal entities of a conglomerate or group of conglomerates; and industry conferences on various topics of interest. I expect these initiatives will contribute to the development of sound practices that the umbrella supervisor and the functional and banking regulators can communicate to senior management and boards of directors at the FHC level and to the senior management of bank and nonbank subsidiaries. Finally, let me note that greater transparency can meaningfully supplement the efforts of supervisors to monitor the increasingly complex and global activities of diversified banking organizations. As the umbrella supervisor, the Federal Reserve will, consistent with sound accounting principles and practices and with considerations of bank safety and soundness, participate in efforts to enhance disclosures that reflect group-wide activities, risk exposures, and risk management. Conclusion Many of the concepts I have outlined are already being applied, and have been for some time, by the Federal Reserve in the context of the consolidated supervision of bank holding companies. So, part of the good news is that we are not starting from scratch. A risk-focused approach and heightened coordination and communication with other supervisory authorities are two of the major practices that will continue as the Federal Reserve performs its role as umbrella supervisor. Still, the supervision of more diversified FHCs presents new challenges and opportunities for development. We will continue our efforts to develop and enhance strong cooperative relationships with other supervisors. We will also strive to strengthen our relationships with FHC management and key personnel. Information flows and effective communication will be critical for all these relationships. I am confident that, together, we can fulfill our individual and collective responsibilities in a way that enables institutions to make the most of the opportunities available through the passage of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today its approval of the application of Banca Sella, Biella, Italy, to establish an agency in Miami, Florida. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application of BB&T Corporation, Winston-Salem, North Carolina, to acquire One Valley Bancorp, Inc., Charleston, West Virginia, and its nine wholly owned subsidiary banks. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the proposal of Wells Fargo & Company, San Francisco, California, to acquire First Commerce Bancshares, Inc., Lincoln, Nebraska, and its banking and nonbanking subsidiaries. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
Remarks by Governor Laurence H. Meyer At the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council, International Banking Conference, Arlington, Virginia May 31, 2000 The Challenges of Global Financial Institution Supervision Most of my long-time academic and business friends and acquaintances believe that Federal Reserve governors spend virtually all their time in monk-like contemplation of economic projections and monetary policy. Well, reality is certainly different. Most of my time is occupied by issues concerning institutions and markets, regulations and supervisory policy. In the process, I have learned that the most difficult and most under-appreciated job is yours--bank supervision. When times are good, bankers and policymakers don't see the need for your services. In not-so-good times, they blame you for not seeing problems soon enough. Adding to the supervisor's problems is the increasing scale, scope, span of operation, and general complexity of the largest banks operating in the United States--the "global financial institutions" of my title, or, as we call them at the Fed, large, complex banking organizations (LCBOs). These entities are becoming increasingly difficult to supervise and evaluate because of their complexity and opaqueness. The banking agencies have recognized this difficulty and each has developed more-or-less special programs and approaches for the organizations it supervises. Let me underline that these observations are not intended to suggest that regional and community banks are unimportant. Rather, they are intended to convey that the modifications--recent and future--required in the supervision of those smaller banks are far fewer than those required for the LCBOs. The capital reforms being developed at Basel, for example, are really addressing developments at complex organizations, and the extent of changes at most other commercial banks in this country will be, I think, quite modest. In the balance of my remarks today, I would like to discuss what I think are the major approaches that we should take in addressing the challenges of supervising the increasingly complex and large global financial institutions. Internal Ratings For the past decade or so supervisors have recognized that snapshots of the balance sheets of complex banking organizations are not very helpful for supervisory evaluations. Positions just change too rapidly. Moreover, the complexity of positions implies a major commitment of time and supervisory resources. Thus, all the banking agencies have adopted, in one form or another, an approach that emphasizes careful analysis and evaluation of each bank's internal risk management policies and procedures, as well as transactions-testing of those policies and procedures. I suspect that a new, and I think evolutionary, supervisory vehicle--one that supplements the evaluation of risk-management systems--will soon be a required part of supervision for all of us. I refer, of course, to the development, use, and application of internal credit-risk-rating systems by banks. Systems for credit-risk rating in one form or another, are widely used by LCBOs for internal management purposes. As they improve, these systems can increasingly be expected to figure prominently in our supervisory process. That dual use--for both management and supervision--is a dramatic innovation, creating a link between bank management and supervisory standards that has been needed for some time. Cutting-edge banks have already begun to classify their loan portfolios into risk classes of finer and finer gradation and to use those classifications for internal capital allocations, for loan pricing, and for determination of loan loss reserves among other purposes. When the classification scheme is used for internal capital allocations, a probability of default, as well as a loss rate from default, is calculated for each loan. Regulatory agencies and central banks around the world are working on ways to use this same information as the raw material for the development of a much more accurate regulatory capital requirement. The purpose of capital, I need not remind you, is to absorb unexpected losses. At least in principle, a bank's quantification of probabilities of default, and of loss rates given default, in combination with other information, allows both management and policymakers to determine how much capital is needed to cover unexpected losses within a certain minimum probability. Indeed, I believe that a consensus is developing among G-10 countries around just such a use--that is to say, a capital accord in which the capital requirements for individual banks will vary with their individual credit risk profiles, based increasingly on the bank's own internal risk evaluations. To be sure, there remains the problem of supervisory validation of these internal risk systems to ensure first, that the risk classifications are objective and reliable and, second, that they are also used by management for decisionmaking. No less critical is the tying of risk weights to internal risk classifications in such a way as to minimize inconsistencies of capital treatment among banks that have similar risks. From the work I've seen, these problems look solvable, at least in stages. Getting the numbers right is both a science and an art--and is critical. If we simply create a few more risk weights and buckets we will, I submit, have done no more than create new opportunities for capital arbitrage. In short, we will simply continue to induce banks to retain their risky assets when their own internal capital allocations exceed the regulatory levels and to sell, securitize, and otherwise shift off-balance-sheet those assets for which the regulatory capital requirement exceeds the economic requirement. The net result is likely to be riskier and less transparent banks--quite the opposite of what policymakers, supervisors, legislators, and the public want. Regardless of what we do , and I cannot emphasize this enough, those banks on the frontier of risk management, small in number now but increasing, will continue along their current path of ever more sophisticated use of internal risk classifications. And whenever regulatory capital differs from economic capital by more than the cost of arbitrage, they will arbitrage. Another way of saying this is that regardless of our actions, frontier banks will always attempt to manage their businesses to earn competitive risk-adjusted rates of return on equity. Today, our capital regulation, with its one-size-fits-all risk weight for loans, encourages banks to withdraw from low-risk credit markets, or to arbitrage, when regulatory capital requirements exceed levels consistent with an activity's underlying economic risk. Not only is this situation costly and inefficient for banks and their customers, but it also has become increasingly difficult for supervisors to assess the residual capital adequacy of LCBOs, as relatively low risk assets have been removed from the banking book. That is why we need a new regulatory capital framework, and why it is so critical that both the bank and the supervisor use capital weights that are as risk-sensitive as possible. Supervisors, of course, cannot simply take whatever banks are using in their internal risk classifications. Indeed, some large banks are, surprisingly, behind the curve in developing their own internal risk classifications. Their systems have too few categories, are based on insufficient historical data, have been subject to inadequate stress-testing, and are too simplistic. In mid-1999, the Federal Reserve told these banking organizations that they should catch up, and we required our examiners to explicitly evaluate these catch-up efforts in their examinations. I trust that these lagging banking organizations in their own self-interest will promptly revise their systems, both to meet coming revisions in the regulatory capital system and to avoid the market's criticism as information about more institutions' systems becomes better known to creditors of banking organizations. Market Discipline Indeed, harnessing the market to assist in the process is critical to supervising global financial institutions. Reality requires that we emphasize that even with improvement in risk classifications and more accurate capital requirements, we have limited public-policy choices for large and complex organizations. Choice 1: We can accept systemic risk as a cost of having large, global organizations in the marketplace. Choice 2: In order to limit systemic risk, we can adopt very detailed regulation and supervision programs that include a growing list of prohibitions. Choice 3: We can rely more on market discipline to supplement capital reforms and can maintain a level of supervision similar to the one we have today. Given the choices, we simply must try market discipline--and its necessary prerequisite, public disclosure. Large, complex banking organizations already rely heavily on funding from sources other than insured depositors. These other creditors--including, but certainly not limited to, holders of subordinated debentures--should anticipate that the failure of the organization would, in a financial restructuring by the authorities, entail losses--at a minimum, significant haircuts. Fear of loss, if linked with the availability of sufficient information so that creditors are able to determine a bank's real risk profile, should in turn induce uninsured creditors to behave like those of any nonbanking business. That is, uninsured creditors could be expected to command risk premiums linked to the portfolio risks and other risks of the organization. Such risk premiums should, in turn, act both as curbs on the risk-taking behavior of banking organizations and as supplementary signals to supervisors. But, if either effect is to materialize, the uninsured creditors must have both a credible fear of loss and the information about the individual institution necessary to make judgments and decisions. As most of you are aware, late last month the Fed, in cooperation with the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the Security and Exchange Commission, set up a private-sector advisory group. Composed of senior executives of banking and securities firms, the advisory group is to review the state of the art in public disclosure, to counsel us on best practices, and to suggest improvements in those practices. The group's report will be public. While I have no idea what will be in the report, it is my hope and expectation that we will learn more about how to use market discipline both to strengthen our banking system and to avoid additional regulation and supervision of global financial institutions. At the Federal Reserve, we plan, however, to require that at least the large, complex banking organizations establish and implement a disclosure policy to provide stakeholders with information that can be used to evaluate the organization's risk profile. Our examiners, as part of both the holding company inspection and the state member bank examination, will review and evaluate such disclosures for their conformance to best practices and their contribution to stakeholders' understanding of their risk at that organization. We should all be aware that additional public disclosure is not a free good, especially if it works. Banks will find that additional market discipline constrains their options, and supervisors will be concerned about creditors' response to bad news. But both constrained options and swift market punishment are part of the desired effect of market discipline. Supervision If, and I underline "if," (1) banking organizations develop working, verifiable, and reasonably accurate methods of evaluating and categorizing credit risks (2) capital requirements are linked tightly to those risks (3) public disclosures induce realistic market discipline and (4) market, operational, and legal risks are under control, then the direction for supervisors seems reasonably clear: to validate systems, policies, and procedures. Now, I have purposely set up a straw man so that we can all appreciate how much work remains to be done. Despite the many tasks that lie ahead, the path that I believe we are on will, I think, lead to supervisory efforts that focus on a bank's management information and risk-management systems and on providing management with evaluations and criticisms designed to improve those systems. To be sure, transactions-testing will remain an important effort. But, critically, the safety and soundness of the bank will depend on how well its risk-management systems work, the judgment its management brings to bear in using those systems, and the effectiveness of market discipline. It will, I think, increasingly be the job of the supervisor of global financial organizations to evaluate and test systems and to evaluate and criticize the accuracy and helpfulness of the information banks disclose about their own risk profiles. Internal systems and public disclosure, in short, are the real first line of defense. The only alternative for the large and complex banking organization, as I have noted, is intrusiveness and detailed regulation, which would dramatically reduce flexibility and innovation in our banking system. We have, I believe, already started down the path I have described. Several problems remain to be solved. Any one of them could slow or even stop our progress. I have already mentioned the need to develop procedures for validating risk classifications and for converting risk classifications into risk weights on an equitable basis across banks. The challenge of reaching a consensus at Basel is another obstacle. But whatever we develop, either here or on an international basis, we will be relying on the good judgment and sophistication of the nation's examiners and on their development of the skills needed to keep pace with the activities of banks operating in the United States. Cooperation But skill and good judgment are, unfortunately, not sufficient. For better or worse, supervisors and policymakers function in a multi-agency environment. We must cooperate across agencies if we are going to get the job done. Most global U.S. banks are supervised by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. All bank and financial holding companies and some large banks are supervised by the Federal Reserve. Nothing in this structure was changed by the recently enacted Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act. The challenges of supervising large, complex banking organizations raise yet again the question of how to make the supervisory structure mandated by the Congress work efficiently and in the public interest. All the parties, it seems to me, must work out relationships and operating norms that serve the objective of safe, sound, and efficient financial markets. The implicit tensions among the regulators are a fact of life; goodwill and cooperation are required if we are to carry out the law. Before I proceed further, it might help if I spend a moment on the philosophy underlying umbrella supervision and distinguish this supervisory approach from direct supervision of insured depository institutions. As you know, all large and sophisticated financial services companies manage their risks on a consolidated basis, requiring, in turn, oversight of risk-taking by the consolidated entity. The consolidated, or umbrella, supervisor aims to keep the relevant regulators informed about overall risk-taking and to identify and evaluate the myriad risks that extend throughout such diversified bank and financial holding companies in order to judge how the parts and the whole affect, or may affect, affiliated banks. To fulfill its responsibility, reaffirmed by the recent legislation, the Federal Reserve plans to focus on the organization's consolidated risk-management process and on overall capital adequacy. For the new financial holding companies, the consolidated capital issue is complicated by the affiliation of banks with institutions that have their own financial regulator and capital regulation. We are in the process of tackling these issues, knowing that responsibility for ensuring adequate management processes and control relies, in the first instance, with a bank's management and its primary supervisor. As umbrella supervisor, the Federal Reserve seeks to gain an overview of the organization's activities and to detect potential threats to affiliated U.S. depository institutions. The role of a financial and bank holding company supervisor is significantly different from that of a bank supervisor. The difference reflects the difference between an insured depository institution and a nonbank affiliate of the holding company. Depository institutions are covered by the federal safety net--deposit insurance and access to the discount window and to other guarantees associated with the Federal Reserve's payment and settlement system. Access to the federal safety net dampens the incentive of investors and creditors to monitor banks' risk-taking, which in turn breaks the link between bank risk-taking and funding costs. Bank regulation and supervision aims to compensate for the resultant breakdown in market discipline and to limit bank failures that could overwhelm the deposit insurance fund. The financial modernization law did not change the focus of the safety net. But the relative growth of activities in bank holding companies outside the insured depository institution, as well as the increased focus by both management and supervisors on consolidated risk management, may make maintaining the distinction between the insured bank and its increasingly nonbank affiliates more challenging. If we let public perceptions, let alone supervisory actions, blur the distinction, we will surely extend the implicit safety net and expand its moral hazard, to the detriment of efficient markets and, ultimately, at high cost to taxpayers. The recently enacted law provides that, when specialized functional regulators already oversee the new permissible activities, duplication of supervision, and hence excessive regulatory burden, should be avoided. In addition, because market discipline operates more effectively in connection with nonbank activities not subject to the moral hazard of the safety net, regulators should try to avoid diminishing market discipline in the new financial holding companies. Thus, the act discourages the extension of bank-like regulation and supervision to nonbank affiliates and subsidiaries. The Federal Reserve can contribute to this goal by being clear in word and deed that the affiliation of nonbank entities with a bank does not afford them access to the safety net. However, the Congress also saw the need for an umbrella supervisor to protect insured depository institutions from the risks of activities conducted by bank holding company affiliates. The law limits the extension of credit by insured depository institutions to their affiliates, and the umbrella supervisor--the Fed--is charged with limiting other forms of risk exposure to the depository institutions from the bank holding company structure. Clearly, there is a tension between protecting banks from such risks and avoiding the extension of bank-like supervision to affiliates. The provisions of the law dealing with the relationship between the Federal Reserve and the functional supervisors of certain types of nonbank affiliates--the SEC, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, and the state insurance regulators--attempt to balance these considerations. As you know, these provisions call for the Federal Reserve to rely, as much as possible, on the examinations conducted by the functional supervisors and on public reports to obtain information about broker-dealers, insurance companies, and futures merchants. The Federal Reserve may examine such functionally regulated entities only if (1) the Board has reasonable cause to believe that the entity is engaged in activities that pose a material risk to an affiliated depository institution, (2) the Board determines that an examination is necessary to inform the Board of the entity's risk-management systems, or (3) the Board has reasonable cause to believe that the entity is not in compliance with the banking laws. We are in the process of working out satisfactory procedures with functional regulators. But it seems to me that we also must work harder to cooperate and share information among the umbrella and bank supervisors in a manner that is satisfactory to both and that minimizes regulatory burden and overlap. In principle, the relationship between the umbrella supervisor and the primary federal bank regulator could involve the relationship between the Federal Reserve and either the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or the OCC. In practice, however, the key relationship for large, complex financial holding companies will be between the Federal Reserve and the OCC because the banks in large, complex financial holding companies are either state member banks or national banks. Indeed, most of the large and complex institutions likely to take advantage of the new opportunities have lead banks, as I have noted, with national charters. This relationship between the primary bank regulator and the umbrella supervisor must respect the agencies' individual statutory authorities and responsibilities. At the same time, the primary bank regulator and the umbrella supervisor need to share information that allows them to carry out their responsibilities without creating duplication or excessive burden. Given the systemic risk associated with the disruption of the operations of large banks--and the role of the bank within the broader banking organization--the Federal Reserve believes that it needs to know more about the activities within large insured depository institutions than can be derived from access to public information or from the reports of the primary bank supervisor. Similarly, the primary bank regulator needs information about the activities of a bank's parent company and its nonbank affiliates aimed at protecting the bank from threats that might arise elsewhere in the consolidated organization. The need is particularly pressing when companies manage their businesses and attendant risks across legal entities within the structure of a financial holding company. As I have noted, the result is a complicated relationship, one with unavoidable, inherent, tensions. We each have our specific statutory responsibilities--the primary bank regulator for the bank and the Fed for the consolidated holding company. Yet to be most effective we need to work cooperatively and to keep each other informed. This cooperation should, when necessary, include participation in each other's examination teams. The bottom line is that the primary bank regulator and the Federal Reserve as umbrella supervisor should establish practical operating arrangements to ensure that the relationship avoids duplication, minimizes regulatory burden, respects individual responsibilities, and still ensures the wider flow of information required to meet their individual and collective responsibilities. There are, I am pleased report, ongoing discussions between the Federal Reserve and the OCC focused on improving our cooperation and coordination where we are both involved in the supervision of individual LCBOs. In many cases today, the existing relationships and coordination between Federal Reserve and OCC examiners are already excellent. Working collaboratively, we will assess our coordination at several LCBOs to draw lessons from those cases where the relationship is already working very well. We will use this information to improve the consistency of our relationship across all the LCBOs where we are both involved in supervision. In addition to improved cooperation among U.S. banking agencies, supervision of global financial institutions requires strong relations among supervisors worldwide. Most certainly, we have sought to do that, for decades now, through the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and its predecessor. Although the work of that committee has focused on banks in G-10 countries, the supervisory principles and sound banking practices that it has identified have helped to strengthen bank supervision around the globe. Development of the "Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision," is a prime example of those efforts. The creation of the Financial Stability Institute, under the joint sponsorship of the Bank for International Settlements and the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, is another and represents an important effort to help developing countries train their supervisory staffs. The need for international cooperation extends beyond banking systems and bank supervisors, however, and must embrace the full range of regulated activities that large, complex financial institutions conduct. Toward that end, authorities from around the world have established the Joint Forum, made up of representatives of agencies regulating banking, insurance, and securities activities. The Financial Stability Forum, established by the G-7 in 1999, is another effort to promote international financial stability through information exchange and cooperation in financial supervision. The Forum regularly brings together national authorities responsible for financial stability in significant international financial centers--including both securities and banking supervisors--international financial institutions, and representatives of international groups of supervisors and regulators. Other groups exist and will, necessarily, be created to address issues of specific interest and may have short or long lives. The point is, it is important that we communicate and coordinate our activities, so that we understand each other's responsibilities and oversight techniques. As international problems emerge--as they will--knowing our counterparts abroad and trusting their judgment could be essential to resolving problems in a timely and orderly way. Conclusion The challenge of supervising global financial institutions is the challenge of the decade for supervisors. Large banking organizations are likely to become increasingly complicated and wide ranging, and the banking supervisory agencies will have to adjust to that. In my view, the adjustment will require increasing reliance on banks' own internal risk management, and especially on internal risk classification systems; on regulatory capital linked to internal risk classifications; on supervision that focuses on evaluation of, and supervisory feedback on, risk-management systems; on market discipline; and on increased cooperation among agencies. None of these steps will be easy. The good news is that we've started on all of these efforts, and that progress has already been made.