Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Office of the Comptroller of the Currency Office of Thrift Supervision AGENCIES CONSIDER A SIMPLIFIED CAPITAL FRAMEWORK FOR NON-COMPLEX INSTITUTIONS The federal bank and thrift regulatory agencies today requested public comment on an advance notice of proposed rulemaking that considers the establishment of a simplified regulatory capital framework for non-complex institutions. The advance notice was published in today's Federal Register . Comments are due February 1, 2001, to the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, or the Office of Thrift Supervision. Banks and thrifts are required to maintain minimum levels of capital set by U.S. regulators under a framework established by the Basel Accord in 1988. The U.S. and other regulators are currently revising the Accord to provide a more refined assessment of the capital requirements for large, complex, internationally active banks. The agencies seek comment on simplified capital frameworks for non-complex banks and thrifts that would conform to the underlying principles of a revised Basel Accord and maintain the principles of prudential supervision, yet would relieve unnecessary regulatory burden. The advance notice by the agencies observes that a large number of community banks and thrifts might benefit from a simpler capital framework that relieves some of the regulatory burden associated with regulatory capital calculations. The agencies suggest criteria that could be used to determine eligibility for a simplified capital framework, such as the nature of a bank's activities, its asset size and its risk profile. In the advance notice, the agencies seek comment on possible minimum regulatory capital requirements for non-complex institutions, including a simplified risk-based ratio, a simple leverage ratio, or a leverage ratio modified to incorporate certain off-balance sheet exposures. The advance notice solicits public comment on the agencies' preliminary views, particularly on the following issues: Defining a non-complex institution. Identifying the factors for determining eligibility for a simplified capital framework. Setting an appropriate minimum capital threshold for non-complex institutions that balances the need to maintain prudent capital levels while minimizing the regulatory burden associated with calculating that level. Considering additional options for measuring regulatory capital at non-complex institutions. Resolving the implementation issues associated with a simplified capital framework. Media Contacts: FDIC: Phil Battey (202) 898-6993 Federal Reserve: David Skidmore (202) 452-2955 OCC: Sam Eskenazi (202) 874-5770 OTS: William Fulwider (202) 906-6913 FDIC: Phil Battey (202) 898-6993 Federal Reserve: David Skidmore (202) 452-2955 OCC: Sam Eskenazi (202) 874-5770 OTS: William Fulwider (202) 906-6913
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of an Order of Prohibition against George J. Peterson, the former chairman of the board and chief executive officer and institution-affiliated party of Foxdale Bancorp, Inc., and the Foxdale Bank, both of South Elgin, Illinois. Mr. Peterson, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order as a result of his alleged conduct which constituted violations of applicable law and regulations. The Order was issued jointly with the Commissioner of Banks and Real Estate, Bureau of Banks and Trust Companies for the state of Illinois. A copy of the Order is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today approved fee schedules for Federal Reserve Bank payment services, effective January 2, 2001. Overall, the 2001 price level for Federal Reserve payments services is projected to increase 4.2 percent from the 2000 level. Because of price reductions in recent years, the overall price level has risen only half a percent since 1996. For electronic payments services, the efficiencies that have been gained from consolidating the Federal Reserve's automated processing facilities will allow the Reserve Banks to maintain their current basic transaction fees for Fedwire funds, book-entry securities, and automated clearinghouse in 2001. Reflecting, in part, investments in check automation and electronic check technologies, check service fees will increase, on average, approximately 3 percent compared with current prices. These investments should lead to greater operating efficiencies at the Reserve Banks and result in cost savings that ultimately can be passed along to customers. The 2001 priced services fee schedules are available at the Federal Reserve's Financial Services web site at . The Board today also approved the 2001 private sector adjustment factor (PSAF) for Reserve Bank priced services of $206.9 million, an increase of $14.2 million or 7.4 percent from the 2000 PSAF of $192.6 million. The PSAF is an allowance for taxes and other imputed expenses that would have been paid and return on capital that would have been provided had the Federal Reserve's priced services been provided by a private business. The Monetary Control Act of 1980 requires the Federal Reserve to recover the costs of providing priced payment services, including the PSAF, over the long run to promote competition between the Reserve Banks and private-sector service providers. The Reserve Banks project that they will recover 98.0 percent of their priced services costs, including operating costs and the imputed costs and target return on equity (ROE), in 2001. The Reserve Banks expect to earn $978.5 million in revenue while incurring operating and imputed costs of $889.4 million, for a net income of $89.1 million compared to a target ROE of $109.3 million. The Reserve Banks estimate that they will recover 100.4 percent of their costs in 2000. During the period 1990 to 1999, the Reserve Banks recovered 99.7 percent of the costs of priced services, including targeted ROE. A notice of the new fee schedules is attached.
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan Globalization At the Banco de Mexico 75th Anniversary Conference, Stabilization and Monetary Policy: The International Experience, Mexico City, Mexico November 14, 2000 I am honored to be speaking before this distinguished group on the occasion of the Bank of Mexico's seventy-fifth anniversary. Appropriately, major mileposts encourage introspection and a search for perspective. This morning, I shall focus my remarks on the important engine of growth for our mutual economies--the force of globalization. Although globalization has its critics, I say with some conviction that the increasing interaction among national economies has engendered benefits that have significantly exceeded their costs over the years. And the clearest way to understand those net benefits in the twenty-first century is to examine the record of the prior two centuries, both for ways in which the current experience is similar and for ways in which it is different. After touching upon the benefits that closer linkages have provided to us all, I will then discuss the importance of not ceding the progress that we have won thus far. How the World is Similar Though economic data are increasingly suspect as we look further back into the past, three regularities in the long sweep of the record strongly suggest that the degree of globalization today is not measurably greater than that prevailing in the century-ago world of our great grandparents. One is the importance of trade in the overall economy. Measures of total trade across industrial countries, including those that simply sum merchandise exports and imports, have grown rapidly relative to total output over the past fifty years. But this growth mostly reverses declines in the ratio of total trade to GDP in the first half of the twentieth century. In fact, for many industrial countries, total trade as a share of GDP is not much above levels that were commonplace in the late nineteenth century. Second, trade in goods was accompanied by substantial trade in assets. A century ago, net capital flows across the major industrial economies were often greater than today when scaled to GDP. This integration of global financial markets was made possible in part by technological advances, including importantly the laying of the transatlantic cable in 1866. And, like today, open markets allowed capital to flow to the most productive uses where prospective returns were judged to be highest. Third, because funds could flow across national borders to their most profitable uses, national investment was not limited to the pool of national saving. Indeed, in the last few decades of the nineteenth century, saving and investment at the national level apparently were far less correlated with each other than they were for most of the twentieth century, suggesting a greater degree of globalization of investment financing in the latter part of the nineteenth century than existed in the succeeding century relative to the size of our domestic economies. Thus, our great grandparents lived in a world in which the product of their efforts well may have been sent to foreign shores. Quite often, those efforts were funded in part by foreign investors. As a result, what happened in the financial markets of the City of London, however distant, would echo around the globe. Although this system produced inevitable errors of mispricing and panic on occasion, it reliably funded the opening of new economies and the rolling back of frontiers across the Americas. A considerable portion of the most impressive infrastructure built over the centuries--including the center of old Mexico City itself, our system of canals in the United States, and thousands of miles of railroad track bed and bridges in all our countries--provides eloquent testimony to the net benefit of that international trade and finance. How the World Differs But we should remember that the world of the nineteenth century differed in important respects from our own. For one, our great grandparents were more likely to relocate. Given the great waves of immigration in the mid and late nineteenth century, it was not unprecedented in some countries that migration would change the population by one-tenth in a decade. The erection of hurdles to the free flow of workers since then implies that our national relationship with foreign countries is more likely to reflect commercial interests than lingering ties of earlier origin. It also requires that capital and managers relocate to tap the pool of lower-cost workers available worldwide, helping to explain both the rise of multinational firms and much of the expansion in real wages over time in developing countries. The output of our workers also differs. While ore-laden ships still cross the Great Lakes, quite often goods of far higher value are packed in the hold of a single cargo jet bound for a more distant location. Simply put, the advent of the microchip has allowed producers to increase the value of output while shrinking the physical volume it takes up. The range of innovation in the high-technology industry is truly awesome, bringing new products on line at a staggering pace and directly adding to the advance of output per hour worked in that sector. And as knowledge and skill in harnessing this equipment diffuses through the rest of the economy, other workers generally become more productive as well. That is, advances in the new economy have spilled over to more established goods production. I hesitate to use the phrase "old" economy because I am not sure how much of the truly old remains in an economy where information from global positioning satellites is used to guide "old economy" tractors in the field, robotic arms swing car doors in place on "old economy" assembly lines, and seismic soundings have, during the past decade, doubled the odds of success in that stalwart of the "old economy," wildcat drilling. Innovations in inventory control and better and more accurate routing have made it cheaper to bring more traditional goods onto the world market. Taken together, modern producers of goods--whether low or high tech--move goods between national markets at a lower real cost and have more means at their disposal to meet foreign demands more flexibly than our great grandparents could have ever imagined. In part for these reasons, world markets are increasingly important for those who produce goods that can be traded. While I noted earlier that merchandise trade as a share of GDP in the United States is not much different today than it was in the late nineteenth century, it is important to remember that the composition of GDP has changed considerably. One hundred years ago-even fifty years ago-agriculture, mining, and manufacturing made up about 40 percent of U.S. output. Today, that figure stands closer to 20 percent. On the spending side, governments have tended to take increasing shares of total output. Thus, comparing the twenty-first to the nineteenth century, a proportionally smaller industrial base now supports a similar relative volume of trade, suggesting that we are now more reliant on foreign markets. The ongoing revolution in computing and communication has also allowed U.S. producers of services to find foreign buyers as well. At the end of the nineteenth century, U.S. exports of services were de minimis. Indeed, as late as 1970, service exports amounted to about 1 percent of GDP. Today, that share stands closer to 3-1/2 percent. Representative of this progress are the rapid advances in financial services, which have knitted together national markets and added value by searching out prospective high-return firms and projects. The speed at which capital can now cross national borders is reflected in a considerably higher short-term component of capital flows than was the case in the nineteenth century. In those earlier days, by contrast, the slower pace of round-trip investment curbed the incentive to accumulate short-term assets. Of course, freely flowing capital brings costs along with benefits. The short-term nature of capital flows implies that their direction can reverse quickly, sometimes with quite disturbing consequences. As opposed to the nineteenth century, we have mechanisms to help cushion the effects of crises and a willingness to change national monetary policies when the need arises. The Role of Policy As with our great grandparents, our own economies are made better by our interaction with the wider world around us. International trade in goods, services, and assets are the chief means of facilitating that interaction. And those interactions and connections in recent decades have become stronger. To some extent, we can credit good national policy making for this. The progress in lowering trade barriers since World War II marks the triumph of putting an important idea into practice-that international trade benefits all nations. Indeed, in every nation, those benefits are shared by people spread across quite different income brackets. The pity is that this idea has been well known in the economics profession for the two past centuries. To be sure, some of this recent progress was bred by necessity, as national governments came to appreciate the patent inevitability of globalization. By lowering the costs of transacting and sharing information, technology has reduced market frictions and provided significant impetus to the process of broadening world markets. Expanding markets, in turn, have increased competition and narrowed the ability of governments to influence economic outcomes. In recognition both of the prosperity possible through an open trading system and of their lessened ability to halt that tide, many governments have reduced tariffs and trade barriers and, when necessary, deregulated markets. These actions themselves have further promoted globalization. The Risks We Face Understanding the process by which this progress has been accomplished highlights a critical risk going forward. Simply put, good economic performance has made it easier to make good economic policy. However, any notable shortfall in economic performance from the exemplary standard of recent years runs the risk of reviving mistrust of market-oriented systems, even among conventional policymakers. Thankfully, such views are not widespread, and most fall quickly to the force of reason. Still, the arguments against the global trading system that emerged first in Seattle and then spread over the past year arguably touched a chord in many people, in part by raising the fear that they would lose local political control of their destinies. As some analysts have noted, protests have arisen not against "economic forums" per se, but rather against "world economic forums." Clearly, the risk is that support for restrictions on trade is not dead, only quiescent. In many important respects, the past half century has represented an uneven struggle to repair the close linkages among national economies that existed before the first World War. The hostilities bred of war, the substantial disruptions to established trading patterns associated with that conflict, and the subsequent poor economic performance over the next few decades triggered the erection of trade barriers around the world that have taken even longer to dismantle. To repeat that error would be a tragic act of foolishness and waste. Central bankers can make two contributions to ensure an open trading system. For one, we should not hesitate to remind our fellow citizens of the manifest net benefits of free trade in goods, services, and assets, benefits that accrue not only to all trading partners on average but also especially to some of the least fortunate within those trading societies. I would further emphasize that the free market system has proven itself better than all other forms of organization dedicated to harnessing the underlying competitive forces of the division of labor and comparative advantage. For another, we monetary policymakers must keep hold of the anchor provided by price stability so as to support maximum sustainable economic growth over time. By fostering such economic performance, our arguments for free trade and open markets should find a receptive audience.
For immediate release The Federal Open Market Committee at its meeting today decided to maintain the existing stance of monetary policy, keeping its target for the federal funds rate at 6-1/2 percent. The utilization of the pool of available workers remains at an unusually high level, and the increase in energy prices, though having limited effect on core measures of prices to date, still harbors the possibility of raising inflation expectations. The Committee, accordingly, continues to see a risk of heightened inflation pressures. However, softening in business and household demand and tightening conditions in financial markets over recent months suggest that the economy could expand for a time at a pace below the productivity-enhanced rate of growth of its potential to produce. Nonetheless, to date the easing of demand pressures has not been sufficient to warrant a change in the Committee's judgment that against the background of its long-run goals of price stability and sustainable economic growth and of the information currently available, the risks continue to be weighted mainly toward conditions that may generate heightened inflation pressures in the foreseeable future.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the annual adjustments in the amount of net transaction accounts used in the calculation of reserve requirements and the cutoff levels used to determine the detail and frequency of deposit reporting. All depository institutions must retain a percentage of certain types of deposits in the form of vault cash, or as a deposit in a Federal Reserve Bank, or a pass-through account at a correspondent institution. Reserve requirements currently are assessed on the depository institution's net transaction accounts (mostly checking accounts). For net transaction accounts in 2001, the first $5.5 million, up from $5 million in 2000, will be exempt from reserve requirements. A 3 percent reserve ratio will be assessed on net transaction accounts over $5.5 million to and including $42.8 million, down from $44.3 million in 2000. A 10 percent reserve ratio will be applied above $42.8 million. These annual adjustments, known as the low reserve tranche adjustment and the reservable liabilities exemption adjustment, are based on growth in net transaction accounts and total reservable liabilities, respectively, at all depository institutions between June 30, 1999 and June 30, 2000. Additionally, the Board increased the deposit cutoff level that is used with the exemption level to determine the frequency and detail of deposit reporting. Effective September 2001, depository institutions with total reservable liabilities greater than the exemption level ($5.5 million) are subject to detailed deposit reporting and are called nonexempt institutions. Those nonexempt institutions with total deposits greater than or equal to $101 million, up from the $95 million cutoff that became effective September 2000, must report their deposit levels weekly. Those with total deposits less than $101 million must report their deposit levels quarterly. Depository institutions with total reservable liabilities equal to or less than the exemption level of $5.5 million are not subject to detailed deposit reporting and are called exempt depository institutions. Exempt depository institutions with total deposits of $5.5 million or more file a less detailed deposit report once each year. Exempt depository institutions with total deposits less than $5.5 million are not required to file deposit reports. In July 2000, the Board discontinued the quarterly report previously used by some exempt institutions (form FR 2910q). U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks and Edge and agreement corporations must file deposit reports weekly, regardless of size. For depository institutions that report weekly, the low reserve tranche adjustment and the reservable liabilities exemption adjustment will apply to the reserve computation period that begins November 28, 2000 and the corresponding reserve maintenance period that begins December 28, 2000. For institutions that report quarterly, the low reserve tranche adjustment and the reservable liabilities exemption adjustment will apply to the reserve computation period that begins December 19, 2000, and the corresponding reserve maintenance period that begins January 18, 2001. The Board's notice is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Guaranty Financial Corporation, Charlottesville, Virginia; the Guaranty Bank, Charlottesville, Virginia; the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond; and the Bureau of Financial Institutions of the Commonwealth of Virginia. A copy of the Order is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the termination of the following enforcement action: The Asahi Bank, Ltd., New York Branch Cease and Desist Order dated February 13, 1997--terminated October 11, 2000
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of a Cease and Desist Order against the United Central Bank, Garland, Texas. A copy of the Order is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today a new Internet resource designed to help bankers and bank examiners apply consumer regulations to Internet banking. The Checkers Bank (TCB) is a mock online bank whose website contains violations of federal consumer protection regulations. The TCB site highlights these violations for further investigation. The TCB site provides web pages that address such financial vehicles as: Loans and Credit Cards Consumer Deposits Investments Commercial Services Each web page provides a link to a support sidebar that the user can reach by clicking on the Federal Reserve System seal at the bottom of the page. The sidebar provides educational features that help users to spot violations and to learn more about the underlying regulation. Each sidebar offers these features: Need a hint: Gives hints about what may be wrong with the page without completely ruining the challenge. Findings and Follow-up: Marks actual violations or problem areas that require further investigation. Review Regs: Provides a link to the Federal Reserve Board's Regulations directory. Suggest Changes: Allows users to electronically send feedback to the Federal Reserve. Though not all pages show violations, for those that do, the issues are described in detail. The Findings page offers users the option to print for closer examination. Users of the site may peruse the site at their own pace. The Checkers Bank can be accessed at .
For immediate release
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among CSB Bancorp, Inc., Millersburg, Ohio; The Commercial and Savings Bank of Millersburg, Millersburg, Ohio; the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland; and the Ohio Division of Financial Institutions. A copy of the Order is attached.