Remarks by Governor Laurence H. Meyer At the Risk Management Planning Conference, Chicago, Illinois June 1, 2000 The Roles of Banks, Supervisors, and the Market in Advancing Risk Management It's a little bit more than carrying coals to Newcastle to say to an audience like this that the environment in which banks operate--by which I mean 95 percent the markets and only 5 percent the regulatory and statutory rules--is changing at what appears to be an accelerating rate. Technology--and its associated competitive pressures--is affecting institutions of all sizes. Banks and their supervisory counterparts are responding in many ways, not the least of which is how they manage and evaluate risk Before I get into risk management, however, let me note that in identifying technology as the driving force of change, I do not mean to demean the importance of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act. It greatly reduced the cost of operating a modern financial institution by explicitly authorizing a structure that had already largely been created--by technology, by deregulation, and, let us be frank, by loopholes. That, and bankers' good sense in looking before they leap, are, I think, the main reasons why we have not seen a rush to combine banks, securities firms, and insurance companies. Banking organizations will, it seems, continue to evolve with a wide range of strategies, in markets from local to global, with structures ranging from more-or-less standard commercial banking to operations combining trading, merchant banking, investment banking, and commercial banking. The financial modernization legislation facilitates these choices. Reflecting the subject of risk management, my remarks today will focus mainly on the largest and most complex organizations because that is where the greatest change in the art has, and will, occur in response to real needs. Because complexity is the driving force requiring better risk management tools and practices, these new techniques will spread to smaller organizations as needed. But less complex and even traditional organizations are being affected by the changing technology; credit scoring and participations in securitizations are two examples. Moreover, as new systems are applied at the larger banks, other institutions are likely to find ways of using some of the new techniques. Thus, I hope my comments and observations will be of interest to most of you, and that your attention will not solely reflect the good manners characteristic of all bankers. Internal Ratings One of the most dramatic changes in risk management now underway is the development and application of more sophisticated internal risk classifications for loan portfolios. Virtually all large, complex banking organizations now have some form of internal risk classification system. Cutting-edge banks, however, are classifying their loan portfolios into risk classes of finer and finer gradation. They use those categories to control aggregate risk exposure, to allocate capital internally, to price loans, to determine loan loss reserves, and for other purposes. As with bond ratings, a probability of default, and a loss rate given default, are calculated for each grade. These data provide not only valuable statistical insight into a bank's evolving risk but also the information needed to control it. This information could be critically important to bank supervisors. Indeed, central banks and banking agencies around the world are considering using the same information produced for internal risk classification systems as the raw material for the development of a much more accurate regulatory risk-based capital requirement. The purpose of capital is to absorb unexpected losses and, at least in principle, the probability functions I just described allow the policymaker to determine how much of the loss distribution probability should be covered by capital. Indeed, I believe a consensus of G-10 countries is developing around a capital accord in which individual bank capital requirements will vary with their individual credit risk profiles, based increasingly on the banks' own internal risk evaluations. To be sure, supervisors will need to ensure that, first, the risk classifications are empirically based and tested and, second, that they are also used by management for decision making. No less critical is tying risk weights to internal risk classifications so as to minimize inconsistencies of capital treatment among banks with similar risks. From the work I've seen, these problems look solvable, at least in stages. This dual use by supervisors and bank managers of internal risk classifications is a dramatic innovation, creating a link between bank management and supervisory standards that has been needed for some time. Let me explain why that linkage is so important for, I'd say almost critical to, our evolving strategy of bank supervision and capital reform and why it should be so important for you as well. If both the supervisors and management are using the same information--reading from the same prayer book as it were--the burden on banks should be dramatically reduced. Neither the agencies nor the industry should be happy when supervisory policies become separated from the reality of management and practice. Not only may one of us be doing something irrelevant, but bankers may be forced to duplicate their efforts. I might add that burdens on supervisors are also reduced when we both look at the same thing. Under risk-focused supervision, the current paradigm of all the agencies, we will be reviewing internal risk management practices anyway. There are real efficiencies if this review is also tied to the evaluation of the bank's capital. Moreover, supervisors do not have the resources to review each separate loan. The focus on systems and risk management provides a degree of comfort about loan quality. If supervisors are emphasizing the linkage between internal risk classifications and capital, I think it quite likely that both will be interested in jointly developing improved internal risk management systems. Bankers, I am sure you will agree, will always have a better understanding of the credit quality of their customers than will the supervisors. The quality of supervision will, I think, thus be greatly enhanced when supervisors are plugged-in, literally, to the bank's risk management systems. I remind you again that, first, the supervisors have to be comfortable with management's internal risk classification systems; they have to validate its accuracy by reviewing it, by understanding it, by testing it. If the system falls short, we are both better off when it is improved. When the supervisor accepts the system, we both enjoy benefits: better capital regulations, greater efficiencies, reduced burden, and, one hopes, better risk management. Our working hypothesis is that the scale of capital reform for most banks in the United States will be rather modest. Indeed, for most banks in this country it may even be possible to adopt a quite simple regulatory capital ratio consistent with the straightforward nature of their operations. As the operations of a bank become more complicated--please notice that I am not linking these gradations to size but to operational complexity--its capital regime might be revised to reflect the closing of certain loopholes and perhaps somewhat greater use of both external and internal grades. The most complex entities will require the most complex capital rules but also the most complex risk management regimes, on which we hope the capital rules will be based. The scope and complexity of supervision must reflect the scope and complexity of the banks to which it is applied. Getting the proposed risk-based capital numbers correct, both in science and as an art, is especially critical for the most complex organizations. The current one-size-fits-all regulatory capital regime, as you know, has led increasingly to a gaming of the regulatory requirements. This amounts to at least a supervisor-permitted series of market-based transfers designed to reduce regulatory capital and, one hopes, link it more closely to economic capital. If we just create a few more risk weights and buckets we will, I submit, have done no more than create new opportunities for this kind of capital arbitrage. In short, we will simply continue to induce banks to retain their risky assets when their own internal capital allocations exceed the regulatory levels and to sell, securitize, and otherwise shift off-balance sheet those assets for which the regulatory capital requirement exceeds their economic requirement. The net result is likely to be riskier banks--quite the opposite of what policymakers and supervisors want. Regardless of what we do , and I cannot emphasize this enough, the small but increasing number of banks on the frontier of risk management, will continue along their current path of ever more sophisticated use of internal risk classifications. And whenever regulatory capital differs from economic capital by more than the cost of arbitrage, they will arbitrage. Another way of saying this is that, regardless of supervisory actions, bank management will always attempt to manage its business to earn competitive risk-adjusted rates of return on equity. Today, our capital regulation encourages banks to withdraw from low-risk credit markets, or to arbitrage, when regulatory capital requirements exceed levels consistent with an activity's underlying economic risk. Not only is this situation costly and inefficient for banks and their customers, it has become increasingly difficult for supervisors to assess the residual capital adequacy of large, complex, banking organizations as relatively low-risk assets have been removed from the banking book. Indeed, I am concerned that regulatory capital is, as a result, becoming a safety and soundness irrelevancy and simply a compliance requirement. That is why we need a new regulatory capital framework and why it is so critical that both the bank and the supervisor use capital weights that are as risk-sensitive as possible. As I mentioned, supervisors, have to be comfortable with banks' internal risk classifications. And the fact is that today supervisors would not have the necessary degree of comfort. Indeed, the fact is that today some large banks are surprisingly behind the curve in developing their own internal risk classifications. The major complaints are that categories are too few, historical data and stress testing are insufficient, and assumptions are too simplistic. That is why last year the Federal Reserve told lagging banking organizations that they should catch up and required our examiners to evaluate efforts to do so. If you take only one thing away from this conference, I hope it will be a resolution to put a high priority on improving your internal risk classification system, virtually regardless of your size, but certainly most critically as your operations become more complex. For their own benefit, banking organizations will, I trust, promptly revise the systems, not only to meet coming revisions in the regulatory capital regimes, but also to avoid the market's criticism as creditors become more familiar with best practices and come to expect it of their banks. Market Discipline Indeed, market evaluations will, I think, play an expanding role. Indeed, a discussion of risk management would be incomplete without mention of the best risk manager in a market economy: the market. As executives of banking organizations, I am sure that you feel the pressure of the marketplace throughout your working day. But I'm referring here to a different kind of market pressure or discipline that, the evidence is quite clear, is now less effective on insured depository institutions than on other kinds of financial and nonfinancial business. That is the market discipline that comes in a tight linkage between funding costs and availability, on one hand, and risk-taking on the other. The reason why this linkage is attenuated in banking is no great mystery. The safety net--deposit insurance, the discount window, and access to the Federal Reserve payment mechanism--coupled with a kind of an imprimatur that comes from supervision, both elevate the relative status of bank liabilities and weaken the nexus between the riskiness of bank portfolios and bank funding costs and availability. That is to say, the market gives banks a kind of pass to avoid the full costs of their own risk-taking because of banks' special privileges and a belief that the supervisor is acting as the market's agent, as it were. There is a kind of vicious circle at work here: The less the market does its job, the more the supervisor is called upon, and the more the supervisor is called upon, the less the market does its job. Given the safety net, we cannot eliminate this circle. But it's time that we make it less binding. Because as markets have become more global and competitive and because technology and deregulation have fostered more innovation, traditional supervision is no longer compatible with a responsive and innovative financial services industry. At the same time, the increasing concentration of banking and financial assets in a smaller number of very large organizations raises real systemic risk and concerns about taxpayer liability. It seems to me that we have a limited set of options: acceptance of greater risk coupled with prayer; or heavier and more detailed supervision and regulation coupled with an increasing number of outright prohibitions, a reversal of everything for which we've worked so hard; or a greater reliance on market discipline, linked with the improvements in internal risk management and capital reform I discussed earlier. Now, my rabbi and I support prayer, but I think the Lord would like us to help ourselves, and it seems to me that the choices require us to give market discipline a real chance. There are certain prerequisites to expanding market discipline in banking. Uninsured creditors and shareholders have to believe that bad management or bad luck exposes them to loss; that the safety net is not a guarantee for other than insured depositors; and that the resolutions both large and small problem banks will be handled similarly. To be sure, for systemic reasons, under provisions of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Act of 1991, the resolution of a larger problem bank may involve use of bridge banks and the minimization of outright liquidations, but in all cases the uninsured stakeholders will bear the cost of resolution. The rhetoric of the agencies and their actions must be the same if market discipline is to be credible. Credible policies are not sufficient. In addition, banks must disclose the information that creditors and shareholders need to evaluate the underlying risk profile of the individual bank: not some boilerplate statistical report, but the information that is useful for understanding that particular organization's risk. Fear of loss, if linked with the availability of sufficient information about the banking organization to determine the entity's real risk profile, should in turn induce the uninsured creditors to behave like those of any nonbanking business. That is, uninsured creditors could be expected to command a risk premium linked to the portfolio and other risks of the organization. Such a risk premium should in turn act both as a governor on the risk-taking behavior of banking organizations and as a supplementary signal to supervisors. But, to do either, the uninsured creditors must have both a credible fear of loss and the necessary information about the individual institution to make judgments and decisions. In late April, the Federal Reserve, in cooperation with the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the Securities and Exchange Commission, set up a private sector advisory group on public disclosure, under the chairmanship of Walter Shipley, former chairman of Chase Manhattan. We have asked the group, composed of senior executives of banking and securities firms, to review the state of the art on public disclosure, to identify best practices, and to suggest improvements in those practices. Their report will be public. While I have no idea what will be in their report, it is my hope and expectation that we will learn more about how to use market discipline both to strengthen our banking system and to avoid the necessity of additional regulation and supervision of global financial institutions. At the Federal Reserve, we plan, however, to require that at least the large, complex banking organizations establish and implement a disclosure policy that is designed to provide information stakeholders can use to evaluate the risk profile of the banking organization. Our examiners, as part of both the holding company inspection and the state member bank examination, will review and evaluate these disclosures to ensure that they conform to best practices and contribute to stakeholders' understanding of their risk at that organization. We should all be aware that additional public disclosure is not a free good, especially if it works. Banks will find that additional market discipline constrains their options, and supervisors will be concerned about creditors' response to bad news. But both constrained options and swift market punishment are desired effects of market discipline. And, I say with great regret, our failure to use market discipline or the failure of market discipline to work as advertised will lead, I fear, to re-regulation, a return to more invasive supervision, and a general reversal of the freeing of banking markets. Supervision Even with effective market discipline, better internal risk classifications and systems, and an improved regulatory capital framework, supervision will not disappear. So long as there is a safety net, there will be supervisors, and I would advise young supervisors that they have a lifetime opportunity in their present employment. But I do believe that the nature of bank supervision will change and evolve if and as banks are successful in developing meaningful internal risk classification and disclosure systems and the authorities are successful in modifying capital regulations and procedures for resolving problem banks. The nature of the change I anticipate in supervision is more evolutionary than revolutionary, with an ever-expanding emphasis on understanding of, and comfort with, a banking organization's risk classification and risk management systems. As I noted, this undoubtedly will involve transactions and stress testing. But the more that the safety and soundness of banks come to depend on their risk management systems--and on the judgments the bank manager brings to bear in their use--the more supervisors will come to focus their evaluations on the same systems as bank management. Again, if and as supervisors become comfortable with individual bank's risk classification and management systems, the tighter their focus will be on providing the bank management with comments, evaluations, and suggestions on improving the systems rather than duplicating the efforts of bank management. In short, it will, I think, be increasingly the job of the supervisor to evaluate and test systems and to evaluate and criticize the accuracy and helpfulness of the information banks disclose about their own risk profiles. I anticipate that market discipline at the complex banks will play an important role as a supplement to the evolving supervisory paradigm. Internal systems and public disclosure are the real first line of defense in the safety and soundness of our banking system. The only alternative for the large and complex banking organization, as I have noted, is a degree of supervisory intrusiveness and detailed regulation that would dramatically reduce flexibility and innovation in our banking system. We have, I believe, already started down the road I have outlined. But several problems remain to be solved, and any one of them could slow or even stop our progress. I have already mentioned validation procedures for risk classifications and efforts to convert risk classifications into risk weights on an equitable basis across banks. The process of reaching a consensus at Basel that works in addressing the problems I have outlined is another. But whatever we develop, either here or on an international basis, we will be relying on the development by banks of better risk classification and management systems, on market discipline, on the good judgment of the nation's examiners, and on the development by examiners of the skills needed to keep pace with the activities of banks. Conclusion The changes in financial markets, technology, and law and regulation create new opportunities and risks for banks and supervisors. As institutions become more complex--let alone larger--and financial markets more complex and diverse, the requirement for better risk management increases exponentially. A critical component of better risk management systems will be an empirically based internal structure of risk classifications. Supervisors, once comfortable with the accuracy and sensitivity of such systems, will be able to use them in constructing and evaluating improved regulatory capital requirements. Supervisors will increasingly rely on market discipline and focus on critiquing risk management systems.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the applications of Popular, Inc., Hato Rey, Puerto Rico, and its subsidiaries to acquire Banco Popular, National Association, Orlando, Florida, a de novo bank, and to establish a foreign branch and an agreement corporation in Culebra, Puerto Rico. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
Remarks by Governor Laurence H. Meyer Before the Boston Economics Club, Boston, Massachusetts June 6, 2000 The New Economy Meets Supply and Demand I often draw the themes for my talks from the questions I hear about the intersection of the economic outlook and monetary policy. This evening, I begin with two questions that are central to the economy's prospects and the challenges facing monetary policy. First, Is there a new economy? And second, What role, if any, do traditional economic principles, specifically the role of supply and demand, continue to play in today's economy? Before I proceed to those questions, I want to emphasize why the answers matter. It almost--and I say, almost--goes without saying. Nevertheless, I can't stress too often that we care about the balance of supply and demand in the economy because we care about promoting both full employment and price stability and, thereby, maximum sustainable growth. We want to contain inflation because doing so has been crucial for sustaining the economic expansion that we now enjoy and for providing an environment conducive to private decision-making and longer-term planning so critical for taking advantage of new technological opportunities. Containing inflation has, I am sure, contributed to the length and strength of the economic expansion we now enjoy--an expansion, by the way, that is the longest in our nation's history. And I need not remind you that the low inflation we now have was dearly purchased in the late 1970s and early 1980s with the highest interest rates since the Civil War and the highest unemployment rate since the Depression. Precisely because inflation is the critical issue that hangs in the balance of new economy possibilities and old economy regularities, I will offer some observations on how I read the recent data on labor compensation and price inflation. My comments are in the spirit of inflation reports that many central banks with explicit inflation targets regularly issue. Before proceeding, let me remind you that the views expressed on the outlook and on monetary policy are my own. I am not speaking on behalf of the Board of Governors or the Federal Open Market Committee. Is There a New Economy? So, is there a "new economy"? The answer is: It depends. It depends on how you define new economy, and it depends on where you live. There are broader and narrower definitions of the new economy. The narrow version defines the new economy in terms of two principal developments: first, an increase in the economy's maximum sustainable growth rate and, second, the spread and increasing importance of information and communications technology. The latter is presumably the major contributor to the acceleration in labor productivity that, in turn, is the principal source of the increase in trend growth in real GDP. A third, and perhaps related, development is a possible increase in the economy's sustainable utilization rates, specifically a decline in the non-accelerating-inflation rate of unemployment (NAIRU). Our laboratory for the new economy is the United States, given that there is very little evidence outside the United States for even this narrow definition of the new economy. In the case of the United States, however, there is little doubt that the underlying rate of productivity growth has increased significantly in the second half of the 1990s. From 1974 to 1995, labor productivity advanced at about an annual rate of 1-1/2 percent. Productivity then accelerated to a rate of about 2-1/2 percent in the second half of the 1990s. This acceleration appears to have been spread out over the second half of the 1990s, so that the average rate over that period understates the rate of productivity growth at the end of the period. Productivity typically grows faster than its longer-term trend when GDP growth is rising and falls below trend when GDP decelerates. This pattern simply reflects lags in adjusting employment to changes in GDP growth. Measuring productivity growth over a long period, such as 1974 to 1995, effectively eliminates this shorter-run component of productivity growth. And because GDP growth was relatively stable during the second half of the 1990s, shorter-run dynamics appear not to have been an important contributor to the higher productivity growth in that period. Moreover, careful econometric attempts to isolate the short-run dynamic and longer-run structural components generally have concluded that structural productivity growth increased from about 1-1/2 percent in the earlier periods to around 2-1/2 percent to 3 percent by the end of the decade. That would put the sustainable rate of GDP growth up to 3-1/2 percent to 4 percent. Still there is considerable uncertainty about trend productivity growth, including whether it might be accelerating, especially given the brief period over which higher and rising structural productivity growth has been experienced. Important questions about the measurement of productivity aggravate this uncertainty. And there is also considerable uncertainty about how long the higher productivity growth will persist. For example, periods of more rapid productivity growth might be best understood as a transition to a higher level of productivity that is based on major technological developments. The persistence question is more important for assessing longer-run fiscal prospects--including the solvency of Social Security--than to monetary policy decisions that are made in the context of a one to two year period. Using the neoclassical model, and disaggregating capital into information and communications technology and other capital, Dan Sichel and Steve Oliner of the Board staff decomposed productivity growth into contributions from capital deepening (the growth arising from an increase in the ratio of capital to labor) and multifactor productivity growth (the growth in output that cannot be accounted for by increases in labor and capital inputs) and into the contributions from the use of information technology and from increased efficiency in the production of computers. According to their estimates, a bit less than half of the productivity acceleration was due to a pickup in capital deepening and a bit more than half to an increase in multifactor productivity growth. More than 90 percent of capital deepening came from information and communications technology equipment, and nearly 40 percent of the increase in multifactor productivity growth came from increased efficiency in the production of computers and embedded semiconductors. Altogether, therefore, information and communications technology accounted for slightly more than two-thirds of the increase in productivity. Besides the direct effects of information and communications technology through capital deepening and the more efficient production of computers, this technology may also indirectly raise productivity through spillover effects. If the use of information and communications technology generates externalities throughout the economy--for example, through new efficiencies from e-commerce--the overall efficiency in production will increase. In a traditional growth accounting setup, these effects would show up in multifactor productivity growth. Evidence of spillovers is extremely sparse. Some back-of-the-envelope calculations by Oliner and Sichel suggest that such effects have been quite small to date, though the explosive growth of e-commerce, particularly in the business-to-business segment, suggests a potential for a more important contribution over time. But do these developments--specifically higher trend productivity growth and the spread of information and communications technology--alone justify the "new economy" label? We could, for example, explain recent U.S. economic performance in terms of "new parameters in the old paradigm." Specifically, we could increase the estimate of trend productivity growth, based on higher multifactor productivity and capital deepening--both due in large part to information and communications technology--and have a fairly good explanation of the remarkable performance of the U.S. economy. This approach would explain the recent productivity performance without denying the continued relevance of old economy regularities, including the role of supply and demand imbalances as a source of inflation dynamics. The alternative--and the broader interpretation that often seems to underlie the new economy label--is that we are witnessing a more fundamental change in the paradigm. The old rules no longer apply. Throw out the NAIRU. Heck, throw out supply and demand. No limits, no business cycles. All right, this is a bit of an exaggeration, but you get the point that I am not especially partial to the broader interpretation of the new economy concept! Still, to be fair, there are other potential and perhaps more far-reaching implications of the spread of information and communications technology, including the role of the Internet and e-commerce. Today, these are, in my view, best expressed as questions about future prospects rather than as principles underlying the present economy. For example, do these developments increase the competitiveness of markets, and, if so, how does this affect inflation dynamics? They appear to increase the speed and effectiveness of price discovery. What does this imply for pricing leverage and inflation dynamics? Do they contribute to a permanent increase in sustainable utilization rates, perhaps by increasing the efficiency of the matching of available workers with available jobs? Do they result in rapidly growing sectors dominated by increasing returns to scale, where increases in demand lower cost and hence prices? These are all provocative and important questions, but none of these developments, in my view, are powerful enough at this moment to support the notion that labor and other utilization rates can rise ever higher without triggering accelerating prices--the broader version of the "new economy." So, is there a new economy? As I said, it depends. For my part, I accept the proposition that there has been a significant improvement in underlying productivity growth in the United States, that it is very closely tied to improvements in information and communications technology, and that it is likely to spread around the world. But I resist the new economy label because it seems to encourage a disrespect for the old rules that could seriously undermine our success in taking advantage of the new opportunities. This brings me to my second topic. Welcome Back Supply and Demand I was startled by the bold title of an article that appeared in The Wall Street Journal on December 31, 1999: "So Long, Supply and Demand." But it illustrates the unbounded optimism--some might even call it irrational exuberance--about economic prospects and a willingness to abandon time-tested economic principles that offer cautions and imply constraints on economic opportunities. I was rather certain that confidence in supply and demand would make a comeback, and so I was delighted to see the front-page story in The Wall Street Journal on May 16, 2000--the day of the last FOMC meeting. The title this time was "Firms Start Raising Prices, Stirring Fears of Inflation Fighters," and it began: "Even in the new economy, at least one old rule still applies: If demand exceeds supply for long enough, sellers will raise prices." So let me count the ways that supply and demand help us to understand the recent experience and the challenges facing monetary policy today. First, a productivity shock affects aggregate demand as well as potential supply and may initially have an even larger effect on demand than on supply. In early discussions about the productivity shock, the emphasis was, not surprisingly, exclusively on its supply-side implications--specifically a faster rate of productivity growth and hence of sustainable GDP growth. The natural corollary seemed to be that a faster growth of supply than of demand would be a powerful disinflationary force. But during the period over which productivity has accelerated, demand has grown faster than potential supply. The demand effects--to the extent that they are directly related to the productivity shock--likely reflect the more favorable investment opportunities, the effect of expected profitability on equity prices and hence household wealth and consumption, and the effect of the increase in expected future labor income on current consumption. Demand, it appears, received an additional boost over this period from a run-up in equity prices that the higher productivity growth alone could not fully account for. The balance between supply and demand can be inferred from movements in utilization rates, specifically in the unemployment rate. When actual output is expanding at the same pace as potential, the unemployment rate will be stable. When output growth outpaces the growth of potential, the unemployment rate declines. And the unemployment rate has declined almost 0.4 percentage points a year for the past four years. This translates into excess demand growth of 0.75 to 1 percentage point relative to potential supply growth. The second insight--and enduring old economy wisdom--is that a proximate source of changes in inflation is an imbalance between the levels of aggregate supply and aggregate demand. This can be expressed as an imbalance between actual and potential output or as a divergence of the unemployment rate from the NAIRU. The imbalance between the growth rates of aggregate supply and demand is, of course, the source of changes in the balance between the levels of aggregate demand and supply. But inflation is related directly to the levels not to the growth imbalance. And, even in the new economy, excess aggregate demand ultimately drives up inflation. Thus the limits may have changed, but the consequences of overtaxing the limits remain the same. Do we have excess aggregate demand? In my judgment, we have excess demand conditions in the labor market. The central tendency for my estimate of the NAIRU is in the range of 5 percent to 5-1/4 percent, compared to the 4.1 percent current unemployment rate. This estimate is consistent with most large-scale macroeconometric models and with the estimates of the NAIRU that underlie the economic and budget projections of both the Council of Economic Advisers and the Congressional Budget Office, but there is nonetheless legitimate uncertainty about the estimate of the NAIRU. This uncertainty has been, in my view, an important consideration in the way monetary policy has responded to recent economic developments. Obviously, whether the NAIRU is closer to 4 percent or to 5 percent affects the difficulty associated with rebalancing supply and demand to contain the risk of higher inflation. But why has inflation remained moderate if there is persistent excess demand in the labor market? This is still another supply and demand story. The economy is subject to two fundamental types of aggregate economic shocks: supply shocks and demand shocks. These two types of shocks give rise to different challenges for monetary policy. Supply shocks come in two varieties: relative price shocks (such as changes in the relative price of oil) and productivity shocks. Earlier in this episode, the economy benefited from a series of favorable relative price shocks and, throughout the last several years, has been adjusting to an increase in productivity growth. Both of these developments have had a temporary disinflationary effect. Together they suppressed inflation for a while, countering the potential inflationary consequences of the progressive increase in aggregate demand relative to potential supply. Once the disinflationary impetus from supply shocks begins to dissipate or to reverse, the inflationary consequences of the supply-demand balance will begin to show through. The disinflationary effect of an increase in productivity growth begins to dissipate once productivity growth stabilizes at a higher level. So unless productivity accelerates further, its disinflationary effect should continue to erode for a time. When favorable supply shocks dominate, growth in demand is stimulated and utilization rates rise, but inflation tends to moderate. The result is offsetting implications for the setting of the nominal funds rate and, thus, monetary policy may be left with little work to do. This accounts for the relative inactivity of monetary policy from 1996 through the end of 1999, at which point the federal funds rate was within 1/4 percentage point of where it was at the beginning of the period. But once the disinflationary effects of the favorable supply shocks dissipate or reverse, the challenge is more like one that accompanies demand shocks. Excess demand, evidenced by utilization rates above sustainable levels, will put upward pressure on inflation, and monetary policy must restrain aggregate demand to bring it into balance with potential supply to avoid rising inflation. A Brief Inflation Report But is there any evidence that inflation pressures are in fact building? Of course, overall inflation has clearly increased significantly over the last year. The consumer price index, for example, has increased at a 3 percent rate over the last twelve months, compared with a 2.3 percent rate over the previous twelve months. Similar trends are evident in the PCE and in the GDP price index. But this increase in overall inflation reflects mainly the rise in oil prices over 1999 and into 2000. Assuming that oil prices stabilize, the effect will dissipate, and overall inflation will return toward, and indeed dip slightly below, the core rate (the rate net of food and energy prices). So, looking forward, the core inflation rate is the more important consideration. The core CPI advanced at a 2.2 percent rate over the last twelve months, a rate equal to that over the previous twelve months and only about 1/4 percentage point above the cyclical low reached in January. These numbers suggest that inflation pressures remain well contained. But digging a little deeper, the evidence, in my judgment, supports the conclusion that core inflation has moved modestly higher over the last six to nine months. First, the introduction of a methodological change in measuring the CPI in January 1999 lowered CPI inflation relative to the earlier period. As a result, on a methodologically consistent basis, core CPI inflation in the last twelve months has actually been up a couple tenths of a percentage point. But, more important, the higher-frequency data provides some evidence of a rising trend in core inflation. For example, at an annual rate, core CPI inflation is 2.4 percent over the last nine months, 2.5 percent over the last six months and 3.2 percent over the last three months. So I conclude that the underlying trend for core CPI inflation has moved up to close to 2-1/2 percent today. The core PCE and the GDP price indexes also have accelerated over the last six to nine months. The core PCE index increased at a 1.4 percent rate over 1999. Over the last year the rate was 1.6 percent, over the last six months 1.9 percent, and over the last three months 2.4 percent. The higher core inflation could be explained by a pass-through to the core of earlier increases in oil prices. However, whether such a pass-through leads to a one-time increase in the price level or to continuing inflation depends on whether or not monetary policy accommodates the higher inflation. Whether such accommodation occurs, in turn, depends on how policy deals with the excess demand that will be felt in the first instance in wage pressures in a very tight labor market. I therefore turn to an assessment of the pressures coming from labor compensation. Here the data are even more confusing. For example, consider the trend in year-over-year growth rates for the three key measures. For the employment cost index, the trend is decidedly up; for average hourly earnings, however, the year-over- year growth rate has been flat; and for compensation per hour in the productivity and costs report, the trend is actually down. Again, we need to dig a little deeper, but this excavation will not allow us to reach a definitive judgment from this extraordinarily mixed set of indicators. Until the May employment report, the recent monthly data clearly pointed to an acceleration in average hourly earnings--given the 4-1/2 percent rate posted over the first four months of the year after a 3-1/2 percent rate over 1999. But the unexpectedly small increase in May left the year-over-year increase in average hourly earnings at just 3.5 percent, about the same as over the previous twelve months. Year-to-date, average hourly earnings has increased at a 3.8 percent rate--still an acceleration, but one that is far less definitive than that based on the data through April. There will be considerable interest in the next report for further evidence on the degree of upward trend in this measure. There are, in my judgment, some grounds for discounting the productivity and cost measure. During the last benchmark revision, this measure was adjusted up sharply. I will have more confidence in the recent data for this measure of labor compensation if the deceleration remains intact after the next revision. In addition, this measure tends to use trends instead of real-time data for benefit costs--although the Bureau of Economic Analysis does adjust the trends judgmentally in response to the real-time ECI data on benefit costs. Lately, the benefit component of the ECI has rebounded sharply. Even if the evidence for an acceleration in nominal labor compensation were more definitive, the implications for inflation are not altogether straightforward. If the trend in the growth of labor compensation is upward, it could be a response to the uptick in overall inflation last year or to overly tight labor markets or to a catch-up to the higher rate of productivity growth. Just as the slowing in overall inflation in 1997 and 1998 contributed to a moderation in nominal wage demands, the higher overall inflation in 1999 and 2000 would be expected to boost nominal wage demands. But any rebound in nominal labor compensation could also reflect a catch-up to higher productivity growth. If nominal compensation is just matching the higher productivity growth, this source of acceleration in nominal compensation would not itself be inflationary. But there is an important caveat here. The slow initial response of nominal compensation to higher productivity growth is the source of the temporary disinflationary effect of a productivity shock. Therefore, once the catch-up is under way, this disinflationary impetus gradually disappears. And at this point, the pass-through from higher inflation and the effect of tight labor markets have no offset and will begin to dominate. So even the catch-up story plays a role in the upward trend in inflation. A second reason that nominal compensation is so difficult to factor into an inflation forecast is that compensation practices are changing. For example, our measurement has not caught up with the increased importance of stock options. Stock options are incorporated, based on gains upon exercising the options, in the productivity and cost measure, but not in the ECI. In addition, many ways in which firms are recruiting and retaining workers--such as in-house fitness and child care centers, flexible hours, educational assistance, on-site personal services, and in-kind payments--are not reflected in compensation measures (although hiring and referral bonuses will be included in the ECI in the next release). Finally, the growing importance of variable pay and of temporary workers may have important implications for wage dynamics that are not fully understood. So what is the outlook for inflation, and how does it relate to the interplay of new economy forces and traditional supply and demand considerations? In my judgment, we took the benefits of both the earlier favorable relative price shocks and the productivity shock, partly in a decline in the unemployment rate below the NAIRU and partly in a decline in inflation. This is not a statement about what policymakers planned, but rather about what evolved as we responded to unexpected developments in inflation and growth. At any rate, we could have taken more of the benefits of the favorable supply shocks in lower inflation, but given that inflation was already so low, the combination we ended up with seems, after the fact, to have been reasonable. At some point, however, when the temporary disinflationary impetus of the favorable supply developments dissipate, not only will there be some rebound in inflation, but unless a transition is made back to sustainable utilization rates, there will be a risk of a continuous upward movement in inflation. During that transition, at least some of the earlier decline in core inflation will be reversed. To be sure, it has been difficult to be precise about both sustainable utilization rates and the path of inflation because of uncertainties about the NAIRU and other aspects of inflation dynamics in a period of significant structural change. But I believe the qualitative story that I have set out is the right one. Given our uncertainty about sustainable utilization rates and wage-price dynamics in the new economy, however, policy setting must remain flexible and responsive to new information about both the supply and the demand sides of our economy. Conclusion: The Challenge Facing Monetary Policy This analysis suggests that monetary policy does face a challenge--rebalancing aggregate supply and demand to contain the risk of higher inflation. I believe that we have been moving effectively to get this job done. The major question in this respect is whether slowing the economy to trend alone will get the job done or whether we need a period of below-trend growth to unwind an imbalance between the levels of aggregate demand and supply. If the task is only slowing the economy to trend--because the NAIRU turns out to be close to 4 percent--the task is not as challenging, and inflation will remain stable near current levels. If the NAIRU turns out to be closer to 5 percent, then the task is more demanding, and growth will have to slow to below trend for a while, and inflation is likely to rise somewhat further until the rebalancing is complete. If successful, in either scenario, the payoff from monetary restraint will be both to contain the risk of higher inflation and to extend the life of this remarkable expansion. Several considerations provide some optimism that the outcome will be a benign one--a soft as opposed to a hard landing. First, we are now in a high-growth rather than a low-growth economy. Even if we have to slow growth to below trend for a period, the resulting growth rate could remain well above the average growth rate over the previous 25 years and still get the job done. Second, supply forces could smooth the transition. If oil prices have now at least peaked--and, better yet, if they decline at least modestly over the next year and a half, as suggested by expectations reflected in futures markets--the upward impetus to overall inflation from oil prices will dissipate or even reverse. In this case, overall inflation is likely to decline next year, and this decrease could help moderate the rise in core inflation into the following year. Third, long-term inflation expectations remain firmly anchored, reflecting considerable confidence that monetary policy will contain any threat of higher inflation. This should damp the rise in inflation in the short term. Fourth, monetary policy got a head start on containing inflation by beginning to tighten last June, before the signs of building inflation pressures were evident. Fifth, the tighter monetary policy is now contributing to a less accommodative set of financial conditions throughout the economy--including higher short- and long-term private interest rates, lower equity prices, a stronger dollar, and more stringent lending conditions at banks. If these tighter financial conditions remain in place, we will have made significant progress in establishing the foundation for slower growth. References Gordon, Robert, J., "Does the New Economy Measure Up to the Great Inventions of the Past," Journal of Economic Perspectives (forthcoming). Jorgenson, Dale W., and Kevin J. Stiroh, "Raising the Speed Limit: U.S. Economic Growth in the Information Age," May 1, 2000. Macroeconomic Advisers, "Productivity and Potential GDP in the 'New' U.S. Economy," September 1999. Oliner, Stephen D., and Daniel E. Sichel, "The Resurgence of Growth in the Late 1990s: Is Information Technology the Story?" working paper, Federal Reserve Board, February 2000. Footnotes For papers on recent productivity performance and attempts to separate cyclical and trend components and the role of capital deepening and multifactor productivity, and to measure the contribution from information and communications technology, see Robert J. Gordon, "Does the New Economy Measure Up to the Great Inventions of the Past," Journal of Economic Perspectives (forthcoming); Dale W. Jorgenson and Kevin J. Stiroh, "Raising the Speed Limit: U.S. Economic Growth in the/ Information Age," May 1, 2000; Macroeconomic Advisers, "Productivity and Potential GDP in the 'New' U.S. Economy," September 1999; and Stephen D. Oliner, and Daniel E. Sichel, "The Resurgence of Growth in the Late 1990s: Is Information Technology the Story?" working paper, Federal Reserve Board, February 2000.
Testimony of Governor Laurence H. Meyer Capital markets in the new economy and proposed merchant banking rules Before the Subcommittee on Securities and the Subcommittee on Financial Institutions of the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate June 13, 2000 Governor Meyer presented identical testimony before the Securities and Government Sponsored Enterprises of the Committee on Banking and Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, on June 7, 2000 Mr. Chairman and other members of the Subcommittee on Capital Markets, I appreciate the opportunity to explain the rules recently proposed by the Federal Reserve Board and the Department of the Treasury to allow financial holding companies to engage in merchant banking activities under the Gramm-Leach-Bliley (GLB) Act. I want to stress that part of what I'm about to discuss is only a proposal, and the rest is a rule that has been adopted only on an interim basis. The Board and the Treasury have requested comment from the public on both parts, and both are subject to review and modification in light of those comments. Our experience has been that public comments are generally very helpful, and we value the insight and information they provide from practitioners, analysts, other policy makers and informed members of the public. The public comment period ended on May 22, and the Board and the Treasury are analyzing those comments now. As I'm sure you can appreciate, because we are in this evaluation phase I do not know what final rules will be adopted. The staff is in the process of reviewing and analyzing the comments, and both Treasury officials and members of the Board are reserving judgment until we see both a summary of the full comments and the staff's analysis. At that time, the Board will review the proposal and the interim rule in light of the comments, and both are subject to revision. In addition, the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC) will be discussing bank capital requirements on equity investments, a discussion that will, of course, be considered in the Board's final decision on holding company capital requirements on these assets. With these caveats in mind, the Board nonetheless believes it would be useful not only to describe what the Board and the Treasury proposed, but also to summarize the information and analysis we reviewed in developing our proposals. Our initial proposal was based on a considerable amount of information and experience regarding the current equity investment activities of securities firms and large banking organizations. It would allow merchant banking to continue to develop along the lines already evident in the industry and in the manner intended by the Congress. At the same time, the rule and proposal attempt to address the boundaries between merchant banking and the mixing of banking and commerce. And most important, the rule seeks responsibly to come to grips with the very real safety and soundness risks to an insured depository institution affiliate of both a financial holding company that engages in merchant banking and a bank holding company that invests in equities using existing authorities. I. Summary of the Interim Rule and Capital Proposal Let me first briefly explain what the Board and the Treasury have proposed. For the sake of brevity, I will sacrifice some detail. The notice published by the Board and the Treasury in the Federal Register explains the proposal in great detail. The GLB Act allows financial holding companies-which are bank holding companies whose depository institutions meet specified capital, management, and, for insured institutions, CRA requirements-to acquire shares, assets or ownership interests in any type of nonfinancial company. Merchant banking authority represents a broad exception to the central prohibition in the Bank Holding Company Act against the ownership of interests in nonfinancial firms. Moreover, this new merchant banking authority is in addition to-and does not replace--the authority that bank holding companies have under other provisions of the Bank Holding Company Act to engage in equity investment activities. The merchant banking authority included in the GLB Act helped ensure a so-called "two-way street" for securities firms that wish to affiliate with a bank without being required to divest traditional business lines. Prior to the GLB Act, securities firms could not affiliate with a bank without terminating their merchant banking activities. The GLB Act specifically authorizes the Board and the Secretary of the Treasury to issue regulations implementing this new authority, including limitations that we jointly deem appropriate to protect depository institutions. The interim rule and capital proposal are the result of extensive discussions between Board and Treasury officials. Prior to making our proposal, staff reviewed existing research and the staffs of the two agencies jointly conducted interviews at a number of major securities firms and bank holding companies in order to gather information on how the merchant banking business is conducted. We also called on our experience in supervising the more restricted investment authorities exercised by both member banks and bank holding companies, including authority to make investments through small business investment companies, authority to make investments overseas, and holding company authority to make investments in up to 5 percent of the voting shares and up to 25 percent of the total equity of any company. Our proposal incorporates many of the best practices employed by merchant banking professionals and banking organizations and, we believe, would allow securities firms to become financial holding companies while continuing to conduct their merchant banking activities. The proposal is in two parts. The first is an interim rule that contains the framework for defining and conducting merchant banking activities. The second is the capital proposal. A. Interim Rule The interim rule is designed to implement the provisions of the GLB Act that were enacted in order to prevent merchant banking activities from being no different than a mixture of banking and commerce. It also supports the important objective of encouraging the safe and sound exercise of this new merchant banking authority. The interim rule: * provides guidance on the GLB Act's requirement that merchant banking investments be held only for a period long enough to enable the sale or disposition of each investment on a reasonable basis. Generally, the rule permits a 10-year holding period for direct investments and a 15-year holding period for investments in private equity funds. The Board may approve a longer holding period on a case-by-case basis. * implements the GLB Act's restrictions on the routine management or operation of a portfolio company by a financial holding company. The interim rule contains a number of safe harbors and examples of routine management and explains the types of special circumstances in which routine management is permissible. * establishes recordkeeping and reporting requirements designed to enhance the ability of the financial holding company and the Board to monitor the risks and exposures of merchant banking investments and compliance by the financial holding company with the Act's limitations on holding periods and routine management. These recordkeeping and reporting requirements are general in design and largely could be met by the types of records and reports ordinarily kept by companies engaged in merchant banking activities. * implements the restrictions in the GLB Act on the ability of a depository institution controlled by a financial holding company to cross-market its products or services with a portfolio company it holds under its merchant banking authority. * adopts the presumption established by the GLB Act for applying the limits contained in section 23A of the Federal Reserve Act on transactions between a depository institution and its affiliates to transactions between a depository institution and a portfolio company controlled by the same financial holding company. As a transition measure, the interim rule also establishes two caps on the amount of merchant banking investments that a financial holding company may hold. The caps are high and apply only to investments made under the new merchant banking authority. The first is that the total amount of a financial holding company's merchant banking investments may not exceed the lesser of 30 percent of the financial holding company's Tier 1 capital or $6 billion. The second cap applies to merchant banking investments other than investments made by the financial holding company in private equity funds, and is the lesser of 20 percent of Tier 1 capital or $4 billion. These caps do not apply to or limit in any way the investments made by a financial holding company under its other authorities, such as through small business investment companies. Moreover, these caps are really thresholds. The rule provides that a financial holding company may exceed these amounts with approval from the Board. This approach allows the Board to monitor the risk management systems and exposure of financial holding companies that devote a significant amount of resources to merchant banking. We view the caps as a safe and sound way to allow merchant banking activities to begin and fully expect to revisit the need for caps as we review the interim rule and the capital proposal. B. Capital Proposal Perhaps the most important, but also most controversial, aspect of the proposal is the appropriate capital treatment of equity investments for regulatory purposes. This part has been proposed for comment, but unlike the portion I just described, has not been adopted. Our capital proposal would require bank holding companies to maintain in equity form at least 50 cents of capital for every dollar the consolidated bank holding company invests in merchant banking-type investments. Under existing capital rules, a bank holding company could hold only 4 cents of its own equity capital-that is borrow 96 cents-for every dollar invested in equity securities. The proposed capital treatment would apply at the holding company level on a consolidated basis to the carrying value of investments made using the new merchant banking authority as well as to investments made in nonfinancial companies using other merchant banking-like investment authority. It is to this issue of the capital charge, our reasons for proposing it and its implications that I now turn. II. Safety and Soundness While safety and soundness sensitivities are reflected in several components of the proposed regulation, an important aspect of the proposal to address potential safety and soundness concerns is the new capital requirement. The Board's concern about the safety and soundness of banking organizations, of course, has to be balanced against other goals of the GLB Act and we sought to do so. Nonetheless, this aspect of the proposal elicited the most comment and criticism. I believe, however, there can be little doubt about either the importance of safety and soundness or the Board's authority and responsibility in this area. We note that, in its consideration of the financial modernization legislation, Congress considered the appropriateness of capital standards at the holding company level and did not limit the Board's authority to develop appropriate capital requirements for bank holding and financial holding companies. A. Participation in the Equity Market by Banking Organizations Prior to the enactment of the GLB Act, banking organizations were permitted to invest in equities to a limited extent. For example, the Small Business Investment Act of 1958 permits banks, and the Bank Holding Company Act permits their holding companies, to invest in certain small companies through their ownership of Small Business Investment Companies (SBICs). Banking organizations also have been authorized to match competition abroad by investing in foreign companies through their Edge Act affiliates and subsidiaries, and, under the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956, bank holding companies can invest in up to 5 percent of the voting shares (and up to 25 percent of the total equity) of any company. All of these authorizations, however, have involved limits in one form or another: on size or location of the individual portfolio companies, on the proportion of each portfolio company acquired, or on aggregate holdings. The bulk of activity using these authorities has involved private equity investments. The private equity market is one in which transactions occur largely in unregistered shares in private and public companies. The market has grown quite rapidly in recent years and in 1999 is estimated to have had at least $400 billion outstanding. The venture capital component, the equity financing of new firms, had outstandings of at least $125 billion. It focuses on seed capital for the creation of new companies or equity needed for the continuation or growth of small firms. The non-venture private equity sector, the equity financing of middle-market firms and leveraged buyouts, is considerably larger, with outstandings of about $275 billion. The contribution of a broad and deep private equity market to economic growth is considerable and its existence is critical to our nation's continued economic vibrancy. Holding of Equities by Banking Organizations. Banking organizations play a modest but not insignificant role in the private equities market. Most banking organizations in fact do not make use of their existing authorities and, thus, do not participate in either the public or the private equities market. This may reflect the lack of expertise required to participate in such finance at most banking organizations, more traditional banking strategies, or the restrictions and limits placed on their participation prior to the passage of the GLB Act. Most of the equity participation by banking organizations is concentrated in a small number of large banking organizations, whose activities are focused on the private equity market and, in some cases, whose holdings account for a significant proportion of their capital and earnings. In keeping with the small number of banking organization participants, their share of the market is small-about 9 percent to 10 percent of the private equities outstanding. Despite their limited market share, the ten U.S. banking organizations with the largest commitment to equity investments have about doubled their holdings in the last five or so years with aggregate investments currently exceeding $30 billion at carrying values. These holdings account for an estimated 90 percent of holdings by all banking organizations of private equities in nonfinancial firms. Seven of the ten largest holders each held equities with carrying values in excess of $1 billion at the end of 1999; two held more than $8 billion. Carrying values at the largest holders were equal to 10 percent to 35 percent of their Tier 1 capital and both realized and unrealized gains on these holdings accounted for a growing share of their earnings. Clearly at some large banking organizations, holdings of stock-mainly private equities-already were large and rising before merchant banking was authorized by the GLB Act. As supervisors, equity investment by banking organizations had clearly gotten our attention well before last November. Larger banking organizations generally employ all of the various legal authorities available to them in making equity investments. In making investments in private equity funds and direct investments, banking organizations generally use Bank Holding Company Act authorities and several institutions have made substantial international equity investments through their Edge Act affiliates. SBICs are also used substantially by larger banking organizations and by some regional and smaller institutions. There are roughly 100 SBICs affiliated with about 60 banking organizations. Although they account for only a third of all SBICs, they represent more than 60 percent of SBIC investments, about $5.25 billion out of a total of $8.75 billion. All SBICs-bank-related and others-account for about 7 percent of the venture capital market and about 2 percent of the total private equity market. The large banking organizations active in private equity investments have considerable experience and diversified portfolios. They have, by and large, been successful-with some reporting annual rates of return in excess of 25 percent to 35 percent in recent years. For the most part, they also have been conservative in recognizing gains on their investments, discounting market valuations on traded equities to reflect liquidation realities and often recognizing increases in value on non-traded equities only by actual sales or other events. No large aggregate losses have been reported on the equity holdings of these banking organizations in recent years. Of course, the last several years have also seen the longest economic expansion and largest and longest bull market in our history. Even in such an environment, however, the unusual returns have been dominated by a small number of great successes, the so-called "home runs" of the private equity business. The attraction of banking organizations to the high returns and growing buoyancy in stock prices-especially for IPOs (initial public offerings)-has matched the growth in the entire private equity market. More private equity financing, especially venture capital financing, was accomplished in the past three years than in the previous thirty. In the fourth quarter of last year and the first quarter of 2000 almost as much venture capital was invested as in total over the previous four quarters ending in September. Risk and Equity Holdings. Even with rising valuations, private equity is still the most expensive form of finance available. Investors in private equity securities demand high expected returns, ranging from 15 percent to 25 percent for mature firms seeking expansion capital to 60 percent to 80 percent for early stage ventures. The high hurdle rates for venture capital finance reflect the fact that the loss rates on individual deals are so high. A review of venture capital investments over the last four decades suggests that a fourth to a third of the deals resulted in absolute losses, which is why we do not see 60 percent to 80 percent returns on venture capital portfolios. The high risks that such loss rates imply are both the cause of the high issuer cost and the flip side of high average returns on a portfolio of venture capital equities. In both cases they represent risk compensation. High returns on aggregate venture capital investments rely on those "home runs" I referred to earlier to offset the "strikeouts", if I may use an analogy. Generally, about 20 percent of investments have been "home runs" with extraordinary returns that offset the losses and mediocre returns of other investments. Evidence from 1,000 private equity partnerships developed by the firm Venture Economics suggests that over the entire period since 1969 investors received an average return of about a 20 percent annual rate, but that these returns were boosted by the explosive IPO market in the late 1990s, facilitating exit from a record number of investments by the partnerships. As with individual investments, "home runs" offset a substantial portion of "strikeouts". Median returns have averaged closer to 10 percent, and roughly one-fifth of the individual venture capital partnerships have resulted in capital losses. Returns to such partnerships have varied widely over the years. Investors in more than 200 venture capital partnerships formed in the early 1980s, when the market was expanding rapidly, have received only about a 5 percent to 8 percent annual return on these investments. Nearly a quarter of these partnerships resulted in losses to investors. In a survey, large long-term institutional private equity investors reported that they generally expect a long-run rate of return on private equities of at least 15 percent, as compared to 11 percent to 12 percent for public equities, but some report that they expect the standard deviation of returns to be about twice as high-32 versus 16 percent. A "standard deviation" is a common statistical measure of variation, and measures of variation are used by economists as indicators of the degree of risk in an investment. Any return (or losses) that banking organizations capture per dollar of portfolio equities held are multiplied significantly relative to their own investment in this part of their business-both absolutely and relative to independent firms. That is, of course, the result of the higher degree of leverage at banking organizations. Independent venture capital operations are generally unable to leverage their holdings to any significant degree. Banking Organization Capital and Risk Absorption. As in all businesses, the primary role of the capital of an organization is to absorb risk, i.e. loss. Without equity capital, businesses would not be able to borrow funds to finance any assets, let alone risky assets, because losses would then fall on the creditors who do not participate in the successes-the profits-of the firm. Insured depository institutions and bank holding companies, however, are required to hold as little as 4 cents of equity for every dollar of risk assets, although the average amount of equity actually held by all banks is about 9-1/2 percent of risk assets. The largest U.S. banks and bank holding companies have an equity-to-risk-asset ratio (Tier 1 ratio) of 7 percent to 9 percent. If assets contract in value by these amounts, the entity is insolvent; indeed, Congress requires the agencies to begin steps to close a bank when it becomes "critically under-capitalized", as defined by the Congress, which is when the tangible equity capital to total asset ratio of the bank falls to 2 percent. A dollar contraction in asset values produces a dollar contraction in equity capital. Clearly, banking organizations have very little tolerance for risk-i.e. loss-because they hold such modest equity. Small declines in asset values would eliminate large proportions of their small equity base. The risk of equity investments with modest equity capital backing is even greater when one considers that, under generally accepted accounting principles, a firm engaged in equity investment is permitted to count as income a substantial portion of the increase in the value of its equity investments, even if the firm has not realized this profit by selling the securities. This increase in value-even though unrealized and subject to decline-is then permitted to count as capital for the firm and can be used to support growth of the firm. In effect, under our current capital rules, a banking organization could leverage these paper gains 25 times. From an economic point of view, banks have been able to operate with a high degree of leverage because their creditors, depositors and others are comforted by the safety net-government guarantees of certain deposit liabilities and access to the discount window and payments and settlement systems-as well as by supervision and regulation, which is intended to ensure the safe and sound operation of the bank. In the late 1980s and early 1990s a large number of banks did in fact become insolvent because of credit losses, but historically a level of leverage that would be unacceptable in most other financial businesses has proved to be viable for banking organizations with traditional banking assets. Risk and Capital. Commenters do not generally disagree with the observation that venture capital equity assets are riskier than the average banking organization asset. Nor have they generally disagreed with one of the very few, apparently immutable, laws of finance that, in the long run, the higher the nominal rate of return the greater the inherent risk of the asset. By greater risk, I mean the greater the variability of returns, and thus the larger probability of loss, for a portfolio of such assets. The thrust of the evidence the Board reviewed in developing its capital proposal, which I have described above, suggested that private equity investments carry risks that greatly exceed those of average banking organization assets. Moreover, the Board was concerned that the level of this higher risk has become increasingly inconsistent with the minimum requirements of the current Basel capital Accord, particularly as the amount of such investments has risen sharply in an environment of substantially rising equity valuations. Our review of the merchant banking authority brought this general issue to the fore for equity assets purchased under all authorities, not just the new merchant banking authority. As part of our review, supervisors and economists from both the Federal Reserve and the Treasury, with whom we share rule-making authority on merchant banking, met with banking organizations and securities firms active in the private equity business to review best practices. These interviews indicated that both sets of firms allocated very high levels of internal or economic capital to their private equity business-between 25 and 100 percent, with the median above 50 percent. That is to say, the practitioners' own experience and the resultant policy they followed internally was to assume that the risks were such that they should presume they might lose all or a significant share of their investment and should prepare for that eventuality. That practice seemed consistent with the evidence we reviewed, particularly given the current valuations placed on equities relative to historical norms. That practice was also consistent with the experience of those firms that provide the dominant volume of the private equity market investment. At least 75 percent of the private equity funding is provided by independent firms that manage limited partnerships, raising funds from pension funds, endowments, foundations, corporations, and wealthy individuals. Their equity holdings are essentially balanced dollar-for-dollar with the owner/investor's own equity investment, with virtually no debt financing. We also looked at the practice of other government agencies. The Small Business Administration limits the subsidized borrowing of non-bank SBICs from it to three times equity. In addition, the Securities and Exchange's net capital rule for securities broker-dealers generally requires the firm to deduct from its regulatory capital 100 percent of the carrying value of the firm's private equity investments, a rule that induces these firms to shift their holdings to non-regulated affiliates. In view of their similarity, the Board did not distinguish in its proposal the risk of a venture capital investment made under the new merchant banking authority from that made under other authorities. By and large, the nature of most major banking organizations' existing equity investments are similar to those made by non-bank venture capitalists and are similar to those likely to be made under merchant banking powers. The high average returns to these investments-by suggesting their riskiness (recall the iron law that high return means high risk)-also suggested we seek comment on the need for a higher commitment of equity capital for all portfolio equity assets at banking organizations. Consequently, we proposed a 50 percent capital requirement on portfolio equity investments held under any authority at any location in a bank holding company. This proposal is subject to review in light of public comments. B. Comments about the Capital Proposal Indeed, as mentioned at the outset, the Board is now reviewing and evaluating the comments on its proposals. My colleagues and I have not seen all of the comments or heard the staff's evaluation of them. We are not committed to any conclusion or decision at this time. Nonetheless, the objectives of the Subcommittee, as I understand them, would not be met if I did not try to highlight the major issues as they seem to be unfolding. Please keep in mind the caveats I just noted as I try to do so. Rating Agencies. Each of the two major rating agencies-Standard & Poor's and Moody's-has issued reports discussing banking organizations' private equity activities since the Board published its capital proposal. Standard & Poor's concluded that the proposed 50 percent equity support appeared to be about right "if the bank's portfolio is mature and diversified; less diversified portfolios could need up to 100 percent." It also noted that the heavy regulatory claim on capital for banking organizations active in private equity markets would have "no rating implications" "because Standard & Poor's ha[s] historically allocated this level of capital" to the equity investment activities of banking organizations. Moody's noted that venture capital activities are "capital-intensive" and that it believed "that it is prudent for venture capital activities to be funded with a high equity componentIf the bank is taking on significant fixed income obligations to fund an equity investment, we have further concerns." It concluded that "Moody's sees the recent Treasury and Fed proposal requiring U.S. banks to set aside capital equal to 50 percent of a bank's venture capital investmentsas being supportive of bank ratings." Economic vs. Regulatory Capital. In reviewing the capital proposal, the Board will have to consider a critical comment raised regarding the distinction between regulatory and economic capital. All parties generally agree, as I have noted, private equity is a risky asset. There is, as I also noted, substantial evidence that, in general, both the firms engaged in private equity investing and the rating agencies internally or analytically allocate at least as much capital to such assets as the Board has proposed. That is, the economic capital applied to these assets for internal risk and other purposes already exceeds the regulatory capital by a wide margin, a margin that is not exceeded by our proposal. However, commenters have argued that there would be considerably less difficulty with the proposed regulatory capital treatment for equities if the authorities permitted a regulatory capital treatment for the rest of a banking organization's assets that was consistent with the "real" or economic risk on those assets. This argument rests on the assumption that the regulatory capital on a significant volume of banking organization assets exceeds their economic charge and that, therefore, the sum of a higher regulatory capital on equities and the existing regulatory capital on all other assets would exceed the total economic capital on all the assets. The commenters that have raised this issue have argued the Federal Reserve has engaged in "cherry picking"-picking out the risky assets for higher capital charge without providing relief for the lower risk assets. They have urged the Board to wait until there is broader reform in the Basel Accord that would presumably address these concerns. The reforms underway in the Accord are, in fact, seeking to make bank regulatory capital charges more risk-sensitive and consistent with the "true" underlying economic risk at individual institutions. The U.S. banking agencies are aggressively promoting these efforts in discussions with other G-10 countries at Basel. I remind you again that the Board has not discussed this particular comment yet, although similar issues have been raised in other discussions of capital more broadly. It may be better, as some commenters suggest, to deal with all the capital issues at one time. However, we face a practical problem. Private equity holdings are large and growing rapidly now, and the restraints on further growth are being relaxed. Meanwhile, practical reform of the Basel Accord is at least three years in the future. As the Subcommittee knows, policy-making requires trade-offs and we are going to have to balance the facts and considerations I have just noted. In doing so, however, we must also consider another variable in our deliberations, namely the undermining of the regulatory capital structure through so-called capital arbitrage. Essentially, the regulatory capital framework now groups or "buckets" all banking assets into four risk categories for determining their capital charge-with most falling in the full-weight category that gets the 4 percent minimum Tier 1 charge mentioned earlier. Banking organizations in recent years, however, have developed methods to move off their balance sheets those assets whose economic risk-as determined by the market-implies an economic capital charge that is less than the regulatory capital requirement. That is, they have avoided a one-size-fits-all average regulatory capital requirement whenever that charge is above the market's risk evaluation on a specific set of assets, retaining those assets whose economic capital is equal to or higher than the regulatory requirement. The Federal Reserve and the other banking agencies have not sought to block these transactions. Rather we have all recognized the market reality that the current regulatory capital requirements imply that banking organizations have two choices. The first is to simply stop extending certain low-risk credit because the regulatory capital requirement is too high. The second choice is to extend such credits coupled with market transactions that, by equilibrating the amount of capital required with that consistent with the real economic risk, permit the credit extension to be both safe and profitable. We have, in short, permitted capital arbitrage whenever the banking organization can meet the market test. Capital arbitrage means, however, that the resultant regulatory capital ratios for some banking organizations are biased upward. That is, the average retained assets are, on average, more risky and thus the same capital ratio as before does not represent the same degree of capital strength. Put differently, banking organizations engaging in capital arbitrage have already removed from their balance sheets a large number of those assets whose economic capital charge is less than their regulatory capital requirement. These banking organizations, that is to say, have already engaged in a form of cherry picking to lower their capital charges and thus have fewer low-risk on-balance sheet assets subject to full capital charge. It is difficult to estimate the capital "savings" made by these institutions from capital arbitrage and compare it to the potential "cost" of higher regulatory capital on equities. The measured value of the latter may exceed the former. Nonetheless, capital arbitrage is surely one of the variables we will consider in the final decision making process. A related issue in interpreting distinctions between economic and regulatory capital is banking organizations' desire for excess regulatory capital. It appears clear that banking organizations want to hold a level of capital above the regulatory minimums, in part to assure they can retain the imprimatur of being classified as "well-capitalized" in the event of losses; and in part to receive higher ratings from the rating agencies and a lower cost of funds from the market. Thus, commenters were not assuaged by the observation that even after the imposition of the proposed capital charge on equities, all the banking organizations with significant equity holdings that are now "well-capitalized" on a regulatory basis would remain so, and would have the ability to acquire additional equities and still remain "well-capitalized". Their focus and concern is the reduction in the margin by which they would be "well-capitalized". Congressional Intent. Several commenters have argued that the Board's proposals are inconsistent with several stated congressional objectives: (1) facilitating small business venture capital equity finance, especially through SBICs; (2) permitting securities firms to become financial holding companies (the "two-way street"); and (3) the desire to avoid imposing bank-like regulation on the nonbanking activities of financial holding companies ("Fed-lite"). As noted earlier, the Small Business Investment and the Bank Holding Company acts permit banks and bank holding companies to invest in and operate SBICs with the special objective of easing access to venture capital by smaller firms. Some commenters have argued that higher capital requirements may blunt this effort. The Board must evaluate the potential impact of its capital proposal on the financing of small businesses through SBICs. An important question is whether a higher regulatory capital charge would, in fact, significantly reduce the commitment of banking organizations to SBIC finance. Banks tell us they already have an internal capital hurdle at least as high as the proposed regulatory charge, and in applying the charge we understand they make no distinction about the authority under which, or where in the organization, the shares are held. Moreover, a reduction in their investments-if it did occur-might not be a significant factor in total venture capital finance for small businesses, since banking organization-related SBICs account for only about 6 percent of all venture capital finance. Nonetheless, the comments require that we review the SBIC issue again. Any observer of the negotiations leading to enactment of the GLB Act is aware of the importance placed on both the "two-way street" and "Fed lite". Some commenters argued that the proposed capital charge will make it difficult for securities firms to become financial holding companies by requiring that, as soon as they acquire a bank, they meet higher regulatory capital requirements on the equity investments already held by the firm. In developing the proposal, however, we tried to carefully evaluate this issue, including whether the internal capital charges securities firms told our staff they used represent a calculation of the risks associated with equity investment activities or are just used for internal management decision-making purposes but not for risk management. We will review this issue again in light of the comments. An area where commenters have suggested that we may not have been consistent with our commitment to "Fed-lite" is the quantitative limit or cap on aggregate holdings of equities by banking organizations. Our thinking, admittedly similar to our historical stance, is to be cautious in new activities until we have become more comfortable with how banking organizations manage their positions. We followed such an approach with section 20 affiliates. Recall that merchant banking activities have been authorized to begin while the capital rule is simply proposed. Thus, financial holding companies-two-thirds of which are below $1 billion in consolidated assets-could begin to acquire potentially large amounts of risky assets before being required to hold an appropriate amount of additional capital to support these investments. Moreover, we chose a cap that we felt was unlikely to bind on any present participant any time soon and that, in any event, we could relieve on a case-by-case basis if appropriate. Our objective in the proposal was to err on the side of caution, particularly for new participants, and to consider eliminating the cap in connection with the development of a final capital rule. ****** The commenters raised important questions and the Board will carefully evaluate them and modify its proposal and interim rule where necessary and in the public interest. Footnotes 65 Federal Register 16,460 16,480 (March 28, 2000).
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan Business data analysis Before the New York Association for Business Economics, New York, New York (via videoconference) June 13, 2000 This afternoon, bearing my old business economist credentials, I would like to discuss productivity. In particular, I will emphasize the potential to improve our understanding of the performance of productivity from delving into the microeconomic details of our current business environment. I believe the gains from this approach are likely to be greater than those from efforts to squeeze additional insight out of a limited number of macroeconomic statistics. Until recently, much of the professional debate on the performance of productivity centered on whether there had been any meaningful acceleration of nonfarm business sector output per hour--a standard measure of aggregate productivity. That there has been some underlying improvement in the growth of aggregate productivity is now generally conceded by all but the most skeptical. The discussion has shifted to the extent and nature of that acceleration. A great deal of the evidence offered by the participants in this debate focuses on examinations of very aggregative measures of productivity. However, while the application of sophisticated filtering techniques, cyclical adjustment procedures, and other statistical tools to the analysis of aggregate productivity may improve our understanding in some respects, these approaches ultimately have significant limitations. Only when data are disaggregated can we reasonably hope to tie productivity performance directly to business practices in our offices, on our plant floors, and through our distribution channels. Evidence developed at this level, recalibrated to an economywide scale, is, for reasons that I will discuss, more persuasive than that offered by the aggregate figures. Both the extent of the acceleration we are experiencing and the forces that underlie this improvement can be brought into sharper focus using a disaggregated approach. To make any headway toward understanding productivity trends, one must first understand the data. In that regard, disaggregation often uncovers troubling implications of the underlying data that are not immediately obvious. For example, separating nonfarm business sector output per hour into nonfinancial corporate, financial corporate, and noncorporate sectors has revealed disquieting problems with the measurement of productivity, especially in the noncorporate sector. The Commerce Department will soon release data on output by industry, or "gross product originating," which will allow this decomposition to be updated to more fully reflect the benchmark revision to the national income and product accounts (NIPA) published last fall. Taken at face value, the prerevision data suggested that the level of noncorporate output per hour was no higher in the late 1990s than it had been in 1985. Indeed, the data pointed to falling levels of productivity for many years in such industries as construction and medical, legal, and business services--areas that are important in the noncorporate sector. These statistics, however, are wholly at variance with our casual day-by-day experiences. Perhaps this Thursday's re-benchmarked GPO data will paint a significantly different picture. But, their doing so would only reinforce the argument for downweighting from our analyses sectoral data that are subject to such large revisions. Putting aside the issue of data revisions, some analysts argue that such disaggregation of national productivity measures is inappropriate. They point out that inaccurate estimates of intermediate inputs and prices can shift measured value added from one sector of the economy to another without affecting the total. The implication is that aggregate productivity is measured more accurately than sectoral productivity. This concern clearly would be relevant if one sector were all, or predominantly, an input into the other. But in the case at hand, many of the types of firms that are important in the noncorporate sector--such as self-employed construction contractors, small retail stores, individual insurance agents, and doctors' offices--typically do not supply their output to the corporate sector. Consequently, the hypothesis that the currently estimated flat productivity of the noncorporate sector in recent years largely results from output misattributed to the corporate sector seems improbable. The sources of the productivity measurement problems in the noncorporate sector are not entirely clear. Interestingly, value added per hour in nominal terms has risen at about the same pace in both the noncorporate and the corporate sector since 1992. Although it is conceivable that the problem could be mismeasurement of nominal incomes, difficulties with price measurement likely are the more important factor. The 1996 Boskin Commission documented widespread upward bias in estimated price change. If the biases are greater in the price indexes that implicitly are employed to deflate nominal noncorporate incomes, as I suspect, the output and productivity growth of this sector would be understated. Whatever the source of the measurement error, it simply is not credible that for many years the noncorporate sector has experienced no productivity growth. None of the available measures of productivity are without drawbacks. But I prefer to focus greater attention on the productivity measure for the nonfinancial corporate sector, which accounts for some 70 percent of total nonfarm business product. These figures eliminate the clearly mismeasured productivity of the noncorporate sector and avoid the thorny conceptual issues surrounding measurement of the financial sector. The remainder, while far from perfect, may provide a better representation of productivity developments in the economy. Moreover, in the national accounts, the gross product of the nonfinancial corporate business sector is measured from the income side. In my judgment, this income-side framework has the advantage that it is better suited to identifying the forces of cost containment that have been so critical in engendering productivity growth at the company level. Conceptually, of course, there is no distinction between gross domestic product and gross domestic income. In practice, their difference in measurement is reflected in the NIPA statistical discrepancy. In the past, the year-to-year changes in the discrepancy generally have fluctuated around zero. Hence, over most of the past half-century the average growth rates of output and productivity measured from the product and the income side usually have not differed by much. Data for the most recent years, however, trace a different story. The statistical discrepancy has swung sharply since late 1992, reflecting an annual growth rate in real gross domestic income that has been 0.4 percentage point higher than the growth rate of real gross domestic product. This seven-year change is the largest in the statistical discrepancy, viewed in real terms, in the postwar period. This difference is reflected directly in faster growth of productivity measured on the income side than that measured on the product side of the accounts. Faced with a formidable data collection challenge, the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) does a commendable job in limiting the discrepancy to so low a level; despite the recent widening, the discrepancy is little more than 1 percent of the total nominal annual GDP of nearly $10 trillion. But that said, the differences in productivity growth measured on the product and the income sides of the accounts are large enough to be economically meaningful. And in my view, insufficient attention is paid to the economic signal provided by the income-side measures. To be sure, for some purposes, the product-side estimates of necessity play the central role. For example, most of our structural econometric models seek to explain the dynamics of spending behavior utilizing the structure of the product side of the accounts. But for understanding the behavior of prices, costs, and productivity, using the consolidated and internally consistent income-side accounts, unencumbered by a changing statistical discrepancy, has advantages. To illustrate with recent developments in the nonfinancial corporate sector, for about four years price inflation has remained subdued--with prices rising on average about 1/2 percent per year. During that period, growth in hourly compensation has stepped up, and profitability has been strong. How are these observations reconciled? In the framework of this income-side system, the answer is an acceleration of labor productivity; indeed, for the nonfinancial corporate sector, output per hour has accelerated from around a 1-1/2 percent pace in the first half of the 1990s to more than a 4 percent pace over the past couple of years. Of course, this is precisely the story told repeatedly by businesspeople in recent years, and that also is apparent from a microeconomic examination of firm performance. Indeed, one need not have adverted to the national income and product accounts at all to surmise the early emergence of productivity acceleration. Domestic operating profit margins, rising as they did from 1995 into 1997 in an environment of falling inflation, necessarily implied falling rates of total unit cost increases--most credibly the consequence of rising productivity growth. Substantial increases in U.S. capital investment, and the accompanying faster growth of our capital stock relative to labor input--so-called capital deepening--explain a large part of the pickup in underlying growth in output per hour over the past five years, irrespective of how measured. But there has also been a marked step-up in the growth of so-called multifactor productivity (MFP). MFP is, of course, that portion of labor productivity that cannot be explained by other identifiable inputs into the production process. To a significant extent, MFP captures technological and managerial advance. These influences are very difficult to quantify, and we can only indirectly check that the resulting performance of other economic measures conform with our judgments about underlying efficiency gains in the production of specific goods and services. There is considerable evidence at the microeconomic level that companies have continued to reap ample returns on capital outlays. In that regard, the rate of return on capital has been well maintained in recent years, despite the huge expansion of the capital stock. This conclusion runs counter to our usual expectation that increased supply brings down the marginal product of capital and is certainly consistent with some continuing improvement in multifactor productivity. Indications that something unusual was afoot surfaced as early as 1993 when, a full two years after the 1991 recession, a significant rise in new orders for high-tech equipment unexpectedly emerged. Plant managers must have been inferring large increases in projected rates of return on these capital outlays, a judgment supported by subsequent increases in MFP and a high-tech order flow that is still increasing at an elevated double-digit annual rate. In retrospect, it is evident that we were in the early phases of a major expansion and diffusion of new technologies. These developments allowed firms to boost earnings in the face of intense competitive pressures through a reduction in the growth of unit costs. Moreover, despite a huge increase in the supply of high-tech capital assets, there is little evidence of a noticeable reduction in prospective rates of return on the newer technologies. What differentiates this period from other periods in our history is the extraordinary role played by information and communication technologies. The effect of these technologies could rival and arguably even surpass the impact the telegraph had prior to, and just after, the Civil War. The important contribution of these new technologies is quite evident from another interesting disaggregation of the macroeconomic data, carried out by Stephen Oliner and Dan Sichel at the Federal Reserve Board in some recent research. Their paper shows that much of the jump in productivity growth since the mid-1990s can be explained by two factors related to new information technologies. Most important, businesses throughout the economy have installed a great deal of information technology capital in recent years, which has boosted productivity growth through the associated capital deepening. In addition, the companies that produce computers and the embedded semiconductors appear to have achieved major efficiencies in their own operations, which have boosted MFP growth for the economy as a whole. Taking these two effects together, the authors estimate that since 1995 information technologies have contributed about one-half of the acceleration of productivity measured on the income side and about two-thirds of the acceleration of productivity when measured on the product side. Much, if not all the remainder, reflects improvements beyond information technology narrowly defined and presumably reflects the managerial synergies that have resulted from an innovation-driven reorientation of business practice. The results of the Oliner-Sichel analysis confirm what we could already sense from observation of company performance--that information and communication capabilities are currently expanding at an awesome rate. Ever more sophisticated laser, computer, and satellite technologies, together with innovations in fiber optics, have significantly altered the way goods and services are produced and have improved the associated effectiveness with which we are able to allocate and utilize scarce labor and capital resources. At the most basic level, the major contribution of information innovation is to reduce the number of worker hours required to produce a given level of the nation's output. Yet, in the vibrant economic conditions that have accompanied this period of rapid gains in productivity, labor resources freed up by technical advance have found ready opportunities elsewhere. Indeed, many more jobs have been created than have been lost, and our unemployment rate has fallen notably as technology has blossomed. The more-rapid pace of IT and other high-tech innovation also has been accompanied by a visible acceleration of the process of "creative destruction," a shifting of capital from failing technologies into those technologies at the cutting edge as differential rates of return among prospective investments widened. The resulting process of capital reallocation across the economy has been assisted by a significant unbundling of risks in capital markets made possible by the development of innovative financial products, many of which themselves owe their viability to improvements in IT. Before this revolution in information availability, most twentieth-century business decisionmaking had been hampered by wide uncertainty. Owing to the paucity of timely knowledge of customers' needs and of the location of inventories and materials flowing throughout complex production systems, businesses, as many of you well remember, required substantial programmed redundancies to function effectively. Doubling up on materials and people was essential as backup to the inevitable misjudgments of the real-time state of play in a company. Decisions were made from information that was hours, days, or even weeks old. Accordingly, production planning required costly inventory safety stocks and backup teams of people to respond to the unanticipated and the misjudged. Large remnants of information void, of course, still persist, and forecasts of future events on which all business decisions ultimately depend are still unavoidably uncertain. But the remarkable surge in the availability of more timely information in recent years has enabled business management to remove large swaths of inventory safety stocks and worker redundancies. Information access in real time--resulting, for example, from processes such as electronic data interface between the retail checkout counter and the factory floor or the satellite location of trucks--has fostered marked reductions in delivery lead times and the related workhours required for the production and delivery of all sorts of goods, from books to capital equipment. The dramatic decline in the lead times for the delivery of capital equipment has made a particularly significant contribution to the favorable economic environment of the past decade. When lead times for capital goods are long, the equipment must have multiple capabilities to deal with the plausible range of business needs likely to occur after these capital goods are delivered and installed. With lead times foreshortened, many of the redundancies built into capital equipment to ensure that it could meet most plausible alternatives of a defined distant future could be sharply reduced. That means fewer goods and worker hours are caught up in activities that, while perceived as necessary insurance to sustain valued output, in the end produce nothing of value. Those intermediate production and distribution activities, so essential when information and quality control were poor, are being reduced in scale and, in some cases, eliminated. These trends may well gather speed and force as the Internet continues to alter relationships of businesses to their suppliers and their customers. The process of innovation goes beyond the factory floor or distribution channels. Design times and costs have fallen dramatically as computer modeling has eliminated the need, for example, for the large staff of architectural specification-drafters previously required for building projects. Medical diagnoses are more thorough, more accurate, and far faster, with access to heretofore unavailable information. Treatment is accordingly hastened, and hours of procedures eliminated. Indeed, these developments emphasize the essence of information technology--the expansion of knowledge and its obverse, the reduction of uncertainty. As a consequence, risk premiums that were associated with many forms of business activity have declined. Because the future is never entirely predictable, risk in any business action committed to the future--that is, virtually all business actions--can be reduced but never eliminated. Information technologies, by improving our real-time understanding of production processes and of the vagaries of consumer demand, are reducing the degree of uncertainty and, hence, risk. In short, information technology raises output per hour in the total economy principally by reducing hours worked on activities needed to guard productive processes against the unknown and the unanticipated. Narrowing the uncertainties reduces the number of hours required to maintain any given level of production readiness. In economic terms, we are reducing risk premiums and variances throughout the economic decision tree that drives the production of our goods and services. This has meant that employment of scarce resources to deal with heightened risk premiums has been reduced. The expanding opportunities for e-commerce are already changing the relationship between businesses and consumers. The networking forces unleashed by the Internet are almost surely to be even more potent within and among businesses, where uncertainties are being reduced by improving the quantity, the reliability, and the timeliness of information. This is the case in many recent initiatives, especially among our more seasoned companies, to consolidate and rationalize their supply chains using the Internet. Not all technologies, information or otherwise, however, increase productivity--that is, output per hour--by reducing the inputs necessary to produce existing products. Some technologies bring about new goods and services with above-average value added per workhour. The dramatic advances in biotechnology, for example, are significantly increasing a broad range of productivity-expanding efforts in areas from agriculture to medicine. In summary then, most of the gains in the level and the growth rate of productivity in the United States since 1995 appear to have been structural, largely driven by irreversible advances in technology and its application--irreversible in the sense that knowledge once gained is almost never lost. Having learned to employ bar code and satellite technologies, for example, we are not about to lose our capability in applying them. To be sure, some of the increase in output per hour may well reflect cyclical rather than structural changes. Output can be stretched beyond sustainable capacity for a time, raising measured output per hour. And, on the other side, a cyclical slowing in demand is not usually matched by a prompt scaling back of employment, resulting in a temporary decline in output per hour or, at best, a significant slowing in its growth rate. But cutting through the inevitable cyclical fluctuation of measured output per hour, the evidence of a decided improvement in the growth rate of structural productivity from the macro data has continued to strengthen. And, an examination of the micro level evidence is even more compelling. Disaggregative probings of the productivity data, as well as direct observation of the performance of U.S. businesses lend considerable credibility to the notion that our economy is benefiting from structural gains in productivity that have been driven by a remarkable wave of technological innovation. Footnotes The initial work in this area by the Board=s staff appeared in 1996 in Lawrence Slifman and Carol Corrado, "Decomposition of Productivity and Unit Costs," available at . An updated version of the paper was published as Carol Corrado and Lawrence Slifman, "Decomposition of Productivity and Unit Costs," American Economic Review , vol. 89 (May 1999), pp.328-332. See Stephen D. Oliner and Daniel E. Sichel, "The Resurgence of Growth in the Late 1990s: Is Information Technology the Story?", available at .
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application of The Chase Manhattan Bank, New York, New York, to merge with Chase Bank of Texas, Houston, Texas, and to retain and operate branches. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation National Credit Union Administration Office of the Comptroller of the Currency Office of Thrift Supervision Financial Crimes Enforcement Network AGENCIES ISSUE REVISED SUSPICIOUS ACTIVITY REPORT FORM (SAR) The five federal financial institutions supervisory agencies -- the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the National Credit Union Administration, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the Office of Thrift Supervision , together with the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) -- today issued a newly revised Suspicious Activity Report (SAR) form. Beginning immediately, financial institutions and organizations that are currently required to report suspicious activity pursuant to existing regulations of the federal financial institutions supervisory agencies and FinCEN may use the new SAR form to make these reports. Financial institutions and organizations may continue to use the existing SAR form while their procedures and systems are updated to make use of the new SAR form. However, no versions of the SAR form, other than the new SAR form that is being issued today, will be accepted after December 31, 2000. The revisions to the SAR form reflect comments from filers and users on how to make the SAR form easier to complete and to provide more useful and timely information. Consistent with this goal, several revisions have been made to the new SAR form being issued today. In addition to modifying the layout of the SAR form for easier use, the agencies have: Added a check box for "Computer Intrusion" to Part III, "Suspicious Activity Information," in recognition of the need to obtain more specific information with regard to computer related suspicious activity. Along with the addition of the check box in Part III, a specific definition of "Computer Intrusion" has been added to the "When to Make a Report" instructions at number 2. Deleted the two sections requiring witness and preparer information and have replaced these sections with Part IV, "Contact for Assistance." Replaced the requirements to provide the name and address of any law enforcement authorities contacted with regard to the suspicious activity being reported with Part III, "Suspicious Activity Information," items 40 through 44, to include check boxes for the law enforcement agencies contacted and to list the names and telephone numbers of law enforcement personnel contacted. Deleted the requirement to identify whether a SAR is an "Initial Report," "Corrected Report," or "Supplemental Report." Instead, filers will only be required to identify when a SAR is being filed to correct a prior SAR. Specific instructions on filing a SAR to correct a prior report have been added in the "How to Make a Report" instructions at number 3. Along with the issuance of the new SAR form, a copy of which is attached to this announcement, guidance for the preparation of SAR forms has been prepared and is being distributed with the new SAR form. The guidance provides valuable information on the preparation and filing of SAR forms. In addition to the new SAR form, new software has been developed and is available to assist in the preparation and filing of SAR forms. The new SAR software, as well as the new SAR form, are available on the web sites of the federal financial institutions supervisory agencies and FinCEN. The web site addresses are: the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, ; the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, ; the National Credit Union Administration, ; the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, ; the Office of Thrift Supervision, ; and FinCEN, . Each of these web sites will have available the new SAR form, the guidance for the SAR form and the new SAR software or instructions on how to obtain these materials from other web sites. With the issuance of the new SAR form and SAR software, financial institutions and organizations will be able to file the new form by: Using the new SAR software to complete the SAR form, save it on a diskette and mailing it to the Detroit Computing Center, as set forth in the SAR instructions. Using the new SAR software to complete the SAR form and then printing a paper version of the completed SAR form and mailing it to the Detroit Computing Center, as set forth in the SAR instructions. Producing a magnetic tape of SAR forms (using revised specifications obtained from the Detroit Computing Center) and mailing it to the Detroit Computing Center. Completing (if none of the above options is available) the paper version of the SAR and mailing it to the Detroit Computing Center, as set forth in the SAR instructions. For any questions regarding the newly issued SAR form, financial institutions and organizations should contact their primary federal regulator or FinCEN.
For immediate release Alan Greenspan this afternoon took the oath of office as Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System for a fourth four-year term commencing today. The oath was administered in Dr. Greenspan's office by Vice Chairman Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. President Clinton nominated Dr. Greenspan on January 4 and the Senate confirmed him on February 3. He originally took office on August 11, 1987.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Office of the Comptroller of the Currency Office of Thrift Supervision AGENCIES PROPOSE STANDARDS FOR CUSTOMER INFORMATION SECURITY The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Office of Thrift Supervision jointly requested comment today on a proposed rule establishing standards for safeguarding confidential customer information. The proposed rule would implement section 501 (b) of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLBA). Comments will be accepted until August 25, 2000 . The law requires the agencies to establish standards for financial institutions relating to administrative, technical and physical safeguards for customer records and information. These safeguards are intended to ensure the security and confidentiality of customer records and information, protect against any anticipated threats or hazards to the security or integrity of these records and protect against unauthorized access to or use of these records or information that would result in substantial harm or inconvenience to a customer. The proposed rule would provide that financial institutions establish an information security program that would require them to: (1) identify and assess the risks that may threaten customer information; (2) develop a written plan containing policies and procedures to manage and control these risks; (3) implement and test the plan; and (4) adjust the plan on a continuing basis to account for changes in technology, the sensitivity of customer information, and internal or external threats to information security. The proposed rule outlines specific factors that banks should consider in implementing a security program. Among other factors, banks should evaluate their controls on access to customer information and their policies for encrypting customer information while it is being transmitted or stored on networks to which unauthorized persons may have access. Financial institutions should test, on a regular basis, key controls, systems and procedures to confirm that they meet the objectives of their security programs. The proposed guidelines suggest that tests should be conducted by independent third parties or by staff independent of those that develop or maintain the security program. The agencies seek comment on the need for specific types of tests, such as penetration or intrusion detection tests. The proposed rule also outlines responsibilities of directors and management of financial institutions in overseeing the protection of customer information. An institution's board of directors should approve written information security policies and programs, and oversee management's efforts to develop, implement and maintain an effective information security program. Management should evaluate the impact of changing business arrangements, such as mergers and joint ventures, document compliance with the security standards, and report to the board on the overall status of the program. The agencies seek comments on various aspects of the proposal, including its impact on community banks that operate with more limited resources and which may have a different risk profile than larger banks. Comments are also sought on whether the final standards should be guidelines or regulations.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today issued examination guidance identifying sound practices for equity investment and merchant banking. The guidance, contained in a supervisory letter sent to Federal Reserve bank examiners and supervisors as well as banking organizations supervised by the Federal Reserve, codifies and supplements existing supervisory practices. "While equity investments in non-financial companies can contribute substantially to earnings, such investments, like other rapidly growing and highly profitable business lines, can entail significant market, liquidity and other risks," wrote Richard Spillenkothen, director of the Board's Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation. "Sound investment and risk management practices and strong capital positions are critical elements in the prudent conduct of these activities," he wrote. The guidance advises supervisors to encourage banking institutions to make appropriate public disclosures relevant to their equity investments, including accounting techniques and valuation methods used, realized and unrealized gains and losses, and insights regarding the potential performance of investments under alternative market conditions. Merchant banking and equity investment have emerged as an increasingly important source of earnings at some institutions and the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act enacted in November provides additional merchant banking authority for financial holding companies. Supervisory letters are the Federal Reserve's primary means of communicating key policy directives to its examiners, supervisory staff and the banking industry. Supervisory letters can be viewed on the Board's web site at . The supervisory letter is .
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria, S.A., Madrid, Spain; Banco Bilbao Vizcaya, S.A. Miami Agency, Miami, Florida; Banco Bilbao Vizcaya, S.A. New York Branch, New York, New York; the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta; the Federal Reserve Bank of New York; the New York State Banking Department; and the State of Florida Department of Banking and Finance. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its denial of the notice of Northern Star Financial, Inc., Mankato, Minnesota, to acquire First Federal Holding Company of Morris, Inc., and thereby acquire First Federal Savings Bank, both of Morris, Minnesota. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
For immediate release The Federal Open Market Committee at its meeting today decided to maintain the existing stance of monetary policy, keeping its target for the federal funds rate at 6-1/2 percent. Recent data suggest that the expansion of aggregate demand may be moderating toward a pace closer to the rate of growth of the economy's potential to produce. Although core measures of prices are rising slightly faster than a year ago, continuing rapid advances in productivity have been containing costs and holding down underlying price pressures. Nonetheless, signs that growth in demand is moving to a sustainable pace are still tentative and preliminary, and the utilization of the pool of available workers remains at an unusually high level. In these circumstances, and against the background of its long-term goals of price stability and sustainable economic growth and of the information currently available, the Committee believes the risks continue to be weighted mainly toward conditions that may generate heightened inflation pressures in the foreseeable future.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application of Banco Comercial Portugus, S.A., Oporto, Portugal ("Banco Comercial"), and certain of its subsidiaries to become bank holding companies by acquiring up to 100 percent of the voting shares of BPABank, National Association, Newark, New Jersey. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action. The Board also approved in a today the application by Banco Comercial to establish a representative office in Miami, Florida.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today its approval of the application of Banco Comercial Portugus, S.A., Oporto, Portugal, to establish a representative office in Miami, Florida. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application of Compass Bancshares, Inc., Birmingham, Alabama, ("Compass") to acquire Founders Bancorp, Inc., and thereby acquire Founders Bank of Arizona ("Founders Bank"), both of Scottsdale, Arizona. The Board also approved the application of Compass's lead subsidiary bank, Compass Bank, Birmingham, Alabama, to merge with Founders Bank and to retain and operate branches at the current locations of Founders Bank's offices. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.