For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of a Prompt Corrective Action Directive against the New Century Bank, Southfield, Michigan. A copy of the Directive is attached.
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan The revolution in information technology Before the Boston College Conference on the New Economy, Boston, Massachusetts March 6, 2000 In the last few years it has become increasingly clear that this business cycle differs in a very profound way from the many other cycles that have characterized post-World War II America. Not only has the expansion achieved record length, but it has done so with economic growth far stronger than expected. Most remarkably, inflation has remained largely subdued in the face of labor markets tighter than any we have experienced in a generation. A key factor behind this extremely favorable performance has been the resurgence in productivity growth. Since 1995, output per hour in the nonfinancial corporate sector has increased at an average annual rate of 3-1/2 percent, nearly double the average pace over the preceding quarter-century. Indeed, the rate of growth appears to have been rising throughout the period. My remarks today will focus both on what is evidently the source of this spectacular performance--the revolution in information technology--and on its implications for key government policies. When historians look back at the latter half of the 1990s a decade or two hence, I suspect that they will conclude we are now living through a pivotal period in American economic history. New technologies that evolved from the cumulative innovations of the past half-century have now begun to bring about dramatic changes in the way goods and services are produced and in the way they are distributed to final users. Those innovations, exemplified most recently by the multiplying uses of the Internet, have brought on a flood of startup firms, many of which claim to offer the chance to revolutionize and dominate large shares of the nation's production and distribution system. And participants in capital markets, not comfortable dealing with discontinuous shifts in economic structure, are groping for the appropriate valuations of these companies. The exceptional stock price volatility of these newer firms and, in the view of some, their outsized valuations indicate the difficulty of divining the particular technologies and business models that will prevail in the decades ahead. How did we arrive at such a fascinating and, to some, unsettling point in history? While the process of innovation, of course, is never-ending, the development of the transistor after World War II appears in retrospect to have initiated a special wave of innovative synergies. It brought us the microprocessor, the computer, satellites, and the joining of laser and fiber-optic technologies. By the 1990s, these and a number of lesser but critical innovations had, in turn, fostered an enormous new capacity to capture, analyze, and disseminate information. It is the growing use of information technology throughout the economy that makes the current period unique. However, until the mid-1990s, the billions of dollars that businesses had poured into information technology seemed to leave little imprint on the overall economy. The investment in new technology arguably had not yet cumulated to be a sizable part of the U.S. capital stock, and computers were still being used largely on a stand-alone basis. The full value of computing power could be realized only after ways had been devised to link computers into large-scale networks. As we all know, that day has arrived. At a fundamental level, the essential contribution of information technology is the expansion of knowledge and its obverse, the reduction in uncertainty. Before this quantum jump in information availability, most business decisions were hampered by a fog of uncertainty. Businesses had limited and lagging knowledge of customers' needs and of the location of inventories and materials flowing through complex production systems. In that environment, doubling up on materials and people was essential as a backup to the inevitable misjudgments of the real-time state of play in a company. Decisions were made from information that was hours, days, or even weeks old. Of course, large voids of information still persist, and forecasts of future events on which all business decisions ultimately depend will always be prone to error. But information has become vastly more available in real time--resulting, for example, from developments such as electronic data interface between the retail checkout counter and the factory floor or the satellite location of trucks. This surge in the availability of more timely information has enabled business management to remove large swaths of inventory safety stocks and worker redundancies. Stated differently, fewer goods and worker hours are now involved in activities that, although perceived as necessary insurance to sustain valued output, in the end produced nothing of value. Those intermediate production and distribution activities, so essential when information and quality control were poor, are being reduced in scale and, in some cases, eliminated. These trends may well gather speed and force as the Internet alters relationships of businesses to their suppliers and their customers, a topic to which I shall return in a moment. The process of information innovation has gone far beyond the factory floor and distribution channels. Computer modeling, for example, has dramatically reduced the time and cost required to design items ranging from motor vehicles to commercial airliners to skyscrapers. In a very different part of the economy, medical diagnoses have become more thorough, more accurate, and far faster. With access to heretofore unavailable information, treatment has been hastened, and hours of procedures have been eliminated. Moreover, the potential for discovering more-effective treatments has been greatly enhanced by the parallel revolution in biotechnology, including the ongoing effort to map the entire human genome. That work would have been unthinkable without the ability to store and process huge amounts of data. The advances in information technology also have been an impetus to the ongoing wave of strategic alliance and merger activity. Hardly a week passes without the announcement of another blockbuster deal. Many of these combinations arise directly from the opportunities created by new technology--for example, those at the intersection of the Internet, telecommunications, and the media. It is not possible to know which of the many new technologies will ultimately find a firm foothold in our rapidly changing economy. Accordingly, many high-tech companies that wish to remain independent are hedging their bets by entering into strategic alliances with firms developing competing technologies. In addition, the new technology has fostered full mergers that allow firms to take greater advantage of economies of scale and thus reduce costs. Without highly sophisticated information technology, it would be nearly impossible to manage firms on the scale of some that have been proposed or actually created of late. Although it will be a while before the ultimate success of these endeavors can be judged, information technology has almost certainly pushed out the point at which scale diseconomies begin to take hold for some industries. The impact of information technology has been keenly felt in the financial sector of the economy. Perhaps the most significant innovation has been the development of financial instruments that enable risk to be reallocated to the parties most willing and able to bear that risk. Many of the new financial products that have been created, with financial derivatives being the most notable, contribute economic value by unbundling risks and shifting them in a highly calibrated manner. Although these instruments cannot reduce the risk inherent in real assets, they can redistribute it in a way that induces more investment in real assets and, hence, engenders higher productivity and standards of living. Information technology has made possible the creation, valuation, and exchange of these complex financial products on a global basis. At the end of the day, the benefits of new technologies can be realized only if they are embodied in capital investment, defined to include any outlay that increases the value of the firm. For these investments to be made, the prospective rate of return must exceed the cost of capital. Technological synergies have enlarged the set of productive capital investments, while lofty equity values and declining prices of high-tech equipment have reduced the cost of capital. The result has been a veritable explosion of spending on high-tech equipment and software, which has raised the growth of the capital stock dramatically over the past five years. The fact that the capital spending boom is still going strong indicates that businesses continue to find a wide array of potential high-rate-of-return, productivity-enhancing investments. And I see nothing to suggest that these opportunities will peter out any time soon. Indeed, many argue that the pace of innovation will continue to quicken in the next few years, as companies exploit the still largely untapped potential for e-commerce, especially in the business-to-business arena, where most observers expect the fastest growth. An electronic market that would automatically solicit bids from suppliers has the potential for substantially reducing search and transaction costs for individual firms and for the economy as a whole. This reduction would mean less unproductive search and fewer workhours more generally embodied in each unit of output, enhancing output per hour. Already, major efforts have been announced in the auto industry to move purchasing operations to the Internet. Similar developments are planned or in operation in many other industries as well. It appears to be only a matter of time before the Internet becomes the prime venue for the trillions of dollars of business-to-business commerce conducted every year. There can be little doubt that, on balance, the evolving surge in innovation is an unmitigated good for the large majority of the American people. Yet, implicit in the very forces of change that are bringing us a panoply of goods and services considered unimaginable only a generation ago are potential financial imbalances and worker insecurities that need to be addressed if the full potential of our technological largesse is to be achieved. As I testified before the Congress last month, accelerating productivity entails a matching acceleration in the potential output of goods and services and a corresponding rise in real incomes available to purchase the new output. The pickup in productivity however tends to create even greater increases in aggregate demand than in potential aggregate supply. This occurs principally because a rise in structural productivity growth, not surprisingly, fosters higher expectations for long-term corporate earnings. These higher expectations, in turn, not only spur business investment but also increase stock prices and the market value of assets held by households, creating additional purchasing power for which no additional goods or services have yet been produced. Historical evidence suggests that perhaps three to four cents out of every additional dollar of stock market wealth eventually is reflected in increased consumer purchases. The sharp rise in the amount of consumer outlays relative to disposable incomes in recent years, and the corresponding fall in the saving rate, is a reflection of this so-called wealth effect on household purchases. Moreover, higher stock prices, by lowering the cost of equity capital, have helped to support the boom in capital spending. Outlays prompted by capital gains in equities and homes in excess of increases in income, as best we can judge, have added about 1 percentage point to annual growth of gross domestic purchases, on average, over the past half-decade. The additional growth in spending of recent years that has accompanied these wealth gains, as well as other supporting influences on the economy, appears to have been met in equal measure by increased net imports and by goods and services produced by the net increase in newly hired workers over and above the normal growth of the workforce, including a substantial net inflow of workers from abroad. But these safety valves that have been supplying goods and services to meet the recent increments to purchasing power largely generated by capital gains cannot be expected to absorb indefinitely an excess of demand over supply. Growing net imports and a widening current account deficit require ever-larger portfolio and direct foreign investments in the United States, an outcome that cannot continue without limit. Imbalances in the labor markets perhaps may have even more serious implications for potential inflation pressures. While the pool of officially unemployed and those otherwise willing to work may continue to shrink, as it has persistently over the past seven years, there is an effective limit to new hiring, unless immigration is uncapped. At some point in the continuous reduction in the number of available workers willing to take jobs, short of the repeal of the law of supply and demand, wage increases must rise above even impressive gains in productivity. This would intensify inflationary pressures or squeeze profit margins, with either outcome capable of bringing our growing prosperity to an end. In short, unless we are able to indefinitely increase the rate of capital flows into the United States to finance rising net imports or continuously augment immigration quotas, overall demand for goods and services cannot chronically exceed the underlying growth rate of supply. Our immediate goal at the Federal Reserve should be to encourage the economic and financial conditions that will best foster the technological innovation and investment that spur structural productivity growth. It is structural productivity growth--not the temporary rise and fall of output per hour associated with various stages of the business cycle--that determines how rapidly living standards rise over time. Achievement of this goal requires a stable macroeconomic environment of sustained growth and continued low inflation. That, in turn, means that the expansion of demand must moderate into alignment with the more rapid growth rate of potential supply. The current gap between the growth of supply and demand for goods and services, of necessity, has been reflected in an excess in the demand for funds over new savings from Americans, including those savings generated by rising budget surpluses. As a consequence, real long-term corporate borrowing costs have risen significantly over the past two years. Presumably as a result, many analysts are now projecting that the rate of increase in stock market wealth may soon begin to slow. If so, the wealth effect adding to spending growth would eventually be damped, and both the rate of increase in net imports as a share of GDP, and the rate of decline in the pool of unemployed workers willing to work should also slow. However, so long as these two imbalances continue, reflecting the excess of demand over supply, the level of potential workers will continue to fall and the net debt to foreigners will continue to rise by increasing amounts. Until market forces, assisted by a vigilant Federal Reserve, effect the necessary alignment of the growth of aggregate demand with the growth of potential aggregate supply, the full benefits of innovative productivity acceleration are at risk of being undermined by financial and economic instability. The second consequence of rapid economic and technological change that needs to be addressed is growing worker insecurity, the result, I suspect, of fear of potential job skill obsolescence. Despite the tightest labor markets in a generation, more workers currently report they are fearful of losing their jobs than similar surveys found in 1991 at the bottom of the last recession. The marked move of capital from failing technologies to those at the cutting edge has quickened the pace at which job skills become obsolete. The completion of high school used to equip the average worker with sufficient skills to last a lifetime. That is no longer true, as evidenced by community colleges being inundated with workers returning to school to acquire new skills and on-the-job training being expanded and upgraded by a large proportion of American business. Not unexpectedly, greater worker insecurities are creating political pressures to reduce the fierce global competition that has emerged in the wake of our 1990s technology boom. Protectionist measures, I have no doubt, could temporarily reduce some worker anxieties by inhibiting these competitive forces. However, over the longer run such actions would slow innovation and impede the rise in living standards. They could not alter the eventual shifts in production that owe to enormous changes in relative prices across the economy. Protectionism might enable a worker in a declining industry to hold onto his job longer. But would it not be better for that worker to seek a new career in a more viable industry at age 35 than hang on until age 50, when job opportunities would be far scarcer and when the lifetime benefits of additional education and training would be necessarily smaller? To be sure, assisting those who are already close to retirement in failing industries is an imperative. But that can be readily accomplished without distorting necessary capital flows to newer technologies through protectionist measures. More generally, we must ensure that our whole population receives an education that will allow full participation in this dynamic period of American economic history. * * * These years of extraordinary innovation are enhancing the standard of living for a large majority of Americans. We should be thankful for that and persevere in policies that enlarge the scope for competition and innovation and thereby foster greater opportunities for everyone.
Remarks by Vice Chairman Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. At the Institute of International Bankers, Washington, D.C. March 6, 2000 Convergence of Regulatory Standards: A Work in Process It is a pleasure to be here and to address the members of the Institute of International Bankers. Foreign banks play a critical role in the U.S. financial system, accounting for nearly one-quarter of total U.S. banking assets throughout the 1990s. The Federal Reserve has consistently supported open U.S. markets for foreign banks and has long recognized the value that you add to our economy and financial markets. Conferences such as this provide important opportunities for the banking and supervisory communities to meet with one another and to share our thoughts and concerns. In my comments today, I would like to discuss the apparent motivation for managers to create global financial institutions, which provides the background for a convergence of regulatory standards around the world. I would also like to mention briefly the approach that the Federal Reserve is taking with respect to foreign banks. Finally, I would like to focus on the emerging global regulatory standards, mainly the efforts of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision to revise risk-based capital standards. Global Consolidation of Financial Institutions The need for sound and consistent policies and procedures throughout the world has become more important as our financial markets and financial institutions have become larger, more complex, and more tightly integrated. If anyone needs proof of that statement, the spread of the Asian crisis during the course of 1997 and 1998 stands as the most obvious example of the growing integration of financial markets. Informed researchers would argue that the global consolidation of financial institutions appears to be driven by several factors. Originally, globalization probably reflected the desire of banks to serve their domestic customers as those customers themselves expanded overseas. This was probably a defensive measure designed to retain customers and preclude others from making inroads into longstanding customer relationships. For other financial institutions, the motivation for overseas expansion may well have been to fully leverage perceived comparative advantages in important business lines, such as custody, that were characterized by high fixed cost and economies of scale. A related motivation might have been to take advantage of cultural affinity, which itself is another form of comparative advantage. The strong presence of Spanish financial institutions in Latin America may be the prime example of this motivation. Finally, many institutions may have expanded to meet ambitious aspirations for growth that comparatively small local markets might not accommodate. Certainly, one might argue that the global reach of major Dutch and Swiss institutions reflects this motivation, at least in part. Importantly, one must ask if global institutions are more successful than their home-bound competitors. At least one private-sector study, from a major consulting firm, suggests that during the ten-year period ending December 31, 1996, most of the global financial services companies did not achieve significantly superior returns to shareholders. Nor did they appear to achieve superior revenue growth. I am sure that there will be other studies that attempt to determine the effect of global consolidation on the financial results of the firms involved. In any event, regardless of the presence or absence of financial success, the trend toward a more global financial industry will continue. Such market forces will provide a continuing impetus for continued cooperation and coordination among bank supervisors worldwide. Indeed, the forces for cooperation will only grow as these trends become more pronounced. The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act Issues related to the international supervision and regulation of banks come at a time when we in the United States face new challenges in implementing financial reform and the provisions of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act. That act has the potential, and indeed the intention, to change substantially the structure, activities, and supervision of financial institutions in this country. Many of the foreign banks represented here today operate as universal banks outside the United States and, like many U.S. banks, you have been frustrated by the outmoded restrictions on your banking activities in our markets. After much debate, the U.S. Congress enacted legislation that permits banks operating in the United States to expand their activities within a legal and supervisory framework intended to preserve their safety and soundness. As you well know, the Federal Reserve Board recently issued for public comment an interim amendment to Regulation Y setting forth the procedures for banking organizations to elect to become financial holding companies and avail themselves of the broader powers authorized under the act. In according financial holding company status to foreign banks, the Congress instructed the Board to apply capital and managerial standards comparable to those pertaining to U.S. banking organizations, giving due regard to the principles of national treatment and equality of competitive opportunity. The rule applies the U.S. bank risk-based capital standards of 6 percent Tier 1 capital and 10 percent total capital to foreign banks wishing to become financial holding companies. It also applies the U.S. leverage ratio to foreign banks, but at the lower holding company level of 3 percent, instead of the 5 percent ratio required of U.S. banks. To consider differences in banking and accounting practices in many foreign countries, the Board also will assess the capital and management of foreign banks case by case. This assessment will take into account, when appropriate, a number of factors such as the bank's composition of capital, accounting standards, long-term debt ratings, reliance on government support to meet capital requirements, and the extent to which the bank is subject to comprehensive, consolidated supervision. The intent of this approach is to provide the flexibility necessary to take into account all relevant factors in a way that will be equitable to all banks, foreign and domestic. We understand that there is concern that this procedure will be subject to delays, resulting in disadvantages to foreign banks. Let me assure you that we fully intend to deal with submissions from foreign banks expeditiously and in the same time frames that are provided for the review of submissions by U.S. companies. If different procedures will allow us to meet the statutory requirements on comparability, we are very open to considering them. The Board recognizes that this interim rule is of great interest to foreign banks and that it raises complex issues--in particular, how to achieve comparability as required by the law while still respecting the home country supervisory framework. This balance is difficult to achieve, and the Board intends to give careful consideration to the comments it receives in response to the interim rule. The Board is committed to implementing this new law in a manner that is equitable and fair to all institutions and that ensures a sound and stable framework for the evolution of financial services in the United States. Basel Committee on Banking Supervision In supervising financial holding companies, the Federal Reserve will need to consider not only the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act but also the policies and actions of other agencies in this country and abroad. Fortunately, we have been working together for several years to deal with issues arising from activities of financial conglomerates. I think that much of the experience we have gained through our participation in groups such as the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, the Joint Forum, and the Financial Stability Forum will help us meet the challenges ahead. Because time is brief, I will focus the balance of my remarks on the work of the Basel Committee. The Federal Reserve has been actively involved in this committee since its inception in the mid-1970s, and the Basel Committee continues to take the lead in coordinating banking supervisory policies and practices globally. Although representatives from the G-10 countries and Luxembourg do the work of the committee, it recognizes that supervisors in most of the non-G-10 countries typically adopt the policies and principles that the committee adopts. As a result, the committee has sought to incorporate the views of supervisors throughout the world. A non-G-10 working group, for example, is participating in the current revisions to the Capital Accord. As I know you are all aware, the Basel Committee is devoting a tremendous amount of time and resources to the effort to develop a new capital adequacy framework that is more sensitive to the level of underlying economic risk. Indeed, comments are due soon on a consultative paper issued last year on this topic. Feedback from the industry is important to the Basel Committee, and I hope that many of you will be communicating your ideas and reactions to the Bank for International Settlements. Capital requirements are an essential supervisory tool for fostering the safety and soundness of banks. The 1988 Basel Capital Accord was a major achievement in establishing a uniform standard for internationally active banks. In the years since, the committee has continued to develop and refine the standard in an effort to keep pace with banking practices and to maintain adequate levels of bank capital throughout the world. Many have asked why the Basel Committee is revising the accord at this time. There has been recognition from the start that the 1988 accord was rather crude and imperfect in many respects. Although that accord incorporates some differentiation in credit risk, it is limited. Moreover, the accord does not explicitly address interest rate risk, operational risk, or other risks that can be substantial at some banks. Consequently, some countries, including the United States, have put in place supplementary requirements-such as target ratios above the minimum levels-to help mitigate the accord's shortcomings. For example, as a further prudential measure, the United States decided to apply a separate leverage constraint to provide some limit to leverage, regardless of what the risk-weighted Basel approach might allow. Beyond these initial and inherent imperfections of the accord, simply the dramatic innovations over the past decade in financial markets and in the ways in which banks manage and mitigate credit risk have driven the need for change. The committee has been concerned particularly about the incentives that the accord gives banks to take on higher-risk, higher-reward transactions, and to engage in regulatory capital arbitrage. Efforts to make the standard more sensitive to underlying risk should greatly reduce these incentives. Basel Committee Consultative Paper Last year's consultative paper set out a new paradigm for judging capital adequacy based on a set of three so-called pillars. Pillar I is sound minimum capital standards or, in essence, the existing Accord with improvements. Pillar II is supervisory oversight of capital adequacy at individual banks, and pillar III is market discipline supported by adequate public disclosures by banks. These three pillars represent an evolution in the Basel Committee's approach to capital adequacy and should be mutually reinforcing. The addition of pillars II and III acknowledges the importance of ongoing review by supervisors of the capital adequacy at individual banks and the critical role of market discipline in controlling the risk-taking of banks. The committee's revisions to pillar I are aimed at developing minimum capital standards that more accurately distinguish degrees of credit risk and that are appropriate for banks of varying levels of sophistication. In its consultative document issued last June, the committee set out two possible approaches: a standardized approach that would tie capital requirements to external credit assessments, such as credit ratings, and another approach that would be based on a bank's own internal ratings. The latter would derive a capital requirement from bank estimates of default probabilities and from estimated losses-given-default on individual exposures. Using such estimates would help greatly in making capital requirements more sensitive to different levels of risk but would also introduce more subjectivity and a lack of transparency into the process. Therefore, we may need to limit or constrain certain measures. How to validate the estimates will also be an issue, especially considering that banks, themselves, often have little historical data on which to base key assumptions and calculations. Comparability and competitive equity among banks and national banking systems will be important factors in the debate. Nevertheless, the two-pronged approach of offering both a simplified and a more complex method seems both necessary and reasonable in order to accommodate all types of banks. Even then, however, we must recognize that any standard will continue to evolve. Although I believe that an internal ratings-based approach would provide an important step forward, its results would still likely differ from those of a bank's own economic capital allocation models. Questions about the correlation of risks among different asset groups and about how and whether to consider them in a regulatory capital standard are still unresolved and go to the heart of full credit risk models. Beyond credit risk is the highly complex matter of operating risk and other risks that are not explicitly dealt with in the accord. In the past, of course, the overt charge for credit risk has carried the full load of these other risks, but that has begun to change. Both the Basel Supervisors Committee and the international banking community need to address these topics more directly and more satisfactorily. Regardless of what regulators and supervisors do, you as bank managers must fully recognize and control your risks. As you make greater progress, so can regulators. In the past, relatively rough rules-of-thumb and traditional practices sufficed in supervising and managing banks. But just as derivatives have allowed you to unbundle risks and to price and structure financial products with more precision, similar technologies and innovations are requiring more precision in almost everything else you do. And also everything we do as bank supervisors. Opportunities for arbitrage within financial markets and capital regulations are easily found. What you do within the industry and what we do as bank supervisors must be more closely connected in all respects to the underlying economics. Meeting that challenge will keep all of us on our toes. Recognizing that supervisors need to relate capital requirements of individual banks more closely to their unique risk profiles, the Basel Committee's second pillar--the supervisory review of capital--emphasizes principles such as these: that supervisors should expect, and have the authority to require, banks to operate above the minimum regulatory capital ratios that they should require their banks to assess and maintain overall capital adequacy in relation to underlying risks that supervisors should review and evaluate the internal capital adequacy assessments and strategies of banks, as well as their compliance with regulatory capital ratios that supervisors should intervene at an early stage to prevent capital from falling below prudent levels and should require remedial action quickly if capital becomes inadequate. I believe it is essential to have effective supervisory oversight and assessment of individual bank capital as a complement to meeting regulatory capital requirements. This does not mean, however, that supervisors have ultimate responsibility for determining the adequate level of capital at each bank nor that supervisory judgment should replace that of bank management. Rather an active dialogue should take place between bank management and supervisors with regard to the optimum levels of capital. Pillar II thus moves the accord beyond a simple ratio-based standard to a more comprehensive approach for assessing the adequacy of capital levels. The supervisory review of capital called for in pillar II obviously will have resource implications for supervisors around the world and may require significant changes in supervisory cultures and techniques in many countries, both G-10 and non-G-10. The committee will need to develop guidance for bank supervisors to use when evaluating the adequacy of internal capital assessment processes. A residual benefit of such evaluations will be that supervisors will more easily stay current with evolving industry practices related to risk management and will better understand the risks that individual banks face. The third element of the proposed new capital framework--pillar III--relates to market discipline, which I believe all supervisors recognize as a critical complement to their supervisory oversight process. When banks disclose timely and accurate information about their capital structure and risk exposures, market participants can better evaluate their own risks in dealing with such institutions. Greater market discipline, in turn, gives banks more incentive to manage their risks effectively and to remain adequately capitalized. Recognizing that current disclosure practices in some countries are relatively weak, the Basel Committee under this pillar is working on guidelines that would make banking risks more transparent. The goal is to protect legitimate proprietary information, while promoting more consistent disclosure among nations. Adequate disclosure becomes even more important as we base regulatory capital requirements on internal risk measures of banks. Clearly, more information, by itself, is not always better. Working with the industry, we need to decide which specific elements are needed to do the job. Indeed, an ongoing partnership between banks and supervisors is crucial to the success of any regulatory capital standard and to the success of the supervisory process overall. It is in everyone's interest that we succeed in this effort and that the international financial system remain sound. Other Basel Committee Initiatives Although the Basel Committee may be best known for its work on capital standards, its efforts extend well beyond that--as suggested by the two other pillars. Its development of the Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision in 1997 is particularly noteworthy. These twenty-five principles cover a broad range of supervisory issues involving licensing and supervising banks and enforcing supervisory judgments. By setting reasonable thresholds for standards that banking supervisors in all countries should achieve, the committee has substantially helped to promote financial stability worldwide. Of course, the challenge now is to help all countries meet these core principles, despite the limited expertise and resources some may have. Fortunately, the International Monetary Fund and World Bank are working with the committee and can be of significant help. The securities and insurance supervisors have taken similar steps in developing supervisory principles of their own that should contribute to stronger supervisory regimes worldwide and provide a framework for further harmonization with banking standards, when appropriate. Conclusion In closing, I see no shortage of difficult challenges facing financial institution supervisors in the period ahead. Clearly, supervisors of the various sectors of the financial industry--banking, insurance, and securities--will continue to be confronted with rapid and dramatic changes in banking and financial markets. Supervisors will need to react to technological innovations, expansion of financial institutions into new and increasingly more complex activities, and ongoing consolidation within the industry worldwide. A rigorous, coordinated supervisory approach will be necessary to counterbalance the pressures of an increasingly dynamic and competitive marketplace. I am confident that by working together and with the financial industry supervisors we can meet the challenge. I want to assure you that, as central bankers, we at the Federal Reserve have strong interests in maintaining efficient, well-managed, and responsible financial institutions. I wish you all well in the years ahead. Thank you for your attention.
Remarks by Governor Edward M. Gramlich Before America's Community Bankers, Government Affairs Conference, Washington, D.C. March 7, 2000 CRA and Financial Modernization I am delighted to have the opportunity to speak to America's community bankers. This is an era of rapid change in the world of finance, especially for community bankers. Some of the impending changes in financial markets may create tremendous opportunities; others may be worrisome. But whatever the case, it makes sense to convene and talk about the issues. Today I would like to talk about the impact of the landmark Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLB) on community reinvestment. GLB has, as you know, made significant changes in the financial landscape, simultaneously generating new opportunities and new challenges. In the process some changes have been made affecting the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA), but these changes were actually rather minor. Some members of the Congress wanted a significant expansion of CRA, and others wanted a significant contraction. After vigorous debate and negotiation, the two sides compromised. In my view, the end result was not a huge change in the span of CRA. But time will tell. Just for background, CRA now covers all insured depository institutions. The institution's regulator examines the institution's low- and moderate-income lending in low- and moderate-income areas at regular intervals, approximately two years for large institutions and approximately three years for smaller institutions. Institutions are rated on this so-called lending test, along with an investment test (looking at participation in equity-type projects) and a service test (looking at other types of service to low- and moderate-income individuals). About 20 percent of institutions receive "outstanding" ratings, 75 percent receive "satisfactory" ratings, and the rest receive either "unsatisfactory" ratings or the even worse rating of "substantial noncompliance." The Federal Reserve Board takes these ratings into account in approving mergers. Historically, mergers are disapproved on CRA grounds only in a small minority of cases--approximately one denial for every 1,100 cases. The new bill changes matters in the following ways: Qualification Process. Bank holding companies cannot become financial holding companies or engage in the new financial activities authorized by GLB unless all of their subsidiaries and affiliates have CRA ratings of satisfactory or better. Should any financial holding company subsidiary or affiliate fail to maintain a satisfactory CRA rating, the financial holding company would be prohibited from commencing any new financial activities. This GLB change for the first time extends the review of CRA performance to transactions involving nonbanking activities. It also provides incentives for expansion-minded companies to achieve and maintain at least satisfactory CRA ratings in their depository institutions' subsidiaries. In this sense it could be viewed as slightly strengthening CRA. At the same time, most depository institutions already have a CRA rating of at least satisfactory and an incentive to maintain such a rating if they want to engage in mergers or acquisitions. Examination Process. Currently small insured depository institutions with assets of less than $250 million, about one-third above the median asset size represented in your association, are examined on a three-year cycle for their CRA performance. They are also examined on the same three-year cycle for compliance with other laws, such as Truth in Lending, Equal Credit Opportunity, and Real Estate Settlement Procedures. For these small institutions only, GLB puts the CRA examination on a four-year interval if the institution's last CRA rating was "satisfactory" and on a five-year interval if the institution's last CRA rating was "outstanding." This change is intended to reduce examination burdens on small institutions, and it may also be viewed as providing another slight incentive to improve CRA performance. Because laws for other compliance matters have not changed, the regulators are still thinking about how to schedule the compliance exams for small institutions. They are considering a variety of exam schedules. Some fear that any changes in scheduling will represent a loosening of CRA, but I do not believe this will be the case. There are ways of making the full exam cycle, for CRA and for other compliance matters, more effective and less costly. Our regulators are working out these issues, and we will have new guidance for our examiners soon. Sunshine Provisions. Sometimes financial institutions make lending agreements with community groups, in connection with merger applications or even if a non-merging institution wants to farm out some of its CRA activities. Under GLB, if these agreements entail loans of less than $50,000 a year and payments of less than $10,000 a year, nothing is changed. But above these thresholds, both the institution and the community groups must publicly disclose the agreements and make annual reports to the institution's regulator. The institution must list the payments to community groups under these agreements, other terms of the agreements, and the services provided by the community group. The community group must record the use of the money received under the agreements. As is the present practice, regulators will not enforce these private lending agreements per se, but they do enforce compliance with the reporting requirements. The sunshine provisions will provide new data on lending agreements. The provisions could raise the cost of making CRA agreements for community groups and discourage involvement in the applications process, but they could also calm fears about widespread extortion in the formation of CRA loan agreements. We will have to see the data before we can better predict their effect. Studies . Both the Federal Reserve and the Treasury are responsible for significant new studies of CRA. The Fed is responsible for a comprehensive survey of financial institution lending terms, default rates, and profitability rates of CRA loans. We recently mailed a survey to the 500 largest insured depository institutions on several types of CRA lending and are now getting back responses. The Treasury is responsible for a study of the effect of CRA on financial services in low- and moderate-income communities and to persons of modest financial means. The Treasury is currently collecting and analyzing baseline neighborhood data to make a first report very soon and a more complete report toward the end of next year. * * * There are other, less significant, provisions, but these are the main ones. In the end, it is difficult to say whether GLB strengthens or weakens CRA. My own tentative verdict is that the strength of CRA has not been changed much, but this conclusion is tentative and could change as we gain experience with the new law. But one thing does seem clear. The lending surveys and the new reporting requirements will generate valuable new data for analysis of the CRA law. As so often happens, in the end the new data may represent by far the most significant impact of GLB on CRA.
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan Challenges facing community banks Before the Independent Community Bankers of America, San Antonio, Texas March 8, 2000
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Banco Popular de Puerto Rico, Hato Rey, Puerto Rico, and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today that it has terminated the Temporary Orders to Cease and Desist issued against Banco Nacional de Mexico, Mexico City, Mexico; Banco Internacional, S.A., Mexico City, Mexico; and Banco Santander, Madrid, Spain. The Temporary Orders to Cease and Desist were issued on May 18, 1998 in connection with Operation Casablanca, a law enforcement undercover operation that resulted in numerous convictions of drug traffickers, bankers, and two foreign banking organizations with operations in the United States for money laundering offenses. Banco Nacional de Mexico, Banco Internacional, S.A., and Banco Santander were not charged with any criminal activity in connection with Operation Casablanca. The Temporary Orders to Cease and Desist required Banco Nacional de Mexico, Banco Internacional, S.A., and Banco Santander to enhance their anti-money laundering policies and procedures in the United States. The banks have been in full compliance with the Temporary Orders.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the approval of an interim rule permitting qualifying state member banks to establish financial subsidiaries and thereby engage in activities that have been determined to be financial in nature or incidental to financial activities. The interim rule establishes a streamlined notice procedure for state member banks that wish to acquire control of or an interest in a financial subsidiary. The Board's rule parallels that adopted by the Comptroller of the Currency for financial subsidiaries of national banks. The interim rule is effective on March 11, 2000, the effective date of Title I of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act. Comments will be accepted on the interim rule until May 12, 2000. The Board will revise the interim rule as appropriate after reviewing the comments. The Board's notice is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today approved an interim rule that would apply to financial holding companies authorized under the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act that have securities affiliates, 2 of 8 operating standards that currently apply to bank holding companies that control so-called section 20 affiliates. These two prudential provisions (1) require that intra-day extensions of credit to a securities firm from an affiliated bank or thrift or U.S. branch or agency of a foreign bank be on market terms consistent with section 23B of the Federal Reserve Act, and (2) apply the limitations of sections 23A and 23B of the Federal Reserve Act to certain covered transactions between a U.S. branch or agency of a foreign bank and a U.S. securities affiliate. This interim rule will become effective on March 11, 2000. The Board requests comment on the interim rule by May 12, 2000. The Board will revise the interim rule as appropriate after reviewing comments. All 8 of the operating standards, as well as the Board's current 25 percent revenue test, will continue to apply to bank holding companies that control section 20 subsidiaries pursuant to section 4(c)(8) of the Bank Holding Company Act. The Board's notice is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced that the elections to become or be treated as financial holding companies of 117 bank holding companies and foreign banking organizations are effective as of today. The list of these companies is attached. The Federal Reserve Board and the Secretary of the Treasury anticipate issuing shortly an interim rule governing the merchant banking activities of financial holding companies. Any financial holding company that engages in merchant banking activities will be expected to comply with the interim rule when it becomes effective.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System U.S. Department of the Treasury Federal Reserve and Treasury Department Announce Interim Rule on Alternative to Rated Debt Requirement For Financial Subsidiaries The Federal Reserve Board and the Secretary of the Treasury today announced their approval of an interim rule, effective March 14, 2000, establishing alternative criteria for debt ratings that certain large banks may satisfy in order to establish a financial subsidiary under the Financial Modernization Act. Under the act, a national or state member bank ranked among the largest 50 insured banks may control a financial subsidiary only if the bank meets certain criteria, including having an issue of highly rated debt outstanding. The next 50 largest insured banks may control a financial subsidiary if they satisfy this debt rating requirement or an alternative requirement determined by Treasury and the Federal Reserve. Under the interim rule, a bank meets the alternative requirement if it has a current long-term issuer credit rating from a nationally recognized statistical rating organization that is within the three highest investment-grade rating categories used by the rating organization. Comments will be accepted on the interim rule until May 15, 2000 . The joint notice is attached. Contacts: Federal Reserve: Dave Skidmore (202) 452-2955 Treasury: Bill Buck (202) 622-2960
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced amendments to its interim rule regarding procedures for bank holding companies and foreign banks to elect to be treated as financial holding companies. The interim rule was issued on January 19, 2000. The amendments announced today are effective immediately. The Board has changed the procedures for processing elections filed by foreign banks to allow the use of the 31-day notice procedure applicable to U.S. bank holding companies. The Board based its decision on its assessment of the comparability of the standards used in the first elections filed by foreign banks. Given this experience, the Board believes it can effectively perform its statutory responsibilities using a notice procedure. The Board also adopted several other amendments to the interim rule. The Board will accept comments on these amendments until April 17, 2000 .
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System U.S. Department of the Treasury Federal Reserve And Treasury Department Announce On Merchant Banking Activities The Federal Reserve Board and the Secretary of the Treasury jointly announced their approval on Friday of an interim rule governing the merchant banking activities of financial holding companies. The interim rule implements the merchant banking provisions of the Financial Modernization Act. The interim rule includes provisions on record keeping and reporting; risk management practices; holding periods for merchant banking investments; corporate separateness and limits on involvement in management; and limits on exposure of financial holding companies to merchant banking investments. The interim rule is effective today. The Board also today announced that it is seeking public comment on a proposed rule, developed in consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury, that would govern the regulatory capital treatment for equity investments in nonfinancial companies held by bank holding companies. The proposed rule would generally impose a 50 percent capital requirement on merchant banking investments and certain similar investments. Comments will be accepted on the interim rule and the capital proposal until May 22, 2000 . The interim rule and the capital proposal will be revised as appropriate after the comments are reviewed. The joint notices are attached. Contacts: Federal Reserve: Dave Skidmore (202) 452-2955 Treasury: Bill Buck (202) 622-2960
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of an Order of Prohibition against Vinay B. Malhotra, a former vice president and officer of The Chicago Branch of The Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi, Ltd., Tokyo, Japan. Mr. Malhotra, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order due to his alleged breach of fiduciary duties and misapplication of bank funds for his personal benefit. A copy of the Order is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of a consent Order against the R&T Foundation and James R. Sellers, intitution-affiliated parties of the First Western Bank, Cooper City, Florida, a state member bank. The parties, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the Order to resolve allegations that they violated the Change in Bank Control Act in connection with the acquisition of beneficial ownership of the shares of the bank. A copy of the Order is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today its approval of the application of National Bank of Egypt, Cairo, Egypt, to establish a branch in New York, New York. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
For immediate release The Federal Open Market Committee voted today to raise its target for the federal funds rate by 25 basis points to 6 percent. In a related action, the Board of Governors approved a 25 basis point increase in the discount rate to 5-1/2 percent. Economic conditions and considerations addressed by the Committee are essentially the same as when the Committee met in February. The Committee remains concerned that increases in demand will continue to exceed the growth in potential supply, which could foster inflationary imbalances that would undermine the economy's record economic expansion. Against the background of its long-run goals of price stability and sustainable economic growth and of the information currently available, the Committee believes the risks are weighted mainly toward conditions that may generate heightened inflation pressures in the foreseeable future. In taking the discount rate action, the Federal Reserve Board approved requests submitted by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, St. Louis, Minneapolis, Kansas City and San Francisco. The discount rate is the rate charged depository institutions when they borrow short-term adjustment credit from their district Federal Reserve Banks.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between the Security Dollar Bank, Niles, Ohio, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Office of the Comptroller of the Currency The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency today issued the host state loan-to-deposit ratios that the banking agencies will use to determine compliance with Section 109 of the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act of 1994 (Interstate Act). These ratios update data released on September 3, 1999. Section 109 prohibits any bank from establishing or acquiring a branch or branches outside of its home state primarily for the purpose of deposit production and provides a process to test compliance with the statutory requirements. The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act expanded the coverage of Section 109 to include any branch of a bank controlled by an out-of-state bank holding company. The first step in the process involves a loan-to-deposit ratio screen that compares a bank's statewide loan-to-deposit ratio to the host state loan-to-deposit ratio for banks in a particular state. A second step is conducted if a bank's statewide loan-to-deposit ratio is less than one-half of the published ratio for that state or if data are not available at the bank to conduct the first step. The second step requires the banking agencies to determine if the bank is reasonably helping to meet the credit needs of the communities served by the bank's interstate branches. A bank that fails both steps is in violation of Section 109 and is subject to sanctions by the banking agencies. The host state loan-to-deposit ratios are attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced that the elections of 27 bank holding companies and foreign banking organizations to become or be treated as financial holding companies are effective today. The list of these companies is attached. As they become effective, future financial holding company elections will be posted on the Boards public web site at
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today approved action by the Board of Directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas increasing the discount rate at that bank from 5-1/4 percent to 5-1/2 percent effective immediately.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced revisions to its Regulation Z (Truth in Lending) official staff commentary, which applies and interprets the requirements of the regulation. The commentary revisions address cash advances commonly called "payday loans." The Board is also publishing technical corrections to the regulation and commentary. The revisions are effective immediately. Compliance is optional until October 1, 2000, when compliance becomes mandatory. The Board's notice is attached.
Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan General revenue transfers for social security and Medicare Before the Special Committee on Aging, U.S. Senate March 27, 2000 Mr. Chairman and other members of the committee, I am pleased to be here today as you begin your discussion of using general revenue transfers to shore up social security and Medicare. A thorough consideration of the options available for placing these programs on a firmer fiscal footing is essential given the pressures that loom in the not-too-distant future. I commend the committee for your efforts to advance this important discussion. As you are well aware, the dramatic increase in the number of retirees relative to workers that is set to begin in about ten years makes our pay-as-you-go social security and Medicare programs, as currently constituted, unsustainable in the long run. Eventually, social security and Medicare will have to undergo reform. The goal of this reform must be to increase the real resources available to meet the needs and expectations of retirees, without blunting the growth in living standards among our working population and, presumably, without necessitating sizable reductions in other government spending programs. The only measures that can accomplish this goal are those aimed at increasing the total amount of goods and services produced by our economy. As I have argued many times before, any sustainable retirement system--private or public--requires that sufficient resources be set aside over a lifetime of work to fund an adequate level of retirement consumption. At the most rudimentary level, one could envision households saving by actually storing goods purchased during their working years for consumption during retirement. Even better, the resources that would have otherwise gone into the stored goods could be diverted to the production of new capital assets, which would cumulatively produce an even greater quantity of goods and services to be consumed in retirement. From this perspective, it becomes clear that increasing our national saving is essential to any successful reform of social security or Medicare. The impressive improvement in the budget picture since the early 1990s has helped greatly in this regard. And it appears that both the Administration and the Congress have wisely chosen to wall off the bulk of the unified budget surpluses projected for the next several years and allow it to build. This course would boost saving, raise the productive capital stock, and thus help provide the wherewithal to meet our future obligations. The idea that we should stop borrowing from the social security trust fund to finance other outlays has gained surprising--and welcome--traction. It has established, in effect, a new budgetary framework that is centered on the on-budget surplus and the way it should be used. The focus on the on-budget surplus measure is useful because it offers a clear objective that should help to strengthen budgetary discipline. Moreover, it moves the budget process closer to accrual accounting, the private-sector norm, and--I believe--a sensible direction for federal budget accounting. Under accrual accounting, benefits would be counted when they are earned by workers rather than when they are paid out. Under full accrual accounting, the social security program would have shown a substantial deficit last year. So would have the total federal budget. To the extent that such accruals are not formally accounted for in the unified budget--as they generally are not--we create contingent liabilities that, under most reasonable sets of assumptions, currently amount to many trillions of dollars for social security benefits alone. The contingent liabilities implicit in the Medicare program are much more difficult to calculate--but they are likely also in the trillions of dollars. For the federal government as a whole, an accrual-based budget measure would record noticeable unified budget deficits over the next few years and increasing, rather than decreasing, implicit national indebtedness. The expected slowdown in the growth of the labor force, the direct result of the decrease in the birth rate following the baby boom, means that financing our debt--whether explicit debt or the implicit debt represented by social security and Medicare's contingent liabilities--will become increasingly difficult. I should add, parenthetically, that the problem we face is much smaller than that confronting the more rapidly aging populations of Europe and Japan. Nonetheless, pressures will mount, and I believe that the growth potential of our economy is best served by maintaining the unified budget surpluses presently in train and thereby reducing Treasury debt held by the public. The resulting boost to the pool of domestic saving will help sustain the current boom in productivity-generating investment in the private sector. Indeed, if productivity growth continues at its recent pace, our entitlement programs will be in much better shape. Saving the surpluses--if politically feasible--is, in my judgment, the most important fiscal measure we can take at this time to foster continued improvements in productivity. The vehicle through which we save our surpluses is less important than the fact that we save them. One method that has been proposed, and that is the focus of today's hearing, is to transfer general revenues from the on-budget accounts to the social security trust fund. These transfers in themselves do nothing to the unified budget surplus. The on-budget surplus is reduced, but the off-budget surplus increases commensurately. The transfers have no effect on the debt held by the public and, hence, no direct effect on national saving. But transferring monies from the on-budget to the off-budget social security accounts could make it politically more likely that the large projected unified surpluses will, in fact, materialize. Given that our record of sustaining surpluses for extended periods of time is not good, any device that might accomplish this goal is worth examining. Using general revenues to fund social security is an idea that has been considered previously but rejected. Indeed, the commission that I chaired in 1983 was strongly opposed, for a variety of reasons, to the notion of using general revenues to shore up social security. One argument was that using general revenues would blur the distinction between the social security system, which was viewed as a social insurance program, and other government spending programs. Both social security and, for that matter, Medicare part A are loosely modeled on private insurance systems, with benefits financed out of worker contributions. Like private insurance systems, they are intended to be in long-term balance. But the standard adopted for social security and Medicare part A--that taxes and other income are to be sufficient to pay benefits for 75 years--falls short of the in-perpetuity full funding standard of private pension plans, and, in many years, social security and Medicare have not met even this less stringent standard. Furthermore, the requirement that social security and Medicare be in long-term balance does not mean that each generation gets in benefits only what it contributed in taxes plus earnings. Indeed, most social security beneficiaries to date have received far higher rates of return on their contributions than that available, for example, on U.S. Treasury securities. But the reduction in the birth rate following the baby boom and the continued increase in life expectancy beyond age sixty-five mean that the social security system will no longer provide workers with such high returns. Although the analogy between social security and private insurance has never been that tight, the perception of social security as insurance has been widespread and quite powerful. Many supporters of social security feared that breaking the link between payroll taxes and benefits by moving to greater reliance on general revenue financing would transform social security into a welfare program. But now, when payroll taxes are no longer projected to be sufficient to pay even currently legislated benefits, moving toward a system of general revenue finance raises the concern that the fiscal discipline of the current social security system could be reduced. Once the link between payroll taxes and social security benefits is broken, the pressure to reform the social security system may ease, particularly in this environment of budget surpluses. For example, Medicaid and Medicare part B--both of which will face increasing demands as the population ages--are already financed with general revenues, and, consequently, there has been much less pressure to date to reform these programs. The availability of general revenue finance when the baby boom generation begins to enter retirement and press on our overall fiscal resources could make it more difficult to argue for program cuts, regardless of their broader merits. As I have testified on many previous occasions, there are a number of social security benefit reforms--such as extending the age of full retirement benefit entitlement and indexing it to longevity, altering the benefit calculation bend points, and adjusting annual cost-of-living escalation to a more accurate measure--that should be given careful consideration. The potential for enhancing efficiency by restructuring the Medicare program is probably even greater than in social security. Relaxing fiscal discipline in the Medicare program by expanding the use of general revenues before the underlying program has been tightened could take the steam out of efforts to improve the way health services are delivered. That said, I think it is important to note that most government programs are funded through general revenues, so allowing general revenues to finance some of social security or Medicare part A is clearly an idea that would not necessarily eliminate all fiscal responsibility. It might be feasible, for example, to legislate temporary general revenue transfers that would end long before the baby boom generation starts to retire, without opening the possibility of completely eliminating the need for program cuts in social security or changes to Medicare. It is, of course, difficult to predict the political and economic environment that will be facing policymakers fifteen or twenty years in the future. Legislation passed today that affects the distribution of resources between future workers and retirees could easily be changed later. That is why the most important decision facing policymakers today is not about the distribution of future resources but about the level of future resources available for future workers and retirees. The most effective means of raising the level of future resources, in my judgment, is to allow the budget surpluses projected in the coming years to be used to pay down the nation's debt. The Congress and the Administration will have to decide whether transferring general revenues to the entitlement programs is the best way to preserve the surpluses, or whether better mechanisms exist.
Testimony of Louise L. Roseman Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems Distribution of coin and currency Before the Subcommittee on Domestic and International Monetary Policy of the Committee on Banking and Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives March 28, 2000 Thank you for the opportunity to comment on a variety of issues that affect our nation's coins and currency. The new dollar coin and the Fifty States Commemorative Quarter program have renewed the public's interest in coins. These changes in our coinage are occurring as the Treasury Department prepares to release new $5 and $10 notes later this spring, completing the design series that began with the $100 note in 1996. Before I address the issues raised by the Subcommittee, it may be useful first to describe briefly how the Federal Reserve, as the nation's central bank, issues, distributes, processes, and accounts for currency and coin. Role of the Federal Reserve The Federal Reserve provides cash services to over 9,600 of the 22,000 banks, savings and loans, and credit unions in the United States to carry out its responsibility under the Federal Reserve Act "to furnish an elastic currency." The remaining institutions choose to obtain their cash through correspondent banks rather than directly from the Federal Reserve. Currency Federal Reserve notes account for about 95 percent of the $564 billion of currency and coin in circulation. Each year the Federal Reserve Board determines the need for new currency and submits an order to the Treasury's Bureau of Engraving and Printing (BEP). Typically, more than 80 percent of the new currency replaces currency destroyed by the Reserve Banks because it is unfit for further circulation. The remainder is printed to meet expected increases in the demand for currency. The Federal Reserve pays the BEP the cost of printing new currency and arranges and pays the cost of transporting the currency from the BEP facilities to the Federal Reserve cash offices. The Federal Reserve distributes new and fit currency into circulation, detects counterfeits, and destroys unfit currency. When a depository institution orders currency from a Federal Reserve Bank, the Bank provides the requested shipment to an armored carrier arranged by the depository institution and charges the depository institution's account (or the account of the bank that acts as its settlement agent) for the amount of the order. Similarly, when a depository institution returns excess currency to the Federal Reserve, it receives a corresponding credit to its account. The deposited currency is stored in secure vaults until it is verified on a note-by-note basis by processing on very sophisticated equipment. During this verification, deposited currency is counted for accuracy, counterfeit notes are identified, and unfit notes are destroyed. The fit currency is returned to the secure vault and is used to fill future currency orders. Federal Reserve notes in circulation are recorded as a liability on the Federal Reserve's balance sheet. The Federal Reserve, as required by law, pledges collateral (principally U.S. Treasury securities) equal to the face value of currency in circulation. Each day, as orders are filled and deposits are received, the Federal Reserve determines the net change and takes any necessary action to ensure the currency is fully collateralized. Coin The Federal Reserve's role in coin operations is more limited than its role in currency. The Mint determines the annual coin production and monitors Federal Reserve coin inventories weekly in order to identify trends in coin demand. To help the Mint plan, the Reserve Banks in March provide the Mint with their projected monthly coin orders for the next fiscal year. In addition, the Reserve Banks provide preliminary estimates of their coin needs for the two following fiscal years. The Federal Reserve buys coin from the Mint at face value, and the Mint pays the expense of transporting the coin from its production facilities to the Reserve Banks. The Federal Reserve's coin operations consist primarily of storage and distribution but not processing because coins do not require fitness sorting. In addition to the Federal Reserve offices, Reserve Banks use more than 100 additional sites, known as coin terminals, to handle nearly 80 percent of the Federal Reserve's coin volume. Coin terminals, which are generally operated by armored carriers, reduce the transportation required and make the coin distribution system more efficient. Many retailers and depository institutions need to have coin wrapped, a service provided by armored carriers. Depository institutions order and deposit coin, like currency, to meet customer demand, and the Reserve Banks adjust the appropriate bank's account accordingly. Rather than piece-verify coin deposits, the Reserve Banks and the coin terminals generally weigh coin bags to verify the value of coin received. The Reserve Banks account for the coin in their vaults and at the coin terminals as an asset on their balance sheets. Coin Demand During 1999, the Federal Reserve experienced exceptional demand for all denominations of coins. In several regions, the demand for pennies, and later in the year, for other denominations, at times exceeded the Federal Reserve's ability to meet orders. The average number of coins flowing out of Reserve Banks during 1999 (minus coins flowing into Reserve Banks) was nearly 30 percent higher than in 1998. That number, in turn, was 27 percent higher than in 1997. The strong economy and the public's interest in collecting state quarters were likely contributing factors to the recent higher coin demand. To address this situation, the Mint increased its coin production to 20 billion coins in fiscal year 1999 from 15 billion in 1998. It also shifted production from pennies to higher-denomination coins to avoid shortages there. Faced with coin orders that exceeded the Mint's near-term production capabilities, the Federal Reserve centralized its management of coin inventories in a single office. Centralized management has allowed the Federal Reserve to coordinate better with the Mint to distribute new coins equitably and balance coin inventories across Federal Reserve sites. In addition, the Mint and the Federal Reserve have encouraged depository institutions to make it easier for the public to deposit coins. We also understand that some depository institutions shifted their coin inventories among their offices to better meet their customers' needs in all geographic areas they served. Coin circulates much differently than currency. This is especially true for pennies, which do not circulate with the same frequency as other coin denominations. The Mint and Federal Reserve have experienced other periods in the 1980s and 1990s when the demand for pennies exceeded the Reserve Bank inventories and the Mint's production capacity. The location of the coin, not the amount of coin, is quite often the problem. People tend to accumulate coins in desk drawers, jars, or on the tops of dressers. One company identified this phenomenon as a business opportunity and placed coin collection machines in supermarkets. In 1999, this company returned 20 billion coins to circulation. The Federal Reserve and the Mint are working collaboratively to better understand coin demand and coin circulation patterns. Efforts are under way to develop better models for forecasting coin demand and to improve coin distribution and inventory management systems. Dollar Coin The recent introduction of the new dollar coin illustrates the Federal Reserve's role in coin distribution. The original plan, developed last summer, called for the Federal Reserve to begin distributing the new dollar coin to the banking industry in March 2000. Depository institutions, armored carriers, and the Federal Reserve had requested this release date to ensure that any increased currency flows around the Y2K period had diminished before distribution and inventory build-up efforts began for the dollar coin. In December 1999, the Mint notified the Federal Reserve and banking industry representatives that it planned to enter into a corporate partnership with Wal-Mart to promote the new dollar coin beginning in January. Banking industry representatives objected to a retailer's distributing the new coin before the banking industry obtained it, and they asked that the industry receive the new dollar coin at the same time. The Mint and the Federal Reserve tried to accommodate the depository institutions, but the production and distribution logistics associated with this accelerated schedule made it difficult for the Mint and the Federal Reserve to meet depository institutions' initial orders for the dollar coin. By January 30, the launch date for the Wal-Mart promotion, the Mint had shipped boxes of wrapped new dollar coins directly to Wal-Mart stores. In contrast, the Mint began limited shipments to the Federal Reserve on January 18, but some West Coast Federal Reserve offices did not receive the coin until January 28, two days after the coin was officially released to the public. Additionally, Wal-Mart received more initial supplies of the new dollar coins than did the Federal Reserve. By February 11, the Mint had shipped 60 million coins to Wal-Mart. In contrast, by the same date, the Mint had shipped 51 million coins to the Federal Reserve, which we used to begin meeting the demand for the rest of the U.S. economy. Once the Reserve Bank coin facilities received the initial supply of dollar coins, the Reserve Banks equitably distributed the unwrapped dollar coins and partially filled depository institutions' orders through normal armored carrier transportation routes. Depository institutions typically received the new dollar coins several days later to allow time for the armored carriers to wrap the coin and deliver it. Because of the limited initial quantities of coin available to the Federal Reserve, many community banks and branches of large banks did not receive dollar coins until after Wal-Mart had released them to the public. To address the banking industry's desire to have dollar coin inventories as soon as possible, the Federal Reserve worked closely with the Mint to develop a direct shipment program for depository institutions. This temporary program, managed by the Mint, is designed to expedite delivery of limited quantities of dollar coins to small depository institutions. We expect that within the next few weeks the distribution channels will catch up to initial demand and the Federal Reserve will be able to fill all depository institutions' orders for the new dollar coin. Anti-Counterfeiting Measures Although the Secretary of the Treasury, and not the Federal Reserve, has authority to approve currency designs, the Federal Reserve works actively and collaboratively with the Treasury, the Secret Service, and the Bureau of Engraving and Printing on anti-counterfeiting efforts. Counterfeit-deterrent features in U.S. currency continue to evolve to ensure a secure currency in which the public has confidence. Currency design changes in 1990 introduced a security thread, microprinting, and new covert features. The 1996 series design includes both publicly-recognizable anti-counterfeiting features, such as an enhanced security thread, a watermark, and color-shifting ink, as well as additional covert, machine-readable features. The Federal Reserve also provides information to the Secret Service on all counterfeits the Reserve Banks receive in its deposits, including the most sophisticated counterfeits. Given that about two-thirds of U.S. currency circulates overseas, we monitor and analyze international currency flows and counterfeiting data to understand better the international use of U.S. currency and the incidents of U.S. currency counterfeiting in foreign countries. The Federal Reserve maintains close contact with commercial banks that provide currency internationally as well as with other central banks so that we can closely monitor counterfeiting activity. Ongoing research efforts are aimed at defending against future counterfeiting threats, especially those posed by continued improvements in, and the low-cost availability of, inkjet printers and computer scanners. For instance, the Federal Reserve and the Bureau of Engraving and Printing have devoted significant resources to a twenty-four nation effort, through the Bank for International Settlements, to combat color copier counterfeiting and, more recently, the growing threat of inkjet counterfeiting. The Federal Reserve is not active in anti-counterfeiting efforts for coin. Economic loss and the number of counterfeiting incidents associated with coin are low compared with those involving currency. Moreover, because the Federal Reserve's coin processing operations do not include piece inspections, our ability to detect counterfeit coin is limited. High-Denomination Banknotes The Subcommittee has asked for our views on the advantages and disadvantages of issuing U.S. banknotes in denominations higher than $100. We considered how a higher-denomination note could enhance the attractiveness of using U.S. currency and could provide savings by reducing printing, processing, and transportation costs. These benefits were weighed against the concern that high-denomination banknotes could facilitate money laundering and drug trafficking. Demand for U.S. currency and for specific denominations is driven by many factors, including the needs for a medium of exchange and a store of value. Domestic demand for currency is largely transaction-oriented and is influenced by income levels, prices, and the availability of alternative payment methods. Increases in domestic demand for high-denomination banknotes ($50s and $100s) have been generally modest because Americans tend to use checks, credit/debit cards, or other noncash forms of payment for larger-dollar transactions. The introduction of a higher-denomination banknote saves printing and processing costs, but only to the extent that the public shifts its demand from $100s to larger-denomination notes. Even if such a shift occurred, any savings would likely be minimal without a substantial reduction in the demand for other notes -- $1s through $20s account for about 85 percent of the production of the BEP and over 90 percent of the Federal Reserve's processing. International demand for U.S. currency is influenced largely by the stability of foreign currencies, the confidence in the U.S. dollar as a stable currency backed by a strong economy, and the lack of any recall of U.S. currency. As I mentioned earlier, approximately two-thirds of U.S. currency is held internationally, but about three-quarters of the $100 notes in circulation are held overseas. Foreigners use high-denomination U.S. banknotes primarily for savings, but we also find that countries with transitioning economic and political environments use U.S. currency as a medium of exchange. Ultimately, we believe the strength and stability of our economy will continue to be the primary factors influencing international demand for U.S. currency. Thus, the introduction of a high-denomination U.S. banknote would likely produce minimal increases in demand for U.S. currency. Although there are some benefits associated with a high-denomination banknote, the law enforcement community has expressed concern about the disproportionate use of large-denomination banknotes for illicit activity including money laundering, drug trafficking, and tax evasion. In addition to making large-value transactions more efficient, a high-denomination note could inadvertently facilitate illegitimate transactions by making them more efficient as well. Such concerns prompted the Canadian government's recent proposal to cease issuing its $1000 banknote. In weighing the marginal benefits of introducing a high-denomination U.S. banknote against law enforcement concerns about illegitimate activities, we do not foresee any immediate need to issue high-denomination notes. We appreciate the opportunity to share our thoughts on these issues.
Remarks by Governor Edward W. Kelley, Jr. At the Cosmos Club, Washington, D.C. March 30, 2000 Learning from Experience: Y2K Revisited Thank you very much for the high honor of addressing the Cosmos Club, particularly for the opportunity to address the topic of Y2K for a second time. I have no doubt it is highly unusual, if not unique, for a speaker to rise here to discuss a non-event. To our pleasant surprise, that is exactly what Y2K turned out to be. When I agreed many months before the millennium rollover to offer these remarks, I fully expected to be making a very different speech. On my last visit here in January 1999, my theme was that I believed our extensive preparations would allow us to avoid serious difficulty but that we could expect a series of hopefully minor inconveniences. I held that view throughout last year, and with that expectation, I thought that tonight I would be expounding upon how we managed to avoid any worldwide breakdowns, how we contained those threats that did arise, why other nations had more trouble than we did, and the lessons to be learned would have been gleaned from this mixed bag of results. Instead, of course, the danger was almost totally avoided, and consequently the questions for today are very different. Let me try to address the following issues. First, briefly, was there really such a big threat in the first place? Second, far more fundamentally, why did we do so well? The answers to this question are wide-ranging, and it is out of these answers that arise the implications for the future. And, finally, what are some of the short-term possibilities and long-term concerns that this experience suggests? First of all, one must begin a Y2K retrospective by dealing with the question of whether this really was a serious threat or was it simply vastly over-hyped. The short answer is, you bet it was a serious threat. No reputable computer expert that I know of disagrees with that, and I can verify this assessment from a very up-close and personal perspective. My window onto the rollover event was through the Communication and Control Center we set up at the Fed to monitor the situation in the financial sector. Our preparations were quite comprehensive. We were prepared to receive, and did receive, real time news of any problems, however minor, that arose in Federal Reserve operations or payment systems across the country or in any depository institutions. There are about 22,000 depository institutions in the United States, and not one got into serious trouble as a result of the rollover. The financial community can be very proud of that. To be sure, a few organizations overlooked fixes that were readily available, and a few found mistakes in their remediation work. But because the problems were so few, and also so minor, all were fixed before they could become meaningful disruptions. But the most interesting thing was to observe, even in these few minor occurrences, how much mischief could have been done had the problems not been caught quickly and dealt with effectively. And, further, to imagine the chaos if there had been many thousands of them. An example. We at the Fed examined approximately 90 million lines of our own code contained in thousands of programs and had to remediate approximately 10 percent of them. We had one system in one of our twelve Federal Reserve Districts that had a Y2K glitch show up in its immediate post-millennium operations. It was fixed in two hours but had already misallocated millions of dollars to the wrong banks. The errors were quickly identified and reversed, nobody was hurt or even inconvenienced, but the potential for mischief was huge in just that one incident. I am sure one can find war stories like that in many, many places. What if there had been many thousands of such instances and malfunctions in the endless interconnections between systems had metastasized the errors faster than the technicians could address them. It would have been a nightmare. If preparing for Y2K had been ignored, that is exactly what would have happened. But it was not ignored, and the massive effort paid off in the event. No, there were not serious problems, either in the United States or around the world. Which leaves the most interesting question--why not? The answers, as best we can understand them so far, are quite instructive, and they vary a great deal from country to country. The extent of computerization among countries falls along a spectrum. Clearly alone at one end of the spectrum is the United States, which is by far the most electronically automated of societies. One moves along the spectrum to the other industrialized nations, then to those many countries progressing in varying degrees toward modernization, and finally at the other end is the seriously underdeveloped world. All came through well, but for very different reasons. In the United States, we turned in one of our finest national performances in rising to meet a crisis. In retrospect, we can now see that Y2K was made to order for a classic American "can do" response. It was a specific, clearly identifiable and definable threat with an immutable, moment-in-time deadline. It was massive in scope, required the efforts of millions of people and the expenditure of billions of dollars, but it could be, and was, dealt with. The challenges came in phases. First, it was necessary to achieve public understanding as to what was at stake. Next, to achieve the committed involvement of not only computer technicians (that was easy) but also organizational leadership throughout our economy. And finally, after a frighteningly slow start, there was a nearly frantic rush to complete all the work necessary before the deadline arrived. Those of us who had been deeply involved for a long time simply had no way of knowing on December 31, 1999, to what extent our country, let alone the rest of the world, was really ready. We now know that the American people had responded once again, as the kids say, "big time." In moving along the computerization spectrum to identify how others avoided major problems, we first need to acknowledge that in a few nations there were other examples of massive American-style efforts, particularly in the last six to nine months of 1999. But, basically, the answers are to be found elsewhere. First of all, both here and around the world there were numerous instances of large and small organizations simply jettisoning old systems entirely and replacing them with new, highly efficient systems that were designed to be Y2K compliant from conception. This was just an acceleration of the replacement cycle, and while expensive in the short-run, is now paying off in improved productivity. Second, for over two decades, much of the automation investment dollar in the United States went to purchasing brand-new capabilities, leaving older so called "legacy" systems in operation. A very high percentage of them utilized dates in some way, and those were virtually all Y2K flawed. Further, as they were being painstakingly reviewed for Y2K, it was realized they were very often slow, ineffective, and poorly documented. It was an important and distressing revelation to American management to discover itself so dependent on inefficient and obsolescent equipment, and many are now moving rapidly to rectify this condition. Other nations, who began to automate more recently, never amassed the vast inventory of these older systems that required so much remedial work in our country. The newer systems, which many put in place over the last few years, were more standard and better documented, thus easier to check out and fix. In many cases, after a few operations checked out such a system and discovered it was either all right or could be easily fixed and how to do it, the word got around, and many others with the same installation were saved a lot of trouble. Then, in other places, only very new off-the-shelf software was being used. These were generally first efforts at automation in emerging areas. Most software vendors developed simple fixes for their products and put them up on their web sites for anyone to employ. You may have seen the report from Jamaica, where a very small group of knowledgeable technicians apparently fixed virtually every public and large private computer system in the entire nation in just a few months by simply following instructions available on the Internet. It was, of course, overwhelmingly U.S. companies that provided that free know how. Finally, there are shockingly many nations that had little to do because there simply are very few computers there. As we sat in the Fed control room on December 31 and watched time zone after time zone roll through the millennium problem free, we got increasingly nervous. We better not have a problem here after all the very visible work and all the international preaching we had been doing for so long! That would be a major embarrassment! But all went well. What implications may this experience have for us? We are still much too close to the event to have adequately identified all that happened, let alone comprehensively assess its impact on the future. But let me offer a few speculations. First, in the short-term. Many foreigners are discreetly, but audibly, crowing about how we in the United States were so obsessed and spent so much money on Y2K while they had equally good results and were much more relaxed about it. I am convinced that we will have the last laugh. As a result of that so-called obsession, I believe we have strengthened the underpinnings of our already impressive level of productivity improvement. Among larger companies and public institutions, there is a new awareness in senior management of the possibilities for improving their operations through more effective technology and systems management. An example would be those old, inefficient legacy systems we just had to rework. I would not expect to see them proliferate again, once they disappear. Among the millions of smaller businesses and not-for-profit organizations, there is a new awareness and appreciation for what computers can do and a new sense of confidence in their ability to capture these improvements. This new sensitivity should lead to a far more rapid assimilation of the information technology revolution than has been the case in similar technical breakthroughs in the past. For example, the development of steam power, and later the wide availability of electrical power, took many decades to work through into comprehensive utilization by the economies of their day. Computers, of course, were invented a half-century ago, but it is only quite recently that they have evolved into broadly useful tools. It is even more recently that they have begun to have a major impact on the everyday operation of our economy. At the end of the 1950s, there were about 2,000 computers up and running in the world. Forty years later, there are approximately 200 million, and they are, of course, vastly more powerful and far less expensive. This should now expand much more quickly as a result of the rapid and wide exposure information technology achieved through the run-up to the Y2K event. There has been a great deal of concern in our society over the past several years about an emerging "digital divide" between the more and the less advantaged elements of our society. Computer literacy, some fear, will further widen the already broad gulf between the earning power of rich and poor. I would hope that Y2K's wide public awareness and involvement could provide us an opportunity to shrink that gap rather than see it open even more. Certainly, everyone now knows there is a strong demand for computer skills in the workplace today and that it will only enlarge. Therein lies a huge employment opportunity, offering good wages and working conditions, for qualified applicants. To be sure, as is the case in so many other opportunities for societal improvement, an improvement in the education system will be required for us to seize this chance to move a step closer to greater income parity. But computers are now very much on the minds of leaders in education reform. On the other hand, Y2K, by exposing the vast differences in computer sophistication among nations, demonstrates that we have yet another "digital divide" concern to contend with: The lack in many countries of infrastructure in information technology will provide one more obstacle to their ability to improve their competitiveness with the advanced nations. Finally, some long-term concerns. Certainly, there are endless benefits latent in the new technologies, but they have been widely touted, and reciting them is beyond the scope of these remarks. But let me mention a few emerging concerns that may need to be dealt with as time goes on. Earlier we mentioned that the nature of the Y2K challenge, with its very specific dimensions and very explicit deadline, was made to order for the American workforce to deal with. We passed that first major test of this new era with flying colors, but history may show that, huge and critical as it was, it was relatively easily handled compared with an emerging new genre of social challenge. Later technology-driven challenges may be just as profound but less obvious, less deadline driven, less "salable," more amorphous, and more difficult to pin down. They may be less overtly technical and may play out more on national and international political and social policy stages rather than at the level of the firm. Problems of that sort can be exceedingly difficult to come to grips with. If care is not taken, many could fester unaddressed, with results ranging from suboptimal solutions arrived at ad hoc to out-and-out disasters of any of a number of configurations. Public infrastructures and cultural norms, here as well as around the world, must evolve to successfully accommodate a new marketplace involving many entirely new elements in law and social structure. Driven by technology, one can identify the outlines of future problems such as various ecological issues that involve many nations and require difficult levels of cooperation to successfully address. Personal and national security threats could be unleashed by high-school hackers, computer-competent criminals, or even massive computer assaults mounted by terrorists or rogue states. The prerogatives of sovereign nations will be challenged in such areas as cyber patent opportunities, taxation of cyber commerce, and intellectual property rights. Personal privacy rights are already on the front burner and could prove to be quite intractable as high-tech capabilities advance. Modern financial systems are becoming so technologically sophisticated that regulators around the world are struggling to ensure their safety and soundness. There are different ethical, legal, and religious issues surrounding technologies, unlocking the secrets of the human genome. One could go on and on. We may look back on Y2K as a major watershed event of a new information technology era that first dawned only two or three decades ago. We have learned much from it and glimpsed in the mirror darkly how much more we must yet learn to cope with. We have vividly seen how complex and interdependent our economic affairs have become, and this new awareness is already beginning to pay off in higher levels of efficiency and effectiveness. But we have also seen the outlines of technology-driven challenges that will press in on us with increasing urgency and could prove to be very difficult to deal with effectively. The Cosmos Club, both through its distinguished membership and the program focus it plans for the future, will play an important role in the drama that will unfold. It has been a privilege for me to have a small part in the opening scene.