For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the following applications and notice: Mizuho Holdings, Inc. (In Formation), Tokyo, Japan ("Mizuho"), under section 3(a)(1) of the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act") (12 U.S.C. § 1842(a)(1)) to become a bank holding company by acquiring The Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank, Limited ("DKB"), The Fuji Bank, Limited ("Fuji"), and the Industrial Bank of Japan, Limited ("IBJ"), all of Tokyo, Japan, and thereby acquiring the U.S. subsidiary banks of DKB, Fuji, and IBJ; Mizuho, under sections 4(c)(8) and 4(j) of the BHC Act (12 U.S.C. §§ 1843(c)(8) and (j)) to acquire the U.S. nonbanking subsidiaries of DKB, Fuji, and IBJ, and thereby engage in certain permissible nonbanking activities; and Mizuho, under section 25A of the Federal Reserve Act, 12 U.S.C. § 611 et seq. , to acquire Fuji Bank International, Inc., Los Angeles, California. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
For immediate release A Federal Reserve System committee today outlined a series of cooperative steps the Federal Reserve and the private sector can take to remove barriers to the development of electronic check presentment in the United States. The steps were identified at a workshop conducted by the Payments System Development Committee on June 29 at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston. The actions, described in a short paper distributed this month to workshop participants, include: Further consideration of legal changes that would reduce legal barriers to the electronic collection or return of checks, while protecting the rights of consumers or others that wish to receive paper checks. Further efforts to develop and implement technical standards for exchanging electronic or paper substitutes for checks. Follow-up discussions between the Federal Reserve and the banking industry on the business case for electronic check presentment. Discussions of new operational concepts involving electronic check presentment and check imaging and of potential ways to test the concepts. Preparation of educational materials to inform depository institutions and the public about electronic check presentment. The co-chairs of the committee, Board Vice Chairman Roger W. Ferguson, Jr., and Federal Reserve Bank of Boston President Cathy E. Minehan, emphasized that the initiatives described in the paper were cooperative steps the Federal Reserve can take with the private sector. Some of the ideas will be refined further as the initiatives proceed, they said. The formation of the committee was announced in July 1999. The other members are Governor Edward W. Kelley, Jr., of the Federal Reserve Board and First Vice President Jamie B. Stewart Jr. of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. First Vice President Patrick K. Barron of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta is a liaison to the committee from the System's Retail Payments Office. The committee's paper is attached.
For immediate release The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision has issued a paper providing guidance on managing the settlement risk arising from foreign exchange transactions. The paper is part of the committee's ongoing effort to strengthen procedures for risk management in banks. It can be obtained from the web site of the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) at . Supervisory Guidance for Managing Settlement Risk in Foreign Exchange Transactions stresses that banks should manage foreign exchange settlement risk, like other credit risks of a similar size and duration, through a formal process of measurement and control with active senior management oversight. The paper is a revision of a consultative paper issued in July 1999. It builds on the previous work of the BIS' Committee on Payments and Settlements Systems. The Basel Committee was established in 1975 by the central banks of the Group of Ten countries and operates under the auspices of the BIS in Basel, Switzerland. It consists of senior supervisors of the world's largest banking systems and works to strengthen supervisory and regulatory practices worldwide.
Testimony of Governor Laurence H. Meyer Proposed auditor independence rules Before the Securities and Exchange Commission, Pace University, New York, New York September 13, 2000 Chairman Levitt and Commissioners, thank you for the opportunity to speak at today's hearing on the rules governing auditor independence that have been proposed by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). A principal concern of the Federal Reserve is the efficiency and stability of financial markets. By extension, we take a keen interest in issues that underpin the functioning of these markets, such as the reliability of the information that supports them. The auditor's opinion distinguishes financial reporting from other, potentially self-serving, information circulating in the marketplace. The willingness of investors, creditors, and other stakeholders to trust the public accountant's opinion is an important facet of market efficiency. The Board has long believed that high-quality accounting standards and disclosure requirements are essential for the efficient, rational allocation of capital. We also recognize that independence enhances both the setting of accounting standards and enforcing conformance with those standards. The SEC and the accounting profession have important roles in maintaining and promoting independence. Steps they have taken over the years to foster independence and objectivity in the formulation of accounting standards have improved financial reporting. We note, however, that high-quality accounting standards potentially can be nullified by a perception that auditors lack independence and objectivity in their enforcement role. Accountants have recognized this possibility since the earliest years of their profession. The ethics rules of their professional societies regulate commercial dealings between external auditors and clients to protect the integrity of financial reporting and to promote investor confidence in the auditor's opinion. Achieving and maintaining independence is difficult because independence is an intangible quality, an attitude, a state of mind. An outsider can infer auditors' attitudes only by their outward dealings with clients. Judgment by inference is particularly characteristic of our era of global markets and widely dispersed ownership. As a result, the auditing profession has focused intently on appearance as a means of demonstrating independence. That is, the profession's own rules emphasize the tangible, measurable aspects of the auditor-client relationship to assure the public of its independence. Some indicia of independent appearance are clear-cut. For example, long-standing rules prohibit direct ownership in a client by an audit partner. These rules are obvious and require little explanation or interpretation. Other aspects of the auditor-client relationship are more difficult to regulate, but no less important. For example, the auditing profession prohibits its members from acting in a management capacity for a client. The line between what may appear to be unacceptable "managerial" actions and what may be acceptable "advisory" actions can be a fine one, subject to a great deal of interpretation. For nearly as long as there have been public accountants, state and federal legislators have also grappled with laws to protect auditor independence. It must be difficult to balance the public interest in maintaining independent, objective external audits with legitimate commercial aspirations of accounting professionals. Nonetheless, all recognize that significant erosion of the public's confidence regarding auditor independence could have severe consequences to investors, creditors, and those seeking capital. External Audits As the regulator of state-member banks, bank holding companies, and (recently) financial holding companies, the Federal Reserve is very interested in the external audits of institutions it supervises. Banks with total assets of $500 million or more are required by statute to have an external audit. Recognizing the value of external audits, the federal banking agencies also encourage smaller institutions to engage public accountants. External audits can give supervisors greater assurance of the integrity of the financial information we receive. In addition, we believe that banking organizations benefit from an outside opinion on the quality of their financial reports and internal controls. The benefit derived from an external audit, however, is contingent upon the auditor's competence and independence. For institutions that we supervise, our examiners assess these two qualities. Of course, banking supervisors have broad powers that allow us to remove an audit firm if there is evidence of nonfeasance, misfeasance, or malfeasance. As I said earlier, however, independence is intangible. Therefore, it is difficult for outsiders, including examiners, to judge the objectivity of external auditors toward their clients. Despite that difficulty, we must be watchful because a lack of objectivity can compromise the external audit as a useful tool for enhancing banking safety and soundness. Large financial institutions we supervise are required to furnish us not only with audited financial statements but also with an external auditor's opinion of management's report on the effectiveness of internal controls over financial reporting. These reports are an important source of information about these institutions. The auditor's attestation is key to our reliance on these reports. When auditors lack objectivity this process for informing supervisors about the condition of banks' internal controls can break down. Our ability to supervise institutions is improved by competent and objective external audits. If our examiners are comfortable with a particular audit, they may focus on how management is dealing with problems found by the external auditor. This situation is far more efficient than replicating the work and second-guessing the conclusions drawn from the evidence. According to their assessment of the external audit, our examiners can reallocate supervisory resources to other areas of risk in the banking organization. The Federal Reserve benefits by gaining a better picture of an institution's risk profile for a given level of supervisory resources. Financial institutions also gain from a reduction in overall examination burden. We hope that accounting professionals also benefit from the interaction between the external auditor and the examiner. The Federal Reserve hopes to expand the private sector's role in regulating the risk and solvency of banking organizations. The effectiveness of market discipline is highly dependent upon the quality of information available to market participants. Biased, unreliable information would distort the allocation of capital to banks and thereby frustrate the discipline we seek to promote. Outsourcing of Internal Audit Now I would like to focus on the SEC's proposal to limit internal audit outsourcing by external auditors. The Federal Reserve has a long-standing supervisory interest in banks' risk management, including internal controls and their effect on safety and soundness. We have been wary of the outsourcing of internal audit functions since the trend began. Our concerns are two-fold: the potential for blurring the accountability of bank directors and managers for internal controls and the diminished effectiveness of the internal auditor's ability to monitor controls. In 1997, the federal banking agencies issued an interagency policy statement that serves as a framework for banking organizations to structure and maintain the internal audit function and manage outsourcing arrangements. With respect to outsourcing, the policy seeks foremost to warn managers and directors that outsourcing the review function of an internal auditor does not in any way transfer responsibility for maintaining adequate internal controls. Institutions may delegate the technical work, but not the management oversight or accountability. The policy also makes the important recommendation that banks promote and maintain independence in the design of their own management structures over the internal audit function. The most effective internal audit function has the impartiality and standing within an organization to report its findings and views candidly to directors and the highest levels of management. The policy does not prohibit all outsourcing because we appreciate that efficiencies can be gained and specialized talent brought to bear. Care needs to be exercised, however, in structuring the arrangements so as not to weaken overall the processes for identifying and fixing internal control deficiencies. The banking agencies considered prohibiting banks' external auditors from acting as outsourcing vendors because of a concern about the effect of such arrangements on external-auditor independence. As we finalized our guidance, we decided we could work for the time being within the existing auditor independence rules and that a prohibition by the banking agencies was inappropriate for several reasons. First, the banking agencies were reluctant to set a standard different from that of other industries, which, of course, are exempt from our safety and soundness policies. Second, we believed the issue was more properly regulated by the SEC, which has broader jurisdiction over the auditor-client relationship. Lastly, given the early stage of the outsourcing trend, we decided to take a flexible approach to outsourcing; the policy could be amended to address safety and soundness concerns if they became apparent. With regard to the last issue, the agencies decided it was sufficient for examiners to monitor arrangements among supervised institutions and evaluate auditor independence case by case. Nevertheless, our examiners have been encouraging individual organizations to consider using firms other than their external auditor. We have been vigilant in monitoring these outsourcing arrangements because we view the internal audit function as an integral part of bank management. In arrangements where much of internal audit is outsourced to the external auditor, the public accountant can be disturbingly close to being a part of the management team. Questions, therefore, arise about his or her independence. One of the corollary benefits we see to an external audit is that the auditor can give an independent assessment of the quality of a bank's own processes for identifying and rectifying internal control deficiencies. We feel this "check and balance" is diminished when the external auditor acts largely as the bank's internal auditor. The SEC is looking at internal audit outsourcing through the lens of external auditor independence. We share the SEC's concern. However, we also have a broader issue about the safety and soundness aspects of outsourcing risk management activities, regardless of who is engaged to perform the task. Contracting a large part of the internal audit work to a third party can be cumbersome, and banks operate in a rapidly changing environment. Furthermore, we see the internal audit function as a core part of banks' risk management processes. As is true of other aspects of risk management, the internal audit function is an inextricable part of the senior management team's responsibilities. The SEC's proposal would not eliminate outsourcing or prohibit public accountants from selling internal audit services. Instead, it would generally exclude an auditor from performing both external and internal audits for the same client. Combining the internal and external audits may have some efficiencies because the work can serve a dual purpose of inspecting the system of internal control and expressing an opinion about the financial statements. These efficiencies, however, may come at the cost of the external auditor's appearance of independence. Our view is that auditor independence is more valuable than these asserted efficiencies. We're pleased to see the SEC address this issue on a cross-industry basis. From the perspective of a banking supervisor, we support the SEC's proposal to limit the external auditor's role in the internal audit function of its clients.
For immediate release The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision has issued two papers providing guidance on credit risk in banking. The papers are part of the committee's ongoing effort to strengthen procedures for risk management in banks. They can be obtained from the web site of the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) at . encourages banking supervisors globally to promote sound practices for managing credit risk. It identifies sound practices that banks should use in managing the credit risk of all of their activities, both banking and trading. identifies the credit risk information that market participants and supervisors need to meaningfully assess banking organizations. It encourages banks in all countries to provide that information to the public. The papers are revisions of consultative papers issued in July 1999. The Basel Committee was established in 1975 by the central banks of the Group of Ten countries and operates under the auspices of the BIS in Basel, Switzerland. It consists of senior supervisors of the world's largest banking systems and works to strengthen supervisory and regulatory practices worldwide.
Remarks by Vice Chairman Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. Before the Coalition of Black Investors, Washington, D.C. September 15, 2000 Some Recent Findings regarding the Economic Condition of Minority Americans I am pleased to be here this morning, and I wish to thank the Coalition of Black Investors (COBI) for inviting me to speak as part of your national convention. I would like to focus my remarks on research that describes the economic status of minority Americans. Many of these remarks will be based on recent research by the federal government, including that of the Council of Economic Advisers and the Federal Reserve. I will also touch on programs across the Federal Reserve System to promote small business access to capital and credit and to help individuals manage better in the financial world. In taking this approach, I implicitly recognize what the civil rights leaders of the 1960s recognized, which is that many issues that appear to be race-related are actually socioeconomic in character and origin. Employment and Unemployment As all of you know, we are fortunate to be experiencing the longest uninterrupted economic expansion in U.S. history. Over the past year our economy created 2-1/4 million private sector jobs, and unemployment is the lowest it has been in more than thirty years. As shown in the most recent Economic Report of the President, prepared by the Council of Economic Advisers, the expansion has benefited all segments of the population, including minority populations. In fact, the unemployment rate for blacks, at 8 percent, is the lowest it has been since minority unemployment statistics have been collected. But despite these gains, blacks still lag in terms of employment opportunities, as their unemployment rate is still nearly twice the national average. Let me offer a few remarks on the effect of interest-rate increases on minority unemployment. As you know, our principal purpose in conducting monetary policy is to contribute as best we can to fostering the fastest economic growth sustainable over time and the highest possible standard of living for all Americans. History shows that an economy cannot achieve maximum sustainable growth without price stability, which allows businesses and consumers to make economic decisions undistorted by the fear and uncertainty of inflation. And it is price stability that is the Fed's principal contribution to prosperity. When inflation is already relatively low, we aim to keep supply and demand roughly in balance and prevent inflationary pressures from building. Thus, at times when demand is outpacing the economy's capacity to increase supply, policymakers will seek to dampen demand through higher short-term interest rates. Raising rates can involve short-term economic costs, but by taking action early on we can avoid much more severe economic distress later. Now, monetary policy by its nature is a blunt tool and cannot be calibrated to exempt a particular segment of our economy. Unfortunately, minority employment seems to be more sensitive to cyclical changes in the economy than employment in general. Economists have determined that there are a variety of reasons for the disparity. Educational level, work experience, and proximity to available jobs are among the top reasons for the inequity between minorities and white non-Hispanics in the labor market. So, if we can keep the economy on the maximum sustainable growth path by adjusting monetary policy in a forward-looking manner, then we will avoid a boom-and-bust pattern that would hurt all Americans, especially minorities. That will help create the conditions under which the greatest number of Americans share in the nation's prosperity. Private Wealth Creation Just as the current expansion has been beneficial for the creation of employment, so too has it been hospitable for individual wealth creation. The Federal Reserve and the private sector both have an interest in understanding the process of wealth creation. We at the Fed attempt to encourage the stable economic conditions that allow for sustainable job creation and, ultimately, give rise to wealth creation. You as an organization promote saving and investing among African-American consumers and work to increase financial literacy. Using our 1995 and 1998 Surveys of Consumer Finances as background, Federal Reserve economists are seeking to better understand issues of personal finance. In an acceleration of a trend dating from 1992, both mean and median net worth for U.S. families rose strongly between 1995 and 1998: mean net worth rose 26 percent, and the median rose 18 percent. Both the mean and the median net worth in 1998 were nearly 20 percent higher than in 1989, toward the end of the last expansion. However, as with unemployment, there were differences across racial lines. Over the 1989-98 period, the growth in the mean and median net worth was greater for white non-Hispanic families than for minority families. Moreover, while the growth rate increased steadily for whites through 1998, the rate for minorities leveled off after 1995. Finally and importantly, by 1998 the median net worth of minority families was still substantially below that of other families -- $16,400 versus $94,900. Part of this disparity may be attributable to differences in the family holdings of assets, including everything from vehicles to "managed assets." White families are only slightly more likely to hold nonfinancial assets, such as vehicles and equity in businesses and nonresidential properties. However, as I will discuss further, among their nonfinancial holdings, whites are much more likely to hold business equity, whereas minority family holdings tend to be more concentrated in other nonfinancial assets. Differences in holdings of financial assets are even more skewed. Only 81 percent of nonwhite and Hispanic families held financial assets in 1998, an increase over the 77 percent observed in 1995 but still below the 96 percent of white non-Hispanic families owning them. Given the potential for wealth creation from financial assets, this discrepancy is noticeable. In this period of admittedly robust growth in stock prices, the median value of stock holdings among those having any stock holdings rose strongly--from $15,400 in 1995 to $25,000 in 1998, a 62.3 percent increase, but nonwhites and Hispanics tend to be disproportionately underrepresented in stock ownership. More than half of white non-Hispanic families held some form of stock in 1998, but only 30 percent of minority families did. Put another way, the relatively smaller number of minority families that own financial assets tend to make more conservative choices regarding their portfolios, favoring fixed-income securities over stock ownership in any form. They therefore have not participated fully in the wealth creation that comes from equity investments and that has been such an important part of this unprecedented expansion. The Role of Small Businesses in our Economy I know that COBI is also concerned with business ownership by minorities. The Federal Reserve is interested as well in small businesses and their access to credit. In part, our ongoing interest in the availability of credit to small businesses and its effects on economic growth stems from the significant role that small firms play in our dynamic economy. By some estimates, there are upwards of twenty-three million small businesses in the United States accounting for more than 99 percent of all firms. Although a great number of these firms involve individuals who are self-employed or who have only a few employees, small businesses employ, collectively, more than half of the private sector workforce. These firms also generate nearly half the sales revenues of all U.S. firms. The current expansion has provided a favorable climate for small businesses generally and for minority-owned firms in particular. In 1996 alone, nearly a million new firms began operation. Moreover, in recent years, the number of minority-owned firms has been growing at a rate of three to four times that of other small businesses, though minority-owned firms still constitute only a small proportion of all small businesses. As of 1997, about 10 percent of all small businesses with employees were minority-owned: about 2 percent were black-owned, 4.5 percent were Asian-owned, and 4 percent were Hispanic-owned. Research and Access to Capital and Credit Given the importance of small businesses to our economy, and their heavy reliance on credit to facilitate growth, the Federal Reserve has taken a leading role in efforts to improve the understanding of factors that bear on the availability of funds to support business activity. In 1999, the Federal Reserve sponsored a major research conference on business access to capital and credit that provided many insights on similarities and differences in the characteristics of white-owned and minority-owned firms and of male-owned and female-owned firms. For example, firms owned by blacks tend to be smaller (whether measured by assets or by employees), newer, and more likely to be located in an urban area than their nonminority counterparts. Black-owned businesses also tend to be owned by a person with fewer years of business experience and to have poorer credit histories, but they are also more likely to be owned by a person having at least some college education. Finally, black-owned businesses are more likely to be a sole proprietorship and in the services industry. Differences between other minority-owned firms and white-owned firms tend to be less pronounced, though they have been found. Clearly, many factors are considered in credit decisions. Smaller businesses with limited equity capital, fewer assets to pledge as collateral, uncertain earnings streams, and high failure rates can reasonably be expected, on the whole, to experience greater difficulties in obtaining credit than larger firms experience. The personal creditworthiness of the business owner in sole proprietorships or small partnerships, as well as in small corporations, is also an important consideration. Creditor evaluations of risk, based on these and other legitimate economic factors, properly play a central role in credit decisions. Aside from these differences along financial and nonfinancial dimensions, the research also showed that minority and women-owned firms differ from white and male-owned firms in some of their credit market experiences. All the papers concluded that black-owned firms were generally more likely to be turned down for credit. However, when examined more closely, these general patterns are seen to mask more complex relationships. For example, differences in turndown rates are less pronounced in urban markets, which accounted for the vast majority of firms in the study, than in rural areas. And when small retail establishments are considered separately, denial rates for black-owned firms and for white-owned firms are similar. Clearly, additional research will be required to more fully understand these complexities. Determining whether and to what extent discrimination may help explain differences in the credit market experiences of small businesses owned by individuals from different demographic groups is difficult. Discrimination, if it exists in any creditor's decision, is disturbing. The moral and legal objections to discrimination are obvious. In addition, constraints on access to credit due to discrimination carry real costs and serious economic consequences. Such constraints inhibit economic opportunities by limiting the ability of victims to purchase homes, expand businesses, and accumulate wealth. At its heart, discrimination in granting credit artificially restricts the flow of capital. It means that viable economic activity goes unfunded and markets that should work do not. The Federal Reserve's 1993 National Survey of Small Business Finances has been an extremely useful tool for better understanding the role that discrimination may play in affecting small business credit markets. This survey collected detailed information on the financial and other characteristics of a nationally representative sample of small businesses. To help us gain a better understanding of the nature and needs of minority-owned firms, the survey oversampled the firms owned by various minority groups. The survey was the basis for much of the documentation of differences in credit market experiences obtained through our conference last year, and it continues to provide clues regarding the reasons for these differences. However, these data alone cannot identify discrimination because they do not include all the unique factors involved in each credit-granting decision. I can assure you that the Federal Reserve will remain vigilant for any indications that illegal discrimination is part of credit decisions. We, of course, continue to examine banks to measure and ensure their compliance with the Equal Credit Opportunity Act. And we will continue to sponsor research that bears on issues of credit availability and constraints, including those involving potential illegal discrimination. Information and Educational Programs Besides collecting and analyzing data on small businesses and consumers, the Federal Reserve has also supported programs to encourage community development in low- and moderate-income areas. Through our Community Affairs programs at each of the twelve Federal Reserve Banks, we conduct ongoing outreach and educational activities and give hands-on technical assistance to help banks, their customers, and communities understand and address community credit needs, including those of small businesses. This is no small commitment. The Federal Reserve Board and the twelve Reserve Banks combined devote more than 100 full-time staff members to help institutions understand and participate in community development. To give you an idea of the kinds of activities we engage in, the twelve Federal Reserve Banks over the past three years have sponsored educational conferences, seminars, and workshops focusing on credit and investment issues attended by more than 35,000 people. Some of this activity involves issues related to affordable housing and community development, but over the past few years, our Community Affairs activities have increasingly focused on small business and economic development. Each of the Reserve Banks develops programs responsive to local needs. The Federal Reserve Bank of Boston sponsored a major conference entitled "Making It in the Mainstream," which reviewed partnerships between minority enterprises and major corporations as a strategy for inner-city business development and job creation. The Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, in conjunction with the National Association of Women Business Owners, conducted a series of six conferences entitled "Access to Capital: Start to Finish," which focused on the financing needs of and resources for women-owned businesses. As an adjunct to their educational programs, the Reserve Banks provide direct technical assistance to bankers, businesses, and community development organizations to help them identify and address capital and credit issues. Many of our Reserve Banks have helped bankers create multibank community development corporations (CDCs) and other consortium lending intermediaries, which focus on equity and debt financing for small and disadvantaged businesses. They also help banks deal with regulatory requirements that often must be addressed before investing in CDCs, Small Business Investment Companies, or multibank loan consortiums. The Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, for example, worked with the Florida Black Business Investment Board and assisted banks interested in investing in regional black business investment corporations, which provide equity and loans to black-owned businesses in that state. In a related effort this past year, the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago began the initial phases of its "Small Business Credit Access Initiative," which will identify and address barriers to equity and debt capital for small enterprises in the Chicago metropolitan area, especially those businesses located in predominately minority and low-income communities. As another example, the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland has joined forces with the Small Business Administration and the Greater Cleveland Growth Association's Council of Smaller Enterprises (COSE) to fund and coordinate a communitywide effort to improve capital access for small businesses in northeast Ohio. The Fed is also strongly supportive of efforts across the nation to increase financial literacy. We are actively involved with the National Partners for Financial Empowerment (NPFE). This nonpartisan coalition, launched by Treasury Secretary Lawrence Summers in April 2000, is a public-private partnership that seeks to promote the development of personal financial skills. Many Americans at all income levels do not understand the basics of personal finance and how to make their money work for them as efficiently as possible. Some are easy targets for abuses or make poor choices in the use of credit. Many low- and moderate-income families lack access to financial services. Families of all income levels need financial education to improve their financial future, but families at the lowest income levels face special challenges. Personal debt and bankruptcy rates are high, and saving is at its lowest level in seventy years. The inability of many households to budget, save, and invest, prevents them from laying the foundation for a secure financial future. To raise public awareness of the critical importance of financial literacy and to reinforce the many creative and energetic efforts in financial literacy already underway, NPFE is engaging in a major campaign that will reach across the nation with the help of leaders from the public and private sectors. Working with the NPFE, the Federal Reserve will seek to educate people on how to make informed choices for common financial transactions, including home mortgages, consumer credit, and basic banking services. Conclusion Let me conclude by emphasizing that the Federal Reserve employs many tools that help us understand credit markets and address credit and capital availability issues confronting consumers and small businesses. Through effective monetary policy, our goal is to help maintain price stability and sustain conditions for growth that provide continuing opportunities for families and small businesses to flourish. Sustainable growth also helps many of our citizens to enter the job market, obtaining important skills that can be life-transforming. By creating conditions conducive to maximum sustainable growth, the Federal Reserve can best do its part to make sure that all Americans have the chance to assure their financial well-being. Through our supervision of banks, we continue to monitor financial institutions' compliance with laws requiring them to offer credit fairly and impartially. And we will continue to sponsor research on consumer finance and small business credit markets and to promote financial literacy. Through these efforts we, like you, are working to ensure that our current economic gain enables the construction of a solid platform for enhanced job opportunity, business growth, and wealth creation for all Americans.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today its approval of the application of Turkiye Is Bankasi, A.S., Ankara, Turkey, to establish a representative office in New York, New York. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
For immediate release
Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan The economic importance of improving math-science education Before the Committee on Education and the Workforce, U.S. House of Representatives September 21, 2000 I am pleased to be here this morning to discuss improving mathematics and science education in our elementary and secondary schools. In this regard, I am conveying my own views, not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve. We are in a period--especially in this country--of rapid innovation that is yielding dramatic changes in the way goods and services are produced and in the ways that they are delivered to final users. These innovations are markedly elevating the skill levels that will be needed if our increasingly sophisticated capital stock is to function effectively in the years ahead. Such considerations are an important element in the ongoing dialogue that our nation's leaders in business, labor, education, and public policy must have if we, together, are to be successful in meeting the rising demand for skilled workers. Success in this area will, in turn, allow us to realize the potential that advances in science and technology have to enhance living standards for a large majority of Americans. The pressures we face today are not unlike those of a century ago, when our education system successfully responded to the multiplying needs brought about by a marked acceleration in technological innovation. As those advances put new demands on workers interacting with an increasingly more complex stock of productive capital, high-school education proliferated-- enabling students to read manuals, manipulate numbers, and understand formulae. Students were thus accorded the skills necessary to staff the newly developing assembly lines in factories and the rapidly expanding transportation systems whose mechanical and automotive jobs required a widening array of cognitive skills. For those who sought education beyond high school, land grant colleges sprang up, as states reacted to the increased skills required by industry and especially agriculture, the dominant occupation a century ago. By today's standard, the required share of "intellectual workers" in our labor force was then still small. But the technological innovations of the latter part of the nineteenth century began to bring an increasing conceptualization of our gross domestic product--that is, a greater emphasis on value added stemming from new ideas and concepts as distinct from material inputs and demanding physical labor. The proportion of our workforce that created value through intellectual endeavors, rather than predominantly through manual labor, began a century-long climb. In 1900, only one out of every ten workers was in a professional, technical, or managerial occupation. By 1970, that proportion had doubled, and today those types of jobs account for nearly one-third of our workforce. Moreover, this simple statistic undoubtedly understates the ongoing increase in the analytic content of work, because there also seems to have been a marked increase in the need for conceptual skills in jobs that a decade or so ago would have been easily characterized as fully manual labor. Indeed, the proliferation of information technologies throughout the economy in recent years has likely accelerated this shift in the skill requirements of many occupations away from routine work and toward non-routine interactive and analytical tasks. Another signal of the ongoing rise in demand for conceptual skills in recent years has been the increase in relative wages for college-educated workers. During the 1980s and much of the 1990s, as demand for skilled workers outpaced the supply, the gap between the wages of the college educated and those with a high-school diploma or less widened considerably. More recently, as labor markets tightened, that gap has leveled off. Real wage gains have picked up for workers with less than a college education. But evidence of a high skills premium for workers with college degrees remains--not just for high-tech workers but across a broad range of occupations. Innovation boosts output per hour and the freed pool of workers seek to exploit other opportunities. Their success is evidenced by the dramatic decline in the unemployment rate since 1992. The capital invested in any endeavor needs human interaction in order to function. But the new jobs that have been created by the surge in innovation require that the workers who fill them use more of their intellectual potential. This process of stretching toward our human intellectual capacity is not likely to end any time soon. Indeed, the dramatic increase in the demand for on-the-job technical training and the major expansion of the role of our community colleges in teaching the skills required to address our newer technologies are persuasive evidence that the pressures for increased learning are ongoing. At the same time that we have been witnessing these substantial increases in the demand for human input, we see little evidence that the general level of human intelligence has changed much--indeed, has changed at all--over the centuries. Fortunately, human beings exhibit a pronounced ability to stretch their intellectual capabilities when called upon. Hence, while the intellectual output of humans may appear to have an upper limit, that limit seems to be sufficiently flexible to assuage most concerns. Nonetheless, in today's economy, it is becoming evident that a significant upgrading or activation of underutilized intellectual skills will be necessary to effectively engage the newer technologies. Expanding the number of individuals prepared to use a greater proportion of their intellectual capacity means, among other things, that our elementary and secondary students must broaden their skills in mathematics and related sciences. In my experience, competency in mathematics--both in numerical manipulation and in understanding its conceptual foundations-- enhances a person's ability to handle the more ambiguous and qualitative relationships that dominate our day-to-day decisionmaking. The study of science, of course, also advances problem-solving skills. Early success in problem solving clearly enhances the self-esteem of young people and encourages them to engage in ever more complex reasoning. We all tend to gravitate toward those activities that we do best. This is a self-reinforcing process in which early success promotes further effort in a self-perpetuating direction. This is true of playing Little League baseball or the piano, as well as doing math. If we are to improve the scientific reasoning skills of our young people, we need to encourage a deeper interaction with numbers and their manipulation to a point at which students are confident and proud of their level of skills--in many instances an outcome they may not have anticipated. One is led to wonder whether the early sharpening of intellectual rigor that occurs when young students struggle to negotiate the complexities of doing multiplication and division the old-fashioned way is not without enduring value. A superficial understanding that does not stretch a child's intellectual capacity, in my experience, cannot galvanize an enhanced reality-based sense of self-esteem. In this regard, it is discouraging that so many students who clearly demonstrate impressive verbal or other conceptual skills find mathematical procedures intimidating. According to a recent survey of student attitudes toward math conducted by the Department of Education, fewer than half of the high-school seniors surveyed said that they like mathematics, a proportion similar to the proportion who felt that they were good at it. Even more disturbing, these proportions were lower than those in the surveys conducted in 1990. Some research indicates that such "math anxiety" has a negative effect on mathematics performance and that strategies for increasing students' confidence in their mathematical abilities are likely to have additional benefits in terms of achievement. If we can enhance their self-esteem and provide them with a strong curriculum and effective teaching, students may well find themselves rising to a level of analytic capability beyond their previous vision. There is clearly work to be done, for, as you know, the international comparisons of student achievement in mathematics and science that were conducted in 1995 suggested that our fourth graders were among the highest rated around the world but that our eighth and twelfth graders fell short of their peers in other countries. These comparisons heightened the debate about the quality of education that students are exposed to between the fourth and twelfth grades and raised concerns about prospects for a continuing shortfall of American-educated skilled technicians. To be sure, substantial reforms in math and science education had been under way for some time prior to the 1995 study and have continued since. It is encouraging that the latest results on trends in academic progress from the National Assessment of Educational Progress show some improvement in both subjects. Perhaps that improvement will show up in a narrowing of the gap between our students and those abroad when the results of a follow-up survey of international comparisons are released later this year. Nonetheless, with the conceptual demands on our workers continuing to rise, substantial further progress needs to be made in raising the analytic competency of our graduating high-school seniors. Addressing this issue is crucial for the future of our nation. It is obviously just a matter of time before the bulk of our workforce will require a much higher level of problem-solving skills than is currently evident. And while we have been fortunate to attract so many skilled young people to our shores, we must nonetheless strive to increase math and science achievement so that our students can take advantage of the considerable opportunities that will exist in tomorrow's labor market. In that way, we can realize the potential of technological change for bringing substantial and lasting benefits to our economy. As a final point, I would stress that, even with the increasing intellectual specialization so necessary if we are to move to an ever higher degree of specialization in our overall economy, we also need to ensure that all students have a broad knowledge of the world at large. Major technological advances are becoming increasingly interdisciplinary. Many academics argue, I believe rightly, that significant exposure to a liberal education--music, literature, and the arts-- broadens intellectual awareness, enhancing the ability to reach across disciplines to forge new ideas. Thus, while we must strengthen math and science education to address the requirements of the newer technologies we see on the horizon, we should not lose sight of the advantages of a liberal education. I do not doubt that many of our most innovative and successful dot-com entrepreneurs are exceptionally, but narrowly, technically focused and educated. But if technology is to fit into a broader society of complex democratic institutions such as ours, it is important that all participants have an adequate awareness of its structure and values. For it is the latter that we as a people endeavor to achieve. Our technologies are only a means to that end. Footnotes Hsui-Zu Ho and others, "The Affective and Cognitive Dimensions of Math Anxiety: A Cross-National Study," Journal for Research in Mathematics Education (May 2000). This article cites a long literature on "math anxiety" among U.S. students and reports that it also has an adverse effect on students in China and Taiwan.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among the Consolidated Bank and Trust Company, Richmond, Virginia; the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond; and the Bureau of Financial Institutions of the Commonwealth of Virginia. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
For immediate release
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today its approval of the application of Banco Venezolano de Credito S.A.C.A., Caracas, Venezuela, to establish a representative office in Miami, Florida. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice by North Fork Bancorporation, Inc., Melville, New York, to acquire at least 50.1 percent of the voting shares of Dime Bancorp, Inc., New York, New York. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application of FleetBoston Financial Corporation, Boston, Massachusetts ("Fleet"), to acquire up to 9 percent of the voting shares of North Fork Bancorporation, Inc., Melville ("North Fork"), and its subsidiaries North Fork Bank, Mattituck, both in New York, and Superior Savings of New England, N.A., Branford, Connecticut. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today published a final rule amending Regulation Z, which implements the Truth in Lending Act, to revise the disclosure requirements for credit and charge card solicitations and applications. The act requires that direct mail and other applications and solicitations to open card accounts must disclose the annual percentage rate (APR) and other cost information, generally in the form of a table. The Regulation Z amendments are intended to make the disclosures more noticeable and easier to understand. Under the final rule, disclosures must be in a readily understandable form and readily noticeable to consumers. The APR for purchase transactions must be in 18-point type. Cash advance and balance transfer APRs must be included in the table. Balance transfer fees must be disclosed either in or outside of the table. Additional guidance is provided on the requirement that the table be prominently located, and on the level of detail about cost information required or permitted in the table. The revisions are effective immediately; compliance is mandatory as of October 1, 2001 . The Board believes that the revisions to the disclosure requirements should help promote consumer awareness of the terms and rates of credit card financing. The Board's notice is attached.