No content found
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday approved action by the Board of Directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, decreasing the discount rate at the bank from 2-1/2 percent to 2 percent, effective immediately.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday approved action by the Board of Directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, decreasing the discount rate at the bank from 2-1/2 percent to 2 percent, effective immediately.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Office of the Comptroller of the Currency Joint Release WASHINGTON -- The 2001 Shared National Credit (SNC) review indicates continued deterioration in the quality of syndicated bank loans, consistent with general economic, sectoral, and credit market trends, according to data released Friday by three federal bank regulatory agencies. The results -- reported by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation -- are based on analyses that were prepared in the second quarter and reflect business and economic conditions that prevailed at that time. Several key factors have adversely affected the quality of syndicated loans over the past several years including bank underwriting and risk selection standards, and economic factors. The seasoning of many aggressively underwritten deals, particularly those credits booked in the latter half of the 1990s, has contributed to the increase in adversely rated credits. Deterioration has been particularly evident for credits to leveraged and speculative-grade borrowers that are facing difficulty generating sufficient cash flow to service their debts in the current environment. It is important to note that most of the deterioration in the quality of syndicated loans is already reflected in the internal credit ratings of individual banks. In 2001, the SNC Program covered 10,146 credits to 5,870 borrowers totaling $2.1 trillion in loan commitments. Approximately one-third of the commitments, or $769 billion, was advanced and outstanding. Classified loans totaled $117 billion, or 5.7 percent of total commitments, up from 3.2 percent in 2000. At the same time, loans listed for special mention rose to 3.7 percent of total commitments, from 1.9 percent in 2000. On a combined basis, special mention and classified loans represent 9.4 percent of total commitments, up from 5.1 percent a year ago but well below the peak of 16 percent in 1991 (see Chart 1 and Appendix A). Of the $2.1 trillion in total SNC commitments, 51 percent is held by U.S. banks, 41 percent is held by foreign banking organizations, and non-bank firms hold the remaining 8 percent. In 2001, 5.4 percent of U.S. bank holdings were classified compared to 4.4 percent for foreign banking organizations and 14.5 percent for non-bank firms. The weakening economy has had a greater impact on certain industry sectors (refer to Appendix B for broad industry trends). In particular, manufacturing companies have experienced increased credit problems since the previous SNC review, especially the textile and apparel, primary and fabricated metals, and machinery and equipment sub-sectors. Weakness in the manufacturing sector was also driven by asbestos litigation associated with various large borrowers. Problems in the information technology sector (specifically the telecommunications industry) have been well documented and are evident in the substantial increase in adversely rated credits for 2001, albeit from low levels. While many established companies remain strong, a large number of start-up entities are experiencing difficulty generating sufficient cash flow for operations and debt service, and may be vulnerable to further deterioration in the event of a sustained economic slowdown. Despite deterioration in the aggregate syndicated loan market, improvement is noted in several industries; the most noteworthy of which is healthcare. This sector shows signs of improvement associated with realization of merger and acquisition synergies and increased revenues, although the volume of adversely rated credits within this sector remains relatively high. The low volume of adversely rated borrowers within the real estate market remained relatively unchanged from last year. For U.S. banks, the rapid deterioration in large syndicated loans comes at a time when the majority of banks have strong capital bases and earnings. While this moderates concerns, banking organizations must remain vigilant in the current environment to ensure that they promptly identify and address any continuation in credit quality deterioration and adjust loans loss allowance levels appropriately. OCC: Kevin Mukri (202) 874-5348 FDIC David Barr (202) 898-6992 Federal Reserve Dave Skidmore (202) 452-2955 Special Mention Sub-standard Doubtful Loss Total Classified Total Adversely Rated Total Committed Total Outstanding 49.2 65.5 10.8 3.5 79.8 129.0 806 # 50.4 56.4 12.8 3.3 72.5 122.9 798 # 31.4 50.4 6.7 3.5 60.6 92.0 806 331 31.5 31.1 2.7 2.3 36.1 67.6 893 298 18.8 25.0 1.7 1.5 28.2 47.0 1,063 343 16.8 23.1 2.6 1.4 27.1 43.9 1,200 372 19.6 19.4 1.9 0.9 22.2 41.8 1,435 423 22.8 17.6 3.5 0.9 22.0 44.8 1,759 561 31.3 31.0 4.9 1.5 37.4 68.7 1,829 629 36.3 47.9 10.8 4.7 63.4 99.7 1,951 705 2001 75.5 86.9 22.6 7.8 117.3 192.8 2,050 769 Adversely rated credits Industry 2001 2000 All Credit Special Mention Classified All Credit Special Mention Classified Utilities & Transportation Amount 199.0 9.5 5.9 174.5 1 4 Percent 100% 4.8% 3.0% 100% 0.6% 2.3% Construction, Real Estate, Lodging Amount 116.3 4.3 1.9 106.4 1.0 1.4 Percent 100% 3.7% 1.6% 100% 0.9% 1.3% Manufacturing Amount 556.3 26.5 59.5 574.7 18.3 19.6 Percent 100% 4.8% 10.7% 100% 3.2% 3.4% Financial Services & Insurance Amount 497.3 6.5 12.7 504 2.4 14.3 Percent 100% 1.3% 2.6% 100% 0.5% 2.8% Information Amount 180.0 12.2 6.9 139.7 3.4 2.1 Percent 100% 6.8% 3.8% 100% 2.4% 1.5% Professional, Scientific, & Other Services Amount 193.0 9.5 17.9 180.2 4 13.2 Percent 100% 4.9% 9.3% 100% 2.2% 7.3% All Other Amount 308.6 6.9 12.7 266.6 6.1 8.7 Percent 100% 2.2% 4.1% 100% 2.3% 3.3% All Industry Amount 2050.5 75.4 117.6 1946.1 36.2 63.3 Percent 100% 3.7% 5.7% 100% 1.9% 3.3% Endnotes The Shared National Credit (SNC) Program was established in 1977 by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency to provide an efficient and consistent review and classification of large syndicated loans. The annual program covers loans or loan commitments of at least $20 million that are shared by three or more financial institutions. Adversely rated credits are the total of loans classified substandard, doubtful and loss and loans rated special mention. Under the Agencies Uniform Loan Classification Standards, classified loans have well defined weaknesses, including default in some cases, while special mention loans exhibit potential weaknesses, which may result in further deterioration if left uncorrected. For further guidance, institutions should refer to the July 12, 1999 Joint Interagency Letter to Financial Institutions on the allowance for loan losses, as well as the December 1993 Interagency Policy Statement on the Allowance for Loan and Lease Losses. Due to the recent conversion of industry classification codes (from SIC to NAICS), the specificity of 2001 data exceeds that available for 2000. Accordingly, consistent year-to-year comparisons of industry sector information are not always possible. Broad NAICS groupings of industries identified In Appendix B for 2001 are as follows: Utilities and Transportation - 22, 48, 49; Real Estate - 23, 53, 72; Manufacturing - 31-33; Finance and Insurance - 52; Information - 51; Professional, Scientific, and Other Services - 54, 62; All Other - Remaining NAICS codes.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced modifications to the method for calculating the private sector adjustment factor (PSAF). The PSAF imputes the costs that would have been incurred and profits that would have been earned if the Reserve Banks' priced services were provided by a private firm. The revised method will be used to determine the 2002 PSAF and fees for Federal Reserve priced services. The Monetary Control Act of 1980 requires that fees for Federal Reserve priced services be set at a rate to recover all direct and indirect costs of providing the services and imputed costs, such as financing costs, return on equity (profit), taxes, and certain other expenses. The method for calculating the PSAF is reviewed by the Board periodically. The Board requested public comment on the changes in December 2000. The changes approved by the Board modify the current method for imputing debt and equity, enhance the method for determining the target rate of return on equity, and refine the basis for selecting the priced-services peer group. The Board's notice is attached.
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan Transparency in monetary policy At the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Economic Policy Conference, St. Louis, Missouri (via videoconference) October 11, 2001 It is my pleasure to address this distinguished group that President Poole and his colleagues have assembled to consider the timely issue of transparency in monetary policy. We at the Federal Reserve are given two mandates that are not often spelled out explicitly. First, to implement an effective monetary policy to meet our legislated objectives. But, second, to do so in a most open and transparent manner in recognition that we, as unelected officials, are accountable both to the Congress from which we derive our monetary policy mission and, beyond, to the American people. These twin goals do not always work in concert. In the extreme, we could achieve full transparency if our deliberations and actions occurred only in public fora. In principle, there is no reason this could not be done. And I do not doubt that there exists a select group of professionals who could deliberate in such open fora as effectively as behind doors. Milton Friedman--whose effect on monetary policy, especially here at the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, is legendary--is one with such sharply refined skills. I might be able to name a few more, but I doubt that I would get much beyond counting the fingers on one hand. Human nature being what it is, the vast majority of us are disinclined to offer half-thought-through, but potentially useful, policy notions only to have them embarrassingly dissected in front of a national television audience. When undertaken in such a medium, deliberations tend toward the less provocative and less useful. I do not say that such a system cannot function, but I do say that in my three decades in and out of government, I have never seen it function well. The undeniable, though regrettable, fact is that the most effective policymaking is done outside the immediate glare of the press. But that notion and others have been used too often in the past to justify a level of secrecy that turned out to be an unnecessary constraint on our obligation to be transparent in conducting the public's business. We need to remember that in decades past it was believed that monetary policy was most effective when it was least transparent. The argument back in the 1950s, as I remember it, was that market uncertainty created significant differences of opinion in the direction of the prices of short-term debt instruments. The result was a "thick market" of bids and asks that increased the degree of liquidity. More recently, in the 1980s, policymakers, myself included, were concerned that being too explicit about short-run targets would make such targets more difficult to change, impeding necessary adjustments to evolving market and economic conditions. Not too many years ago, the world learned of decisions of the Federal Open Market Committee through minor variations in the minutia of daily open market operations--that is, effectively through faint signals that only informed market professionals knew how to read with accuracy. True, over time, those signals became increasingly clear, so that in the end, market participants never missed a policy decision or read into our open market operations a policy action when there was none. As markets, experience, and the magnitude of outstanding financial instruments changed, the dead-weight loss created by such uncertainty--read: "risk"--became increasingly evident, as did the value of transparency. Simply put, financial markets work more efficiently when their participants do not have to waste effort inferring the stance of monetary policy from diffuse signals generated in the day-to-day implementation of policy. And being clear about that stance has not constrained our ability to adjust the stance of monetary policy in either direction. Our current disclosure policy, one hopes, obviates such complexities. In recent years, we have achieved a far better balance, in my judgment, between transparency and effective monetary policy implementation than we thought appropriate in the past. Accordingly, as you know, we moved to the immediate disclosure of our policy actions and, over time, to explaining our decision and our sense of future risks directly after each meeting. In addition, we now publish full transcripts of our meetings after five years. Through these disclosures, together with congressional testimony, speeches by Board Governors and Reserve Bank Presidents, and the publication of the System's sizable research output, we endeavor to keep the public well informed. We have gotten to our present degree of transparency through an incremental process, and our disclosure policy will continue to evolve. At each step, we need to review whether in our judgment this new degree of openness optimizes the Federal Reserve's ability to implement effective monetary policy in the context of maximum feasible disclosure. It is inherent in the complex and changeable nature of our economy that no one can forecast near-term outcomes with precision. However, it is also inherent in our economy that in the long run, the central bank has influence over only nominal magnitudes. As a result, the Federal Reserve can be quite explicit about its ultimate objectives--price stability and the maximum sustainable growth in output that is fostered when prices are stable. By price stability, however, I do not refer to a single number as measured by a particular price index. In fact, it has become increasingly difficult to pin down the notion of what constitutes a stable general price level. When industrial product was the centerpiece of the economy during the first two-thirds of the twentieth century, our overall price indexes served us well. Pricing a pound of electrolytic copper presented few definitional problems. The price of a ton of cold rolled steel sheet, or a linear yard of cotton broad-woven fabrics, could be reasonably compared over a period of years. But in our new century, the simple notion of price has turned decidedly ambiguous. What is the price of a unit of software or a legal opinion? How does one evaluate change in the price of a cataract operation over a ten-year period when the nature of the procedure and its impact on the patient has changed so radically? Indeed, how will we measure inflation, and the associated financial and real implications, in the twenty-first century when our data--using current techniques--could become increasingly less adequate for tracing price trends over time? So long as individuals make contractual arrangements for future payments valued in dollars however, there must be a presumption on the part of those involved in the transaction about the future purchasing power of money. No matter how complex individual products become, there will always be some general sense of the purchasing power of money both across time and across goods and services. Hence, we must assume that embodied in all products is some unit of output, and hence of price, that is recognizable to producers and consumers and upon which they will base their decisions. Doubtless, we will develop new techniques of price measurement to unearth those units as the years go on. It is crucial that we do, for inflation can destabilize an economy even if faulty price indexes fail to reveal it. For all these conceptual uncertainties and measurement problems, a specific numerical inflation target would represent an unhelpful and false precision. Rather, price stability is best thought of as an environment in which inflation is so low and stable over time that it does not materially enter into the decisions of households and firms. Nonetheless, I cannot help but conclude that the progress that the Federal Reserve has achieved over the years in moving toward this old definition of price stability has contributed to the improvement in our nation's longer-term growth prospects that became evident in the latter part of the 1990s. So, for the time being, our conventional measures of the overall price level will remain useful. President Poole has picked an appropriate topic for this group to consider. The historical record indicates that the increased transparency of the Federal Reserve has helped improve the functioning of markets and enhanced our credibility. But, to repeat, openness is more than just useful in shaping better economic performance. Openness is an obligation of a central bank in a free and democratic society. U.S. elected leaders chose to vest the responsibility for setting monetary policy in an independent entity, the Federal Reserve. Transparency of our activities is the means by which we make ourselves accountable to our fellow citizens to aid them in judging whether we are worthy of that task.
Remarks by Governor Laurence H. Meyer At the 52nd International Atlantic Economic Conference, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania October 12, 2001 Executing Monetary Policy without Treasuries When I began writing this paper, projections of federal budget surpluses raised the possibility that the outstanding stock of Treasury debt might be eliminated over the next ten years. While everyone understood that considerable uncertainties--related to economic assumptions and future policy decisions--surrounded these projections, they required that the Federal Reserve take seriously the possibility that monetary policy might have to be conducted without Treasury securities. The events since September 11, including a significantly expanded path for federal expenditures and the potential for further tax cuts, have at least delayed such an outcome and have added significantly to the uncertainty about projections of future surpluses. Nevertheless, it seems prudent to continue to plan for the contingency that over some longer period the federal debt might, at least for a while, be eliminated. In discussing the implications for monetary policy, it is useful to separate monetary policy actions into two steps. In the first step, the policy decision, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) sets a target for the federal funds rate. In the second step, policy implementation, the manager of the Fed's portfolio, the System Open Market Account (SOMA), injects or withdraws reserves to achieve a funds rate consistent with the FOMC's target. The formal procedural link between the two decisions is the FOMC's directive to the manager of SOMA, calling on him or her to conduct appropriate operations to support the FOMC's policy decision. While continued unified budget surpluses leading to the elimination of Treasury securities would have some important macroeconomic implications for our policy decisions, the elimination of Treasury securities should not influence either the way the FOMC makes its policy decisions or the use of reserve injections or withdrawals to implement these decisions. But such a development would require some changes in the way that reserves are injected or withdrawn. I will be discussing some options for adapting the implementation of monetary policy to a world without Treasury securities, but the key message is not to worry. There are plenty of options, the Fed will get the job done, so the elimination of Treasury debt would not undermine the effectiveness of monetary policy. Before proceeding, I note that the views I am presenting today are my own. I am not speaking for the Board of Governors or the FOMC. Monetary Policy Today The federal funds rate is the rate that banks charge for lending reserves to other banks. It is therefore fundamentally determined by supply and demand in the reserves market. The Federal Reserve controls the supply of reserves and can therefore adjust the supply to ensure that the market clears at the FOMC's target funds rate. The principal method of injecting or withdrawing reserves today is open market operations, which take two forms. The first form is outright purchase or sale of Treasury securities from the Fed's portfolio. The size of that portfolio today is about $525 billion. Open market purchases of securities inject reserves into the banking system, and open market sales withdraw reserves. The second type is temporary operations, either repurchase agreements to temporarily add reserves or reverse repurchase agreements (sometimes referred to as matched sale-repurchase agreements) to temporarily withdraw reserves. Repurchase agreements are essentially short-term loans collateralized by acceptable assets. The Fed, technically, buys the underlying asset for a given price with an agreement by the selling institution to buy it back at a specified date and price. The difference between the purchase and buyback prices determines the interest rate on the loan (the repo rate). The Federal Reserve engages in temporary transactions almost every day to compensate for short-run fluctuations in other elements of its balance sheet, such as currency outstanding, float, or Treasury deposits. Both outright operations and temporary operations are implemented through transactions with primary security dealers. In the case of repurchase agreements, these dealers become the direct counterparty in the transaction, owing to the buyback obligation. About half of temporary operations involve Treasury securities as collateral; the other half use either federal agency debt or mortgage-backed securities issued or guaranteed by the federal agencies. Reserves are also injected or withdrawn through discount window loans. These loans are made at the discretion of a bank, subject to Fed restrictions related to the financial soundness of the bank and the use of the funds. In ordinary circumstances, discount window loans are a negligible source of reserves, primarily because banks are reluctant to be seen as borrowing from the Fed. They fear that doing so may raise questions in the market and with the Fed about the management of their liquidity and their overall safety and soundness. However, in extraordinary times, such as in the immediate aftermath of the September 11 tragedies, borrowing from the discount window can become a major source of reserve creation. Principles Before considering how to replace Treasury securities in the implementation of monetary policy, I find it useful to set out some principles that have, at least implicitly, traditionally been followed. These principles provide guidance on how to proceed without Treasuries and identify tradeoffs that would inevitably arise. First, the Federal Reserve should try to be as neutral as possible with respect to effects on credit and, ultimately, on resource allocation. The market can do this far better than we can. The role of monetary policy is to promote price stability and maximum sustainable employment by influencing the level of aggregate demand through changes in the federal funds rate. In carrying out this responsibility, the Fed should aim to have as little effect as possible on the allocation of credit among various sectors or the allocation of resources more generally across industries or sectors. Second, and closely related to the first point, the Fed does not want to risk facing political pressure to influence the allocation of credit or resources. It avoids that pressure today, in part, by confining its holdings of assets primarily to Treasury securities. If the Fed were to hold a range of private assets instead of Treasury securities, it could face pressure to favor certain sectors, industries, or even firms. The potential for such political pressure might best be minimized by deciding on the portfolio allocation transparently and establishing safeguards against becoming an instrument of credit allocation. If the Congress enlarges the range of assets we can hold, for example, it ought to clearly and explicitly prohibit us from favoring one sector over another. Third, to avoid affecting credit allocation, it would be preferable to carry out operations in deep and liquid markets. A liquid market permits transactions to be made quickly and with negligible direct effects on the price of the assets bought and sold. The purpose of open market operations is to affect the supply of reserves and thereby the federal funds rate. The federal funds rate and expectations about future monetary policy then affect a wide range of other interest rates--on longer-term instruments and in both the government and private bond markets. By operating in a broad and liquid market, the Fed can inject and withdraw reserves without having much direct effect on the prices of the asset being bought and sold. Finally, the Fed would prefer to avoid credit risk in its portfolio. Managing credit risk is a role for financial intermediaries, not monetary policymakers. Owning risky assets necessarily involves taking losses at some point, involving the Federal Reserve in complex questions of whether the taxpayer had been adequately compensated for the risk. In addition, once the Fed takes on credit risk, avoiding some effect on the allocation of credit and resources across sectors would be more difficult. The current arrangements, focused on open market operations in Treasury securities, allow the Fed to honor these principles and involve few of the tradeoffs that would inevitably arise under alternative arrangements. The Treasury market is deep and highly liquid. In addition, reliance on Treasuries avoids both credit risk and opportunities for political pressure to influence the allocation of credit. In the absence of Treasury securities, honoring all these principles almost certainly would not be possible. The key decisions would require an assessment of the tradeoffs among the principles. For example, if we ruled out taking on any credit risk, we might preclude holding assets other than direct government debt, agency debt that is explicitly backed by the full faith and credit of the government (for example, mortgage-backed securities guaranteed by Ginnie Mae), and high-rated foreign sovereign debt. Doing so, however, would exclude a wide range of private assets that the Fed might otherwise hold. So it is important to recognize that tradeoffs exist. It may be deemed necessary, in particular, to accept that some credit risk will have to be taken and to focus on managing that risk, on maintaining neutrality by operating in a wide range of markets, and on avoiding political pressure through a clear and explicit prohibition against favoring particular sectors. Monetary Policy in a World without Treasuries Today, monetary policy decisions are implemented through a mix of outright purchases and sales of assets held in the Fed's portfolio, temporary operations through repurchase agreements, and discount window loans. It seems to me that the same three operations, though perhaps in different proportions, could be used in the absence of Treasury securities. First, the Fed could replace Treasury securities in its portfolio with other assets and carry out outright purchases and sales from the new portfolio as it does from the current one. Second, the Fed could widen the collateral acceptable for repurchase agreements and make greater use of repurchase agreements relative to outright purchases and sales. Because the Fed already transacts about half its temporary operations with collateral other than Treasury securities, this option would involve moving further along a path we are already on. Third, the Fed could make greater use of loans through the discount window. I would like to explore each of these directions. 1. Replace Treasury securities with other assets in the Fed's portfolio. The Federal Reserve could replace its current holdings of Treasury securities either with other assets that it is already authorized to hold or a wider range of other assets, including some that could only be purchased if the Fed were granted new legislative authority. This direction, however, is the boldest one and could raise concerns about neutrality, credit risk, and political pressure. However, in principle, a rules-based and index-focused approach could reduce the potential for effects on resource allocation, control risk exposure through diversification, and lessen the opportunity for political pressure. The Federal Reserve, by statute, has authority to hold (1) Treasury securities, (2) federal agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities, (3) bankers acceptances, (4) foreign sovereign debt, (5) certain municipal securities, (6) foreign exchange, and (7) gold. Currently the FOMC authorizes SOMA to make outright purchases only of Treasury securities and federal agency debt. Agency debt, however, makes up only a tiny fraction of the portfolio today and there have been no outright purchases since 1981. The gold and foreign sovereign debt in the portfolio reflect an earlier historic role for gold and stem from interventions in exchange markets rather than from open market operations to affect the reserve base. The most obvious candidates for holding the Fed's permanent portfolio are from those assets allowed by statute but not currently being purchased by SOMA. This group includes federal agency debt, mortgage-backed securities issued or guaranteed by the agencies, and foreign sovereign debt. About $2 trillion is in federal agency debt outstanding, and $2.6 trillion is in mortgage backed securities issued by Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and Ginnie Mae. Mortgage-backed securities issued by Ginnie Mae carry the full faith and credit of the federal government, whereas the debt and mortgage-backed securities issued by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac do not. By comparison, marketable Treasury securities outstanding outside the government total $2.8 trillion. However, holding debt issued by Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac in the Fed's portfolio, to the exclusion of other private assets, would, in my view, reinforce the market perception of the special status of federal agency debt. This would increase the subsidy that already exists in this market, potentially further distorting the allocation of credit and resources. Any decision to move in this direction, therefore, might be best linked to a broader decision to change the Federal Reserve Act to allow the Federal Reserve to hold private debt in its portfolio. In that case, federal agency debt could be treated symmetrically with high-grade commercial paper and corporate bonds. Similarly, mortgage-backed securities insured by Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac should not be treated differently from other highly-rated private debt. Of course, holding only federal agency debt, mortgage-backed securities issued or guaranteed by the federal agencies, and other similarly highly-grade private debt would still distort credit allocation by favoring high-grade over other private debt--but it would dilute the federal agency advantage. Federal agency debt and mortgage-backed securities issued or guaranteed by the federal agencies also could be held as part of a wider range of private debt. The Fed holds foreign sovereign debt today in order to earn interest on its foreign exchange holdings which it acquired in the course of interventions over the years. The question here is whether the Fed should also carry out open market operations by buying and selling such debt. The effect of doing so would be essentially the same as a foreign exchange intervention. This raises a host of questions about the suitability of such operations. It first raises a question of whether such operations would have to be coordinated with the Treasury, given that both the Treasury and the Federal Reserve are authorized to intervene in foreign exchange markets and routinely coordinate their interventions. Second, buying and selling foreign sovereign debt would have a direct effect on the countries whose assets we were buying or selling and could interfere with their domestic policies. Though these considerations weigh against holding foreign sovereign debt in the permanent portfolio, such debt could be used as collateral for dollar-denominated repurchase agreements with dealers. Such transactions would not change the currency composition of the SOMA portfolio and would be less likely to affect exchange rates or the price of such debt. The markets for several of the other assets currently allowable by statute may be too small or too illiquid to be useful in open market operations. The bankers acceptance market is a relic of an earlier age and is now too small and inactive to serve as an option. The market for short-term municipal debt (the municipal debt the Fed is authorized by statute to hold) is also quite small and not very liquid. Gold does not yield a stream of earnings, and using gold for open market operations would also involve the cost of physical delivery. A second category of potential assets consists of assets that would require legislative change to authorize the Fed to purchase and sell. This category includes all other private debt, equities, and other financial claims. The total size of the market for private debt of domestic businesses is about $15 trillion. Specifically, it includes the corporate bond market (about $5 trillion) and the commercial paper market (about $1.5 trillion) in addition to federal agency debt and mortgage-backed securities issued or guaranteed by the agencies. However, a considerable portion of this debt does not trade on markets but is held by financial institutions. These assets could be indirectly included in the Fed's portfolio by having the Fed purchase claims on financial institutions, including money market mutual funds, federal funds (uncollateralized loans in the interbank market), and certificates of deposit (CDs), including euro-dollar CDs. Another class of assets that could be held in the Fed's portfolio consists of securitized assets other than mortgage-backed securities--an asset class that has been expanding rapidly. Finally, equities could be held as well as private debt. This market, including both equities directly held and those held indirectly through ownership of shares in mutual funds, is about $16 trillion. Many of the markets for private debt and equities are large, but some are not very liquid, and all involve some credit or market risk. I also note that double-counting in these numbers is considerable since money market mutual funds, for example, hold a lot of commercial paper. 2. Greater use of repurchase agreements against a wider range of collateral. Today, about $25 billion in Federal Reserve repurchase agreements is outstanding. The amount outstanding swung over a wide range in 1999 and 2000, rising to supply liquidity before and immediately after the Y2K rollover and then declining to more normal levels. The amount again escalated sharply as the Fed sought to provide liquidity to the financial system in the aftermath of September 11, 2001. At the peak around the Y2K rollover and in the days after the terrorist attacks, more than $100 billion in repurchase agreements was outstanding. These experiences suggest that these transactions have considerable potential elasticity, even under prevailing restrictions on collateral. On the other hand, these were unusual experiences in which the demand for financing from the Federal Reserve was boosted by private-sector caution and difficulties. As a result, one should be cautious in using these experiences as a measure of how much this source of supply could easily be expanded in more normal circumstances. In any case, the opportunities to enlarge the size of such transactions would of course increase if the acceptable collateral were expanded, though doing so would require a change in law. If the range of acceptable assets were increased, repurchase agreements would have an advantage over direct purchases in that they carry less credit risk. The reason repurchase agreements have this advantage is that they are two-name paper: the immediate counterparty of the loan is the primary dealer and the collateral in repurchase agreements provides additional protection. For the Fed to take a loss, the direct counterparty would have to default, and either the market value of the collateral would have to decline or the issuer of the asset held as collateral would have to default. Also, a reliance on repurchase agreements would probably create less effect on the markets for the collateral asset than the outright purchase and sale of the asset from the Fed's portfolio. However, repurchase agreements would still have some effect on market liquidity and pricing for assets newly used as collateral. Expanding the use of repurchase agreements against a wide range of collateral might also be helpful during a transition to zero public debt. It would, for example, provide additional time to consider the pros and cons of outright purchases of a wider range of assets. 3. Greater use of loans through the discount window. Another way to increase the supply of reserves is through expanded discount window loans. Today, such loans are made at the initiative of banks, subject to restrictions imposed by the Federal Reserve. In normal times, a negligible amount of reserves are supplied through the discount window, owing both to restrictions imposed by the Federal Reserve to limit use of this subsidized source of funds and to the reluctance of banks to borrow from the Fed. In the early history of the Federal Reserve, however, the discount window was the principal vehicle for adjusting the amount of reserves available to the banking system. Given the reluctance of banks to borrow from the discount window today, some new procedure for supplying credit through the window would need to be developed to allow it to become a more significant source of reserves. In addition, even if we overcame the reluctance of banks to borrow, we would likely need an alternative to the current active administration of the window if we wanted to have a significantly higher amount of discount window borrowing. One possibility would be to auction discount-window credit. Doing so would, to a degree, shift the initiative on amounts to the Federal Reserve. Auctions could be held for loans with terms of a couple of weeks or even quarters. The rate for such lending would be set in the auction market and, being secured loans, would likely be slightly lower than the rate on term federal funds of comparable maturity. An advantage of this direction is that the Fed already has authority to accept a wide range of collateral for discount window loans and, indeed, does accept a wide range of collateral today. However, making significant use of this option would bias credit flows in the direction of depository institutions and, if the volume of these loans were large enough, could affect the interest rates on the assets, specifically bank loans held by such institutions. In addition, it would add to the Fed's burden in monitoring the risks of the borrowing institutions and managing the collateral associated with the loans. Obviously, these considerations would be less significant if the facility involved a more modest expansion of discount window borrowing. A new facility would have to set some standards regarding which banks could borrow from the Fed. These standards could be based, for example, on supervisory ratings. They are necessary to prevent the window from so being used to enable weak banks to avoid market disruption. Banks that met the threshold could borrow without the use of the funds. The Federal Reserve would have to give thought as to whether the borrowings of any institution should be limited in amount or frequency to forestall credit market distortions. A Multifaceted Approach An approach that uses all of the possibilities I've identified might be the best direction. I start from the perspective that there are three different drivers of reserve injection and withdrawal in the implementation of monetary policy. The first driver is the long-term increase in the demand for currency and reserves. The second is intermediate-term need for reserve expansion and contraction, arising, for example, from seasonal changes in the demand for currency and reserves. And the third driver is the day-to-day adjustment needed to keep the funds rate in line with the FOMC's target. One way to think about the three drivers and their associated transactions is in terms of a multifaceted approach consisting of three portfolios. One portfolio might be focused on providing for the gradual long-term increase in the demand for currency and reserves. The second might provide for intermediate-term needs for reserve expansion or contraction. And the third portfolio might be designed specifically to provide for the day-to-day adjustments to keep the federal funds rate in line with the FOMC's target. 1. The permanent portfolio. Long-term secular increases in the demand for currency or the demand for reserves could be met by outright purchases when the most important considerations would be neutrality and managing credit risk and when liquidity would be of less concern. I think that such demand could be well accommodated by a strategy of buying a slice of the same assets held by the private sector. We might think of this portfolio as one large index fund, with all private debt, equity, and other financial claims represented in proportion to their outstanding stocks. A major decision with regard to this portfolio would be whether or not to include equities as well as private debt. Equities are fundamentally different from debt in that they confer ownership and a role in management of the firm to the equity owner. Allowing the government to have, and perhaps exercise, wide-ranging ownership rights over private businesses would clearly be quite a significant move. With debt, however, the holder generally has no influence on management, especially if the debt is acquired in the secondary market (so the holder does not negotiate any covenants associated with the debt) and if the firm is not in bankruptcy. In the case of a firm in bankruptcy, the Federal Reserve would still need guidelines to govern its conduct as holder of private debt. On the other hand, including equities in the permanent portfolio would best respect the principle of neutrality. The government could hold a wider range of private-sector assets and possibly avoid altering the relative attractiveness of debt versus equity financing. Also, given the large size of this market, including equities it would allow the government to hold a smaller share of all private debt, further minimizing potential distortions. The permanent portfolio could be adjusted in several ways to reduce the cost of administering it and to manage credit risk. First, credit risk could be controlled both by diversification (as with indexing) and by acquiring only investment-grade assets. However, a decision to purchase only high-grade debt would significantly undermine the objective of avoiding an effect on the allocation of credit. In decisions about the composition of the permanent portfolio, it might be best to give the greatest weight to maintaining neutrality. Credit risk could be managed through the diversification implied by the neutrality objective and by relying on the presumption that the higher return on riskier assets appropriately compensates for default risk, especially within a diversified portfolio. Second, a measure of liquidity and transparency could be ensured by limiting assets to those traded on markets with reasonable pricing transparency and some acceptable liquidity. But, again, liquidity is less important for the long-term portfolio than neutrality. Third, some of the claims could be on financial institutions as a substitute for directly holding the loans and other primary debt (loans to households and businesses) that such institutions hold. The system could be managed internally or externally. I favor external management. Specifically, we could ask for proposals for a mutual fund that would operate under some strict guidelines, related to appropriate indexing and asset quality. Holding the assets through a mutual fund could also distance the Federal Reserve from a management role in the companies issuing the equities. 2. The intermediate portfolio. Some occasions call for significant swings in currency or reserves because of seasonal demands for cash and loans. Such injections or withdrawals of reserves are neither as permanent (as those in the long-term portfolio) nor as transitory as the operations that would be handled in the third portfolio I will discuss later. In addition, in some periods the onset of financial stress may require a large increase in reserves to meet the demand for liquidity or the Fed may need to withdraw a large volume of reserves to offset increased discount window borrowing. These periods also require operations that are temporary but that last longer overnight. Term repurchase agreements might fill this need very well, perhaps against a wider range of collateral than employed today. Today, most repurchase agreements are overnight, although the FOMC has authorized term repurchase agreements of as long as ninety days. A second source of such intermediate reserve operations could be the discount window. Credit could be auctioned for weeks or months to fill this need. Regular, say weekly, term actions of repurchase agreements and discount window loans would afford considerable flexibility because they could be allowed to run off or to be added to each auction. 3. The short-term or liquidity portfolio. Day-to-day shocks to the supply and demand for reserves must be offset to maintain the federal funds rate at its target level. Most of these shocks are transitory, so the need is for temporary injections or withdrawals of reserves. The key to this component of the portfolio is liquidity. As always, ensuring neutrality and avoiding credit risk remain important objectives, though neutrality would be best judged by looking at all three portfolios together. Overnight or short-term repurchase agreements are ideal for this role. Outright purchases or sales from the most liquid components of the permanent portfolio--for example, using short-term agency debt and high-grade commercial paper--could supplement short-term repurchase agreements if necessary. Conclusion The Federal Reserve has a range of options to consider if it has to adapt to a world without Treasury securities. These options collectively provide an effective means for implementing the policy decisions of the FOMC. The key will be to design a strategy that respects the principles I have discussed and makes careful judgments about the inevitable tradeoffs among the principles. The public, including specialists in the various markets, will have ample opportunity to provide input on these options, and these contributions will no doubt help us in reaching a final decision. Events, of course, have conspired to make this decision less pressing, but it remains our responsibility to be prepared. Footnotes This is particularly important when open market operations must be substantial enough to offset some other source of reserve creation--such as a large loan through the discount window or a large intervention in foreign exchange rates. One might expect the major policy focus in crises to be the quick adding of reserves. However, the role of open market operations in such periods is often to offset, at least in part, a very sharp expansion of reserves resulting from an escalation in borrowing through the discount window or a change in reserves associated with a foreign exchange intervention, and thus to allow the Federal Reserve to maintain effective control over the federal funds rate at the level specified by the FOMC. Actually, the Fed rarely sells assets outright from its portfolio. Most open market operations aimed at withdrawing reserves are done with temporary operations.
Remarks by Governor Laurence H. Meyer At the Bank Administration Institute's Conference on Treasury, Investment, ALM, and Risk Management, New York, New York October 15, 2001 Basel II: Moving from Concept toward Implementation Thank you for giving me the opportunity to discuss the bank capital reform process that continues to be developed under the auspices of the Bank for International Settlements in Basel. It is a particular pleasure to review developments with this audience of bank treasury, investment, and risk-management practitioners that has been assembled by the Bank Administration Institute to analyze the implications of Basel II. Perhaps I should begin by noting that this has been, and continues to be, a long and difficult process. Many important parts of the proposal have not yet been announced or are in the process of modification. I hope today to clarify the reasons the process is taking longer than we had expected it would. I hope that by reviewing our objectives and the challenges we all face--virtually all of which reflect the sheer complexity of modern commercial banks--we might gain a better understanding of the future schedule and more support for the process. We need your support. And I believe that the U.S. banking system will be even stronger if we can develop an effective process for improving internal-ratings-based systems at our banks and then key our capital and supervisory processes and procedures to such systems. That is what the Basel proposal is all about. I. The Vision It is, I think, too easy, as we contemplate the complexities and the resultant apparent slowness of the process, to lose sight of the point I've just made and to forget what we're trying to do. Let me underline that our ultimate objective is a safer and sounder banking system through better risk management at banking organizations. The tools are risk-based capital (pillar I), risk-based supervision (pillar II), and disclosure of risks to enhance market discipline (pillar III). The approach is to incorporate within the regulatory and supervisory processes some of the quantitative risk-management tools that large complex banking organizations (LCBOs) now use, or will be using by the time the enhanced Accord is implemented, to evaluate and manage their own risk positions. This requires--and it is essential to our vision--that both supervisors and banks focus on the same positions, controls, and objectives. In the process, not only would other LCBOs be required to improve their risk management, but, in addition, a system would be established that can evolve naturally as risk-management practices themselves evolve. For the most part, these new quantitative techniques are designed to address risk at LCBOs. They involve highly detailed and comprehensive management information systems. Such systems are cost effective for LCBOs, but they simply do not apply to the vast majority of banks in this country or, for that matter, to smaller and regional banks any place in the world. For this reason we do not intend that the hallmark of Basel II--the harnessing of internal-ratings-based systems for use in the supervisory process--be applied in this country to any but the largest and most complex banking organizations. Indeed, the internal-ratings-based, or IRB, approaches explicitly assume within their risk-weight formulas a high degree of portfolio diversification that very few banks can achieve. As you know, there are two versions of the IRB approach: Foundation and Advanced. The Foundation version has a high degree of built-in conservatism, under which rigid supervisory rules would establish many of the credit-risk parameters that would determine bank capital requirements. That is because the Foundation approach is designed to address either banks in the early stages of developing their risk-management systems or those operating in a supervisory environment that is not yet prepared to validate and enforce the sound-practice standards applicable to banks under the Advanced IRB approach. In this country, the Foundation version may be useful as a transition for banks that have not yet developed the ability to estimate all of the necessary credit parameters or have not convinced their supervisors that they can both do so and use those parameters in making credit decisions. The Foundation version may also be useful for large organizations that have relatively limited business lines. But we would expect--and we believe the market would as well--that the LCBOs will switch quite rapidly to the Advanced version of IRB. These entities, by their very nature, will be expected to have implemented the risk-management systems required by the Advanced version. If they do not, supervisory pressures and market realities will bring very strong inducements indeed upon such organizations to change their procedures. The Standardized approach to Basel II is extremely close to the current Basel I and should ultimately involve quite modest changes on the part of most non-LCBO U.S. banks. Indeed, it may not even be cost effective to apply the Standardized approach in this country, with only modest revisions to the current Basel I suggested for most, certainly all smaller, banks. It is, of course, not an option for LCBOs in the United States, given our risk-management objectives. We expect significantly different impacts across the small number of large U.S. entities that will use the Advanced IRB approach. That is because the intention is not to develop a cookie-cutter, one-size-fits-all set of requirements. Rather, each bank is to develop meaningful, empirically based risk classifications across its credit portfolios and sub-portfolios. For each sub-portfolio of loans, each bank will estimate the probability of default, the expected loss given default, exposure at default, and the associated capital to meet selected solvency standards. The supervisors will evaluate the risk-classification and risk-estimation processes at each bank using the Advanced IRB approach of Basel II, and if the processes are found to be acceptable, those classifications and associated capital needs will be the basis for the minimum regulatory capital requirements. To ensure the credibility of this process, we will expect those same risk classifications and quantifications of default probabilities and loss severities to be used for pricing, reserving, internal capital allocation, and other management purposes. Not doing so would raise doubts about using these data at that bank for establishing capital requirements. We want our supervisory standards to be based as closely as possible on the information managers use to run the bank. We expect a wide distribution of minimum regulatory requirements across the individual LCBOs, reflecting the differences in their portfolios and risk preferences. We anticipate, however, that the average minimum regulatory requirement will decline under the Advanced IRB capital structure. It is less clear that the amount of capital held will adjust quite as much, for several reasons. Pillar II of the proposed new Accord, enhanced supervision, might call for additional capital at individual institutions, depending on the supervisors' evaluation of controls, management, individual risk structures, and so forth. These variables are difficult to capture in pillar I through formal capital regulations. Pillar II will also address those risk areas--such as interest rate risk--for which it is not optimal to develop a single pillar I rule applicable to all banks. Pillar III, as you know, calls for enhanced disclosure of risk exposures to the public. And we expect that market and supervisory discipline will ensure that banking organizations maintain sufficient capital above the regulatory minimums as a prudent sound-banking practice. That has certainly been the case under the current capital regime. Pillars II and III have not, I think, received the attention they deserve by the industry. Perhaps it is because of the challenge of developing a new regulatory regime. Perhaps, also, banks in the United States believe that they are already subject to supervisory oversight (pillar II) and already engage in sufficient disclosure (pillar III). But both pillars are critical modifications for several important reasons. As I noted, pillar II is designed to avoid the need to design rules for everything and to give supervisors the flexibility to adjust to fit individual cases. Pillar III, by harnessing market discipline as another form of oversight, is also critical to avoiding an increase in regulation that would otherwise come as organizations become more complex. More disclosure--especially on risk exposures--is going to be necessary. Pillars II and III are also extremely important for ensuring that banks here and abroad are treated consistently. In the United States and in other countries, pillar II supervision is essential to ensuring, on an ongoing basis, that banks are implementing pillar I in a disciplined way. The pillar III disclosures are equally important in ensuring a level playing field among internationally active banks. Those banks in this country that argue that disclosure will create an uneven playing field vis--vis domestic non-banks should consider whether they might not be better served by disclosure rules for their foreign bank competitors. The combination of pillars I, II, and III is necessary to build a structure consistent with the increasingly important process of internal capital allocation at banks and to achieve what economists call incentive-compatible regulation. By that we mean a regime in which the regulatory rules and processes induce behavior that is consistent with the banks' own systems, objectives, and processes. Such a structure forces supervisors to view the internal capital-allocation process consistently with bank managers. It may well be that the supervisors' role in the oversight of economic capital determination and the markets' review of banks' risk exposure and management may be more important than the establishment of regulatory capital minimums. II. The Process As any manager knows, the process of converting a vision to reality is difficult for reasons varying from unacceptable costs to conflicting visions. We have been working to revise the Basel Accord--trying to give birth to Basel II--for half a decade. And I think it important to underline that we have made tremendous progress. Many things have been decided to enhance the risk sensitivity of the revised Accord and many of the proposals that needed modification have been revised. Perhaps most important, the Basel discussions have clearly begun to move the regulators and the banking industry to focus more on risk management and its relationship to capital, to analyze the issues, and to collect the data needed for better quantification. Nonetheless, it is important to understand why the process of converting vision to reality has necessarily been a long one. There are three reasons. One is the need to develop consensus among nations with different banking systems, different supervisory structures, and different supervisory philosophies. That takes time, and cutting corners would inevitably lead to undesirable imbalances and competitive inequities. It would be a mistake to underestimate the importance of this difficulty. Compromises have been made, and more will be necessary on all sides. Candor requires that I say that another reason for the slow progress is that the banking industry was less far along developing its risk-management tools and processes than we had anticipated. As a result, regulators working closely with the industry, have had to do more of the original research and data development than we had thought would be necessary. And while in some areas, industry practices are clearly converging, in other areas a wide diversity of market practices still prevails. This has forced supervisors to devise a regulatory approach that accommodates innovation while providing an adequate degree of consistency. Beyond the difficulty of reaching an agreement and the challenge of identifying emerging sound practices, the most important reason for delay is the sheer complexity of moving from concept to application. The state of practice is dynamic--indeed, the efforts to develop a Basel II, as I said, have themselves accelerated advances in risk-management practices. But all of us are facing issues that either we had erroneously thought were relatively simple or we had not at first considered. It has taken time to work through these issues. Moreover, we should not lose sight of the fact that large, complex banking organizations--for whom the real innovations at Basel are designed--are themselves, well, complex. Capital regulations cannot be extremely simple and at the same time appropriately sensitive to the multifaceted operations and risks of the LCBOs. We could try to apply simple rules to complex organizations, but the result could be easily predicted: We would not solve the problems of capital arbitrage and risk sensitivity, and the rules would treat some operations at some banks unfairly. As in medicine, the first principle should be, "Do no harm." And that means that the rules will be complex in order both to be fair and to avoid unintended consequences. One of the complexities of unbundling risk-related capital charges is, in the view of many Basel Committee members, the need for an explicit capital charge for operational risk. Devising such a charge has proved extremely difficult because of a lack of both an agreed-upon methodology and credible industry data. This has required the adoption of a strategy to permit banks to use their own internal measurement approaches--subject to quantitative and qualitative criteria and, on a transitional basis, to a minimum or floor capital charge. Sound-practice guidelines are also being developed for the pillar II supervisory review process. The interval before final implementation in 2005 provides time for both the industry and supervisors to develop the database and to develop explicit operational risk charges better linked to the real risk at each bank. The Federal Reserve, and I believe the other U.S. agencies, have been, and will continue to be, committed to developing and applying a truly risk-based capital framework and supervisory process for both operational and credit risks. As with any such massive effort, timetables are required in order to motivate and to coordinate broad organizational efforts. But we have a prior commitment, one that discussions with the industry suggest that you share. That commitment is: To get it right. If we imposed a flawed structure on the industry, we would be doing a disservice to the banking industry and shirking our public responsibilities. Thus, we will continue to try to get it right, even if it means more delay and modification to time schedules than either group wants. Of course, we also understand that the capital framework will continue to evolve as market practices change and supervisors learn more about the strengths and weaknesses of what we develop. Getting Basel II right does not mean that it can or will be perfect, even on the day the initial rule becomes final. Critical to getting it right is a genuine interaction of the regulators and the banking system. We simply cannot develop Basel II correctly without your help. That does not mean dropping every feature that some entity believes is too costly or too burdensome or would put a crimp in a particular activity. But it does mean that, given our objective of creating a risk-based capital system to promote better risk management and a safer banking system, we need your operational skills and counsel. The industry's initial assistance and subsequent comments on this year's January consultative document were, by and large, exactly in that vein. They were extensive and exceptionally thoughtful, and most were genuinely designed to produce a better system to address both private and public needs. We have taken them seriously, and responding to them has been time consuming. You will, I think, see the result in the next consultative document which I hope will be published early in 2002. But we need continued assistance from an even broader range of institutions. I trust that when the 2002 consultative document is published early next year, the banking industry will provide us with thoughtful feedback, and especially information, to help us gauge the overall quantitative effect of the proposals on your respective institutions. This must be an iterative process involving supervisors and the banking industry, and there must be mutual trust if it is going to work effectively. It is not necessarily our intention to avoid rules that an individual bank may find costly or inconvenient, but rather to avoid unintended consequences that raise costs beyond their benefits. Moreover, we hope that your comments will be preceded by an understanding that our wider objective is to develop a safer and sounder banking system by strengthening risk management at banking organizations. I would like to underline that as extensive as our database is, as large as the data collection burden is for you, we simply do not have the individual bank information to estimate accurately the effect of alternative proposals on your capital requirements; it is up to you to tell us. We are, as I have said, trying to get it right. The comment process will continue to be extensive. I already mentioned the BIS third consultative document, which is expected early next year. At some stage, as the proposal becomes more definitive, the U.S. agencies will have to go through the U.S. rule-making process, with an additional request for comment. And any final rule would have a delayed effective date to allow both the industry and the regulators sufficient time to implement what will, by necessity, be a complicated rule. But between now and the effective date of the new rules, as our mutual needs and mutual capabilities change, we cannot remain idle. Large banks need to continue to enhance their internal risk classification systems, develop empirically based techniques for risk classification of pass loans, and strengthen the process for calculating their internal economic capital requirements. For our part, we have begun to train our examination staffs to evaluate banks' internal systems. Since we will also be living with the current Accord for some years before Basel II can be implemented, we are also shoring up the present capital rules, such as the treatment of recourse and other retained interests in securitization transactions. The effort to improve capital rules and develop better risk management is thus multifaceted. I would not, however, like to lose sight of the fact that the establishment of pillar I is, at least for the next few months, the Prince in this production of Hamlet, or the centerpiece of Basel II for the non-English majors in the audience. Thus, much depends on both pillar I's level and how it's interpreted. That raises the issue of calibration. III. Problems of Calibration The single biggest problem in developing a final proposal for Basel II is the calibration of the absolute level of the minimum required regulatory capital. You might think of the calibration process as establishing the average amount of capital to be minimally required in the banking system, understanding that in a risk-sensitive system, the required level can be expected to vary across individual banks. The January 2001 proposal was criticized for setting the absolute level of capital too high, and it may well have been too high. But we--and the banking industry--are struggling with three related challenges in determining the right level. These challenges are, first, reaching agreement about the right number in a stable world; second, making whatever adjustments are needed because we live in a world with crises and business cycles; and third, making sure the different approaches offered in the new Accord fit together properly. Let's begin with establishing the right level of minimum regulatory capital in a stable world, or as Sherlock Holmes might pose the question, "Is 8 percent the right solution?" Many risk managers might respond to the search for the "right" average capital requirement by arguing that one should develop and implement portfolio risk models and use the answers, allowing appropriate margins for model error. At the beginning of the Accord revision process, many risk managers assured regulators that the art of credit-risk modeling was advanced and that there was broad consensus. However, upon further investigation, regulators--and I believe many practitioners themselves--have discovered that there is less rigor and less consensus than had appeared to be the case initially. Such diverse views and practices reflect the ugly fact that the devil is in the details of model parameter values. This lack of agreement, together with the associated uncertainty, is not just a problem for the regulators. To the extent that banks and market participants rely on such models for internal pricing, capital allocations, and other decisionmaking purposes, this is a problem for us all. The fact is that we--both supervisors and bankers--do not yet know the right answers with high confidence. In these circumstances, the Basel II process could lose momentum unless we can agree to go forward with something that seems reasonable and with the understanding that reasonable people may differ and that changes may be needed as we gain experience. The problem becomes even more complex when we recognize that market economies are cyclical and have crises. In a risk-sensitive system, we expect that the risk measures in the capital formula will have worse values at the trough than at the peak, so capital requirements will move somewhat as macroeconomic conditions change. This is often called the problem of procyclicality of capital requirements. If the minimum capital requirements rise as the economy weakens, it can be argued that a system of risk-sensitive capital requirements may lessen credit availability at just the wrong time. The jury is still out on just how procyclical the Basel II framework ultimately will be, or whether it may, in fact, be less procyclical than the current system in which the lack of rigor in credit evaluations itself creates a procyclical pattern of reserving and charge-offs. We have already taken some steps to address procylicality concerns since issuance of the January 2001 consultative package. For example, we've improved the proposal's treatment of expected losses--and other measures are in train. Finally, there is the problem of making the pieces of the new Accord fit together. The Basel Committee has said it wants modest capital relief incentives for large, international banks to move from the Standardized to the Foundation version of the IRB approach and similar, perhaps larger, additional incentives to move from the Foundation to the Advanced version. But as I noted, these approaches and versions were designed for banks of very different levels of complexity and sophistication and for different regulatory regimes. The basic risk-weight functions are the same across the Foundation and Advanced versions of the IRB approach. Because of the conservatism built into the Foundation version, capital requirements for a given bank under the Advanced version, at least in this country, could be considerably less than under the Foundation version. If the revised Standardized approach is calibrated to yield capital similar to that of the current Accord and Advanced requirements are far below Standardized requirements, in the United States there may well be a very large reduction in capital requirements relative to today's levels for the banking system as a whole. This is because we expect virtually all LCBOs to choose--or to be induced to choose--the Advanced approach. I must tell you frankly that regulators here and abroad would be quite uncomfortable if Basel II resulted in a substantial shedding of capital by the world's megabanks. At least until we have more experience, I think you should expect that we will have transition rules designed to limit the amount of actual reduction in capital that will be permitted, at least until we have time to evaluate the actual experience under Basel II. That is part of the necessary requirement to be sure we've got it right before errors become irreversible. I suppose that too little capital is more of a challenge for regulators than for banks. But this problem arises from features of the real world that none of us can ignore. Supervisory philosophies and resources differ quite a bit across countries, and we must have a regulatory capital regime that can accommodate such differences. At the same time, we all believe that there must be competitive equity, and that banking systems must be well-enough capitalized to be stable. As I noted earlier, perhaps pillars II and III and market realities will blunt the problem of excessively low capital. But you will understand, and I hope respect, our need for caution. IV. Summing Up I am sure of one thing: The next Accord will be imperfect no matter how hard we all try. The challenges are daunting, and I doubt we can meet them all at the outset. But I believe we will develop a set of rules and policies that will be a substantial improvement over the current framework and--most important--that the new groundwork will spur important further progress in risk management and in banking supervision. Indeed, if the effort does nothing but improve risk management at banks and improve the risk focus of supervisors, it will be worth the time and resources we have all expended. But if you will help us with your comments and suggestions, I think we can come closer than that to the vision I described. To do so is in the interest of us all.
Remarks by Vice Chairman Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. At the Bond Market Association's 1st Annual Credit and Risk Management Conference, New York, New York October 16, 2001 Credit Risk Management: Models and Judgment It is an honor to participate in the Bond Market Associations Credit and Risk Management Conference. As this audience knows better than most, last month our country, and our financial system, suffered a trauma of almost unimaginable proportions. The fixed-income community has borne a disproportionate share of the loss. You and the firms that you represent are to be commended for persevering even in the face of great personal grief and professional stress, which may persist long into the future and, for many, will never be put entirely right. Our topic today is risk management, and I will turn to that shortly. First, however, I would like to spend just a few minutes discussing my views regarding the state of the U.S. economy. The longer-term prospects for the U.S. economy remain sound, just as they were before September 11. Our flexible markets, entrepreneurial spirit, and well-educated work force, and more recently major advances in information technology, bode well for the long-term growth of productivity, employment, and standards of living. Clearly, the immediate impact of the events of September 11 was negative--from disrupted sales, air travel, and production, not to mention the effect on the attitudes and expectations of consumers and businesses. Spending appears to be recovering from the initial cutback, but of course it is too early to assess how great the influence will be in the medium term. Although severely disrupted by the attacks, financial market operations and activity have nearly recovered, with the exception of some strains in the repo market. The initial direct disruptions proved to be short-lived. If the extent of the economic damage inflicted by the attacks is unknown at this point, so too is the length of time before aggregate economic growth picks up. Many private-sector economists are forecasting a brief decline in economic activity during the second half of this year, followed by a recovery early next year. Whether this outlook becomes reality depends importantly on the aforementioned household and business confidence. Individuals could curtail consumption and businesses could curtail investment because they are concerned about the direction the economy will take. However, opposing these contractionary impulses, should they occur, will be a more expansionary fiscal policy. Moreover, monetary policy has been and will continue to be responsive to rapidly changing circumstances. All told, as you know, we have taken the federal funds rate down 100 basis points since September 11, in two steps of 50 basis points each. It is too soon to judge the strength of these various forces--consumer and business behavior, monetary and fiscal policy--and how they will balance out. Risk Modeling: Benefits and Critiques Let me turn now to the theme of this conference. Risk management, as this audience is very well aware, has been revolutionized in recent years by advances in both theory and technology. This morning, I would like to discuss the nature of better risk management and also some observers criticism that the expanded use of sophisticated techniques for measuring and managing risk may actually increase market volatility and reduce market liquidity. For centuries, financial intermediaries--lenders, institutional investors, dealers, and insurers--have engaged in risk modeling. The model was in their heads and was based on judgment and experience, but that model involved categorizing and evaluating the proposed risk and reaching a series of interrelated decisions. For example, in the context of bank lending, for each potential credit those decisions have included: (1) whether or not to lend, (2) at what price to lend, (3) what maturity should the loan have, and (4) what collateral to accept and how to structure it. Formal models for market and credit risk are designed to augment judgment and experience to help make exactly the same decisions. The difference, of course, is that models rely on a clearly specified base of information and do so in a structured way. Judgment is still required in determining inputs and evaluating outputs, but the modeling process was inconceivable before the development of both modern finance theory and modern information technology. And, in my opinion, by measuring and managing risk in a formal and structured way, models, when combined with sound judgment, have, on balance, improved the resultant decisions. What have been the benefits of the new model-based approach to risk measurement and management? The most important is that better risk measurement and management contribute to more-efficient resource allocation. When risk is better evaluated, it can be more accurately priced; if it can be more-accurately priced, it can be more easily spread among a larger number of market participants, improving the risk-bearing capacity of the market. Better risk measurement and the consequent more-efficient risk-sharing improve the markets ability to allocate resources to the most productive uses. One example close to the hearts of this audience is the improvement in credit risk modeling that has led to the development of new markets for credit risk transfer, such as credit derivatives and collateralized debt obligations (CDOs). These new markets have expanded the ways that market participants can share credit risk and have led to more-efficient pricing of that risk. More accurate risk measurement and better management do not mean the absence of loss. Those outcomes in the tails of distributions that with some small probability can occur, on occasion do occur. But improved risk management has meant that lenders and investors can more thoroughly understand their risk exposure and intentionally match it to their risk appetite, and they can more easily hedge unwanted risk. I submit that we are already reaping the benefits of better credit risk management in the relatively modest lender and investor difficulties associated with the current slowdown in the economy. Classified bank loans, defaults, and bond downgrades have increased, but the hits to the capital of financial intermediaries have been relatively small, in part, because of the diversification of portfolios and the dispersion of risk that these new tools make possible. Nonetheless, not everyone is a fan of the increasingly widespread use of sophisticated risk-management models. Some express concern about a market externality that may flow from their wider use. The core of the criticism is that more widespread use of a relatively few models and databases may induce a significant number of market participants to respond to new information or shocks by attempting simultaneously to transfer their risks to others. These critics fear that the resulting adjustments in asset prices and market liquidity that are associated with the reallocation of risk can sometimes be disruptive to market functioning, straining market liquidity and magnifying market volatility. The flaw in this critique is that it fails to consider the proper counter factual. The question one must ask is whether formal risk models improve the risk-transfer process relative to the process without such models. In my judgment, the answer to that question is that formal risk models have made the risk-transfer process more efficient than it otherwise would be. That statement does not mean that the risk-transfer process is perfect but that, on balance, it is better. Formal models help firms attempting to shed risk to identify available hedging strategies and to choose the most appropriate strategy, given the prevailing market conditions. Formal models help firms with larger risk appetites--in other words, those willing to take on additional risk--evaluate their capacity to absorb and manage such risks and to take on the risk shifted from others. I contend that firms with larger appetites for risk will be relatively more willing to take on additional risk if they can model and manage it better. Without formal risk management, a firm would still be able, in times of high market volatility, to sense that its risk had risen. But it would be uncertain about exactly how the market volatility had affected it. The firm would, in effect, be flying by the seat of its pants. The uncertainty, it seems clear, would lead to less-effective decisionmaking and less ability to transfer risk to someone willing to bear it since others, too, would face the same uncertainty. Greater uncertainty would also heighten the potential that markets would simply seize up. Though models in general help reduce uncertainty and increase efficiency, the sophistication and structure of risk-management models vary widely, belying the notion that their use would create herdlike behavior. This point applies with full force to value-at-risk models in use at U.S. commercial banks, a topic about which the Federal Reserve has gained considerable knowledge through supervisory oversight. Our examiners have observed how banks implement a common objective--measuring the value at risk of the banks trading account--in diverse ways. Other sources of diversity among financial firms include differences in customer bases and product lines. These additional sources of variation create considerable heterogeneity in financial firms trading strategies, in their risk-taking, and in their responses to market shocks. Nonetheless firms should be aware of the models that their competitors are using and alert to the possibility that a single model could carry undue weight in the assessment of risk in a particular market. Still, neither the models nor the actual risk positions are now, or are likely to be, as similar as assumed by observers concerned about the negative implications of model-based risk management. In addition, it would be a mistake to think that decisionmaking at financial firms has become, or is likely to become, so rigidly bound by models that the models would dominate the process in any meaningful sense. Judgment, experience, exposure limits, and procedures for exceptions are also significant and, at times, critical, and it is important that these more traditional elements of risk management continue to play key roles. Areas for Improvement in Risk Modeling Although I believe that some of the criticisms of recent advances in risk management are misguided, events of the past several years have highlighted several areas for improvement. On balance, formal risk modeling has improved risk management, but making further improvements is important. For example, market participants have been made keenly aware of the implicit assumptions about market liquidity embedded in models and of the ways in which market, credit, and liquidity risk can interact. One common criticism of risk-management models is that they ignore the risk that liquidity may dry up or become depleted in certain markets, making trading difficult, if not impossible. It is certainly true that the first generation of risk-management models did not deal with liquidity in the most sophisticated way, but they did partially address this important issue. For example, the standard measures of value at risk assume that the firm cannot alter its positions for a time as market prices change. In other words, these models assume complete illiquidity throughout a stated holding period. Another widely used, but more sophisticated, approach that takes account of liquidity risk is stress testing. Unlike value-at-risk models, which usually assume normal market conditions, stress tests help to quantify how much a firm could lose in unusual or stressful scenarios. A typical stress scenario incorporates extremely large shocks of the kind that are almost always associated with reduced market liquidity. In sophisticated cases, these scenarios can be dynamic in that they account for likely changes in the firms positions. A fixed-income dealer, for example, might consider a scenario in which the firm first accumulates a long position in certain bonds because of customer order flow, and then those bonds experience a large price decline at the same time that liquidity decreases or dries up. A survey done last year by the Group of Ten central banks found that nearly all internationally active banks use stress tests to help them understand their risk profiles and to communicate with senior management. Even relatively simple methods can be used, to some extent, to quantify the liquidity risk that firms face. For example, the liquidity of each asset position in an investment portfolio can be measured as the number of days it would take to liquidate that position, assuming that the firm limited its trading on any day to 20 percent of average daily volume. Aggregate portfolio liquidity would be the weighted average of this statistic across the entire portfolio. With this relatively simple measurement, which requires only minimal modeling effort, the risk manager can flag the most illiquid positions as a special concern and can monitor changes in the portfolios aggregate liquidity over time. Of course, as I discuss below, this simple measurement may not identify the full range of potential liquidity risks. This example of measuring liquidity risk shows how important market transparency is to efficient risk management. That is, judging liquidity risk is easier in a transparent market like the equity market, from which the foregoing example is actually taken, than in a non-transparent market like the corporate bond market. However, as this audience knows well, the transparency of the corporate bond market will improve next year when the collection and dissemination of data on secondary market trading begin. I suspect this new source of data will improve the ability of fixed-income risk managers to measure and manage the liquidity risk of corporate bond portfolios. Although a number of methods for measuring liquidity risk are already used, the quantification and modeling of market liquidity remains a relatively new area in which I expect to see, and I encourage, further growth. Another weak spot of risk-management models is the risk associated with unknown common positions. That is the risk that several firms are holding the same positions, and all of those firms are basing their value-at-risk estimate on the assumption that these positions could be liquidated more quickly than they actually could. This circumstance is also known as a crowded trade. Examples include the fixed-income relative-value arbitrage in autumn 1998. In autumn 1998, simultaneous liquidations by many market participants, some of them forced because of collateral or margin calls, caused liquidity spreads to widen far beyond the limit that a risk-management model using historical data would have deemed possible. In the wake of this experience, market participants reported that they had not fully understood the balance sheet of Long Term Capital Management (LTCM) and other large players, and hence, in some cases, their risk-management models had underestimated their own portfolios risk. Prudent risk managers are probably aware of this limitation in their models--more aware now than they were before the LTCM crisis, perhaps--and all risk managers should try to manage this risk as best they can. Unfortunately, there are no easy ways to account for it in a typical risk model. Essentially what risk managers can do is to forecast other investors needs for market liquidity in the future. These projections could draw on information such as other investors asset allocations, market risk, leverage, and ability to manage liquidity risk. In the final analysis, the judgment and experience of traders and risk managers come into play. A third area in which risk-management models currently fall short but improvements are possible is counterparty credit risk. Of concern here is that, knowing their ability to measure counterparty credit risk is limited, dealers may cut their business with all counterparties in times of market stress rather than focusing on the counterparties that pose the greatest risk of loss. Indeed, this is a major source of contagion in times of market stress--the phenomenon that causes even fundamentally healthy enterprises to suffer when the market punishes sick ones. Improvements in counterparty credit risk modeling, spurred by the events of autumn 1998, continue. The need for better quantitative and qualitative information about counterparties is essential to any improvement in counterparty credit risk modeling. For example, what asset classes or strategies does the counterparty employ? How much leverage does it tolerate? How liquid or illiquid is its balance sheet? All these questions must be answered for a risk manager to know how a stressful event would affect the counterparty. A key area in counterparty credit risk modeling, as well as in risk modeling more generally, that needs improvement is adequately accounting for the interaction of market, credit, and liquidity risk. These risks are typically measured and managed in isolation from one another, but in reality, they are often linked. An event that drives down the value of a particular asset is likely to reduce the liquidity of that asset as well, at least in the short term. Certain types of market and credit risk exposures are closely linked--for example, derivative contracts on emerging-market exchange rates written with a counterparty from that emerging market. Risk managers use qualitative information about the interaction of market, credit, and liquidity risk to control their exposures. One way they do so is by flagging those deals in which such an interaction is likely. Another is by quantifying their vulnerability with stress tests. Some progress in this area has been made, but more work clearly remains to be done. Finally, we are all more aware now of the need to understand operational risk. Although operational risk is not easily susceptible to formal modeling, the events of September 11 have highlighted its importance to market participants, to financial institutions, to the financial utilities, and to the regulators and supervisors. Addressing operational risk requires, at a minimum, stronger and deeper operational back-ups--including systems and telecommunications--at individual firms and their service providers. Conclusions In closing, I think it useful to revisit one of the main issues I have raised today--whether a firms risk-management decisions should be informed by formal risk modeling. Clearly, either with or without formal modeling, a firm will always respond to a change in perceived risk. Formal risk models provide a systematic and disciplined way for firms to measure changes in the riskiness of their portfolios, and they provide a framework to help firms develop strategies to manage changes in their risk. Put differently, formal models are tools that help provide information to firms so that they can better think about what they are doing. In using this tool, practitioners must never lose sight of the fact that models need continued care and feeding to keep them in line with the latest knowledge, and parameters need to be set with due regard for low-probability events that may not be adequately addressed in recent data. Practitioners need to keep in mind that rare events implicit in the tails of distributions will occasionally occur. The critics dont seem to mention perhaps the biggest risk of the increasing importance of models: the lulling of the users into a false sense of well-being that loses sight of these potential tail events. I find, on balance, recent advances in the formalization of risk measurement and management to be beneficial. I urge financial institutions and market participants to continue to improve these models, and to use empirically based quantitative risk-management models as one of many techniques used to choose and manage risk. These models should not replace, but rather supplement, judgment and experience. Judgment and experience informed by empirical support should, over the long-run, be superior to judgment uninformed by modern technology.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday approved comprehensive revisions to Regulation K (international banking operations) expanding permissible activities abroad for U.S. banking organizations and reducing associated regulatory burdens. The final rule also reduces regulatory burden on foreign banks operating in the United States by streamlining the application and notice processes. The final rule reflects public comments received, enactment of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, and changes to the bank regulatory environment since the Board issued proposed revisions to Regulation K in December 1997. The final rule: Streamlines foreign branching procedures for U.S. banking organizations; Authorizes expanded activities in foreign branches of U.S. banks; Implements recent statutory changes authorizing a bank to invest up to 20 percent of capital and surplus in Edge corporations. Expands permissible foreign activities of U.S. banking organizations, including securities activities, and investments by U.S. banking organizations under the general consent procedures; Streamlines the application procedures applicable to foreign banks seeking to expand operations in the United States; Liberalizes provisions regarding the qualification of foreign banking organizations for exemptions from the nonbanking prohibitions of section 4 of the Bank Holding Company Act; Implements provisions of the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act of 1994 that affect foreign banks; and Includes other changes to eliminate unnecessary regulatory burden and to streamline and modernize Regulation K The final rule will become effective on or about November 20, 2001, within 30 days of publication in the Federal Register. The Board's notice is attached.
Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan Monetary policy and economic outlook Before the Joint Economic Committee, U.S. Congress October 17, 2001 I appreciate this opportunity to appear before the Committee to discuss recent developments in the United States economy. Despite the tragic events of September 11, the foundations of our free society remain sound, and I am confident that we will recover and prosper as we have in the past. But before the recovery process gets under way, stability will need to be restored to the American economy and to others around the world. Arguably, that stability was only barely becoming evident in the United States in the period immediately preceding the act of terrorism. Aggregate measures of production, employment, and business spending continued to be weak in August. Consumer spending, however, moved higher that month and appeared to be reasonably well maintained in the first part of September. Industry analysts suggest that motor vehicle sales were running close to August levels, and chain store sales were only modestly lower. New orders for nondefense capital goods stabilized in August. Moreover, the dramatic rate of decline in profits was slowing. To be sure, these signs were tentative but, on the whole, encouraging. In the days following the attack, the level of activity declined significantly. The shock was most evident in consumer markets, as many potential purchasers stayed riveted to their televisions and away from shopping malls. Both motor vehicle sales and sales at major chain stores fell off noticeably. The airline and travel industries also suffered severe cutbacks. The unprecedented shutdown of American air travel and tightened border restrictions induced dramatic curtailments of production at some establishments with tight just-in-time supply chain practices, most notably in the motor vehicle industry. As the initial shock began to wear off, economic activity recovered somewhat from the depressed levels that immediately followed the attacks, though the recovery has been uneven. Markedly increased incentives induced a sharp rebound in motor vehicle sales by the end of the month that has carried apparently undiminished into the first half of October. However, many retailers of other consumer goods report that sales have only partially retraced the steep drops that occurred in mid-September. Fortunately, air freight is largely back to normal. Overall airline passenger traffic, while above its mid-September lows, was still off considerably in early October from pre-attack levels. Similarly, the hospitality and entertainment industries have overcome some of their earlier difficulties but continue to struggle. The effect on financial markets of the devastating attack on the World Trade Center was pronounced, as telecommunications and trading capacities were severely impaired. But the markets are mostly functioning normally now, and as in the past, the infrastructure will be rapidly restored. For a brief time, the terrorist attacks markedly disrupted payment transfers, leaving those counting on receiving payments caught short. Those needs ultimately were met by the Federal Reserve, both through record lending at the discount window and through an extraordinary infusion of funds through open-market operations. To facilitate the channeling of dollar liquidity to foreign financial institutions operating in the United States, thirty-day currency swap lines were arranged with major central banks, again in record volumes. It was essential in such an environment to meet all appropriate demands for dollar liquidity. As repair of the financial markets and payment infrastructure proceeded apace, loans were repaid, open-market operations could be scaled back, the unusual swap lines were allowed to expire, and the temporarily bloated balance sheet of the Federal Reserve largely returned to normal. But even as market functioning and liquidity flows were restored, the potential for heightened uncertainty to damp household and business spending for a time persisted. To cushion these effects, we have eased the stance of monetary policy appreciably since September 11. * * * We in the United States have assumed ourselves to be fairly well-insulated from terrorism or, at most, subject to limited and sporadic episodes similar to those previously observed on a number of occasions in Europe. We have been aware of the possibility for losses on a much greater scale. But I suspect that those possibilities were deemed so remote that they were never seriously incorporated into most conventional assessments of economic risk. The shock of the tragedies at the World Trade Center and the Pentagon has reshaped those assessments of risk and required an abrupt realignment of prices in many markets to reflect the expected costs of operating in what we now recognize as a more hostile world. These circumstances pose a difficult challenge for business decisionmaking, not so much because the costs are inordinately large, but because the events, which have potentially substantial consequences, are so uncertain. Insurance deals with this problem by spreading the risk and converting potential large unknown costs into a steady stream of known insurance premiums that facilitates the forward planning so essential to an effective business operation. Obviously, sharp increases in insurance premiums for all forms of businesses are to be expected. Some higher insurance costs, in effect, will be borne implicitly rather than explicitly, as firms choose to self-insure, at least in part, rather than lay off all of this risk in the marketplace. These higher insurance costs, both explicit and implicit, endeavor to anticipate future losses. But in addition, they cover the physical capital and labor resources businesses will be required to devote to enhanced security, and to increased redundancies as protection against interruption of supplies or production. For example, the degree of comfort businesses have in allowing inventories to shrink to minimal levels in a just-in-time supply chain is lessened. In this regard, increased security threats, not pooled through insurance, have exactly the opposite effect on productivity than that which is gained by an improvement in information technology. In addition to the loss of human life and capital assets, these are important collateral costs associated with the new threats that we now face. The pronounced rise in uncertainty also has damped consumer spending and capital investment; households and businesses, confronted with heightened uncertainty, have pulled back from the marketplace, though that withdrawal has been partial and presumably temporary. The very great economic uncertainties that have arisen in the current environment have also, at least temporarily, resulted in a widening of bond spreads on high-yield instruments. Markets across our economy will adjust to the altered perceptions of risk that we now confront. Critical to that adjustment process is the behavior of consumers and business people. Behavior is difficult to predict in circumstances such as those we have experienced in the past five weeks. But judging from history, human beings have demonstrated a remarkable capacity to adapt to extraordinarily adverse circumstances. And, I expect the same adaptability to become evident in the present situation. Although it is difficult to determine with any precision, it seems quite likely that a significant repricing of risk has already found its way into our markets, as many economic decisions are responding to shifting market signals. But these adjustments in prices and in the associated allocation of resources, when complete, represent one-time level adjustments, without necessary implications for our longer-term growth prospects. Indeed, the exploitation of available networking and other information technologies was only partially completed when the cyclical retrenchment of the past year began. High-tech equipment investment at elevated rates of return will, most likely, resume once very high uncertainty premiums recede to more normal levels. The level of productivity will presumably undergo a one-time downward adjustment as our economy responds to higher levels of perceived risk. But once the adjustment is completed, productivity growth should resume at rates in excess of those that prevailed in the quarter-century preceding 1995. It is worth noting that increased production to enhance security will be counted in measured output without contributing to our standards of living, as was the case during our military buildup of the Cold War. Our productivity measures have always endeavored to capture increased productive efficiency, not increased well-being. We are, in effect, currently using part of our increase in efficiency to supply increased security. Of course, given the heightened risks we face, these investments in security are, doubtless, quite sound. In any event, such costs are likely to fall short of the costs we incurred for security during the height of the Cold War. Nobody has the capacity to fathom fully how the effects of the tragedy of September 11 will play out in our economy. But in the weeks ahead, as the initial shock continues to wear off, we should be able to better gauge how the ongoing dynamics of these events are shaping the immediate economic outlook. For the longer term, prospects for ongoing rapid technological advance and associated faster productivity growth are scarcely diminished. Those prospects, born of the ingenuity of our people and the strength of our system, fortify a promising future for our free nation.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the annual adjustments in the amount of net transaction accounts used in the calculation of reserve requirements and the cutoff level used to determine the detail and frequency of deposit reporting. All depository institutions must retain a percentage of certain types of deposits in the form of vault cash, or as a deposit in a Federal Reserve Bank, or a pass-through account at a correspondent institution. Reserve requirements currently are assessed on the depository institution's net transaction accounts (mostly checking accounts). For net transaction accounts in 2002, the first $5.7 million, up from $5.5 million in 2001, will be exempt from reserve requirements. A 3 percent reserve ratio will be assessed on net transaction accounts over $5.7 million to and including $41.3 million, down from $42.8 million in 2001. A 10 percent reserve ratio will be applied above $41.3 million. These annual adjustments, known as the low reserve tranche adjustment and the reservable liabilities exemption adjustment, are based on growth in net transaction accounts and total reservable liabilities, respectively, at all depository institutions between June 30, 2000 and June 30, 2001. Additionally, the Board increased the deposit cutoff level that is used with the exemption level to determine the frequency and detail of deposit reporting. Effective September 2002, depository institutions with total reservable liabilities greater than the exemption level ($5.7 million) are subject to detailed deposit reporting and are called nonexempt institutions. Those nonexempt institutions with total deposits greater than or equal to $106.9 million, up from the $101.0 million cutoff that became effective September 2001, must report their deposit levels weekly. Those with total deposits less than $106.9 million must report their deposit levels quarterly. Depository institutions with total reservable liabilities equal to or less than the exemption level of $5.7 million are not subject to detailed deposit reporting and are called exempt depository institutions. Exempt depository institutions with total deposits of $5.7 million or more file a less detailed deposit report once each year. Exempt depository institutions with total deposits less than $5.7 million are not required to file deposit reports. U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks and Edge and agreement corporations must file deposit reports weekly, regardless of size. For depository institutions that report weekly, the low reserve tranche adjustment and the reservable liabilities exemption adjustment will apply to the reserve computation period that begins November 27, 2001 and the corresponding reserve maintenance period that begins December 27, 2001. For institutions that report quarterly, the low reserve tranche adjustment and the reservable liabilities exemption adjustment will apply to the reserve computation period that begins December 18, 2001, and the corresponding reserve maintenance period that begins January 17, 2002. The Board's notice is attached.
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan The September 11 tragedy and the response of the financial industry At the American Bankers Associations Virtual Annual Convention (taped statement) October 23, 2001 I am pleased to speak once again to an American Bankers Association convention. This conference was rescheduled in respect for the loss of our colleagues and fellow citizens in the tragedy of September 11. But the fact that the conference is going forward in cyberspace is a testimony to American perseverance, to our technology, and to our flexibility. It is a metaphor for the ability of our economy to circumvent difficulties and innovate around obstacles and--most of all--for our decentralized and diversified economic structure. Our financial system has exactly such a structure. It still has thousands of banks, with hundreds of foreign competitors, including some of the largest banks in the world. In addition, market developments, regulatory relief, and, most recently, legislative reform have ensured that the banks, the insurance companies, the securities firms, the finance companies, and the host of other participants, from pension funds to hedge funds and from trusts to mutual funds, are all, in effect, in each other's business. And this listing does not even take into account a capital market where lenders and borrowers deal directly and where increasingly the instruments and risks originated by financial intermediaries come to rest. These activities could be done much more efficiently in a technology sense by far fewer entities, but our seemingly crazy quilt structure creates a different kind of efficiency--one that emphasizes constant cost minimization, innovation, and flexibility. And that is exactly what we saw a couple of weeks ago, when literally within hours of the attack on the World Trade Center--with many of the participants still grieving and with the loss of extraordinary personnel and resources--our financial system was finding ways to return to operation. Some examples will clarify this creativity of our system. With borrowers and lenders uncertain whether the financial markets were open and with communications among issuers, their banks, and the settlement system impaired, there were difficulties in rolling over maturing commercial paper. The resulting shortfalls in the coverage of billions of dollars of maturing paper were managed by rolling fails into the next day's settlement or by drawing on bank lines, causing bank assets to balloon for a few days. Similarly, disruptions in the connectivity of communication lines and the shift to backup sites caused delays in payments and settlements, with billions in funds building up at a small number of participants unable to send out funds covered by similar amounts of Federal Reserve open market operations, overdrafts, and loans to those who could not receive. To facilitate the channeling of dollar liquidity to foreign financial institutions operating in the United States and to meet all appropriate demands for dollar liquidity, thirty-day currency swap lines were arranged with major central banks, again in record volume. Fed and bank balance sheets ballooned with the maldistribution of reserves, and domestic and foreign operations, but there was no fear of either credit or liquidity risk. Fed funds borrowers and lenders, forced to deal directly because brokers were temporarily unavailable, quickly reached agreements to trade at the targeted federal funds rate. Similarly, in response to losses of personnel and equipment at some participants, dealers agreed voluntarily to extend settlement in the Treasury market to T+5. Crucially, lenders--banks in particular--stepped up to meet their commitments, real and implied, to avoid the disruptions that were a large part of the terrorists' objective. The list of adjustments and innovations goes on and on. But the point is clear that we are blessed with a financial system that is creative, that is flexible, that is innovative. Banks--including the central bank--were there when they were needed and did what was required with dispatch. We should be proud of the banking system's role in minimizing the economic fallout of that tragic day.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application of North Fork Bancorporation, Inc., Melville, New York, to acquire Commercial Bank of New York, New York, New York. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan Globalization At the Institute for International Economics Inauguration of the Peter G. Peterson Building, Washington, D.C. October 24, 2001 Chairman Greenspan presented identical remarks at George Washington University, the Robert P. Maxon Lecture, Washington, D.C., December 3, 2001 I am pleased to be with you tonight as the Institute for International Economics dedicates this extraordinary new building. I am also pleased to note that you are celebrating your twentieth year in the business of thinking critically about vital international economic issues. It hardly seems that long. Before the tragic events of September 11, discussions of the international economy had increasingly come to be centered on issues related to the growing integration of our economies. The strife we had witnessed over economic globalization was the twenty-first century's version of debates over societal organization that go back at least to the dawn of the industrial revolution, and many of the intellectual roots of those debates go back far longer. There has been a simmering down of the more vociferous protests against globalization since September 11. But the debate surrounding the increasing cross-border integration of markets inevitably will be rejoined. The issue elicits such strong reaction because it centers on the important question of how economies are organized and, specifically, how individuals deal with one another. Globalization as generally understood involves the increasing interaction of the world's peoples through their national economic systems. Of necessity, these economic systems are reasonably compatible and, in at least some important respects, market oriented. During the past half-century, barriers to trade and to financial flows have generally come down, resulting in a significant broadening of world markets. Expanding markets, in turn, have enhanced competition and nurtured what Joseph Schumpeter called "creative destruction," the continuous scrapping of old technologies to make way for the new. Standards of living rise because the depreciation and other cash flows of industries employing older, increasingly obsolescent, technologies are marshaled, along with new savings, to finance the production of capital assets that almost always embody cutting-edge technologies. This is the process by which wealth is created incremental step by incremental step. It presupposes a continuous churning of an economy in which the new displaces the old. The process is particularly evident among those nations that have opened their borders to increased competition. Through its effect on economic growth, globalization has been a powerful force acting to raise standards of living. More open economies have recorded the best growth performance; in contrast, countries with inward-oriented policies have done less well. Importantly, as real incomes have risen on average, the incidence of poverty has declined. Nevertheless technological advance and globalization distress those who once thrived in industries that were at the forefront of technology but which have since become increasingly noncompetitive. In each step of incremental advance, the distance between gainers and losers is necessarily narrow. So it is understandable that our exceptionally complex system for the international distribution of goods, services, and finance is not universally recognized as successful at enhancing standards of living and promoting civil values worldwide. Indeed, those who perceived the need to protect economies from open trade have endeavored since its inception to slow or even reverse the forces supporting global expansion. It would be most unfortunate if the wheels of progress were stopped because of an incapacity or unwillingness to assist those disadvantaged by these broader gains, an issue I will address later. In recent years, protectionism has also manifested itself in a somewhat different guise by challenging the moral roots of capitalism and globalization. At the risk of oversimplification, I would separate the differing parties in that debate into three groups. First, there are those who believe that relatively unfettered capitalism is the only economic organization consistent with individual and political freedom. In a second group are those who accept capitalism as the only practical means to achieve higher standards of living but who are disturbed by the seeming incivility of many market practices and outcomes. In very broad brush terms, the prevalence with which one encounters allegations of incivility defines an important difference in economic views that distinguishes the United States from continental Europe -- two peoples having deeply similar roots in political freedom and democracy. A more pronounced distinction separates both of these groups from a third group, which views societal organization based on the profit motive and corporate culture as fundamentally immoral. This group questions in particular whether the distribution of wealth that results from greater economic interactions among countries is, in some sense, "fair." Here terms such as "exploitation," "subversion of democratic choice," and other value-charged notions dominate the debate. These terms too often substitute for a rigorous discussion of the difficult tradeoffs we confront in advancing the economic welfare of our nations. Such an antipathy to "corporate culture" has sent tens of thousands into the streets to protest what they see as "exploitive capitalism" in its most visible form -- the increased globalization of our economies. Though presumably driven by a desire to foster a better global society, most protestors hold misperceptions about how markets work and how to interpret market outcomes. To be sure, those outcomes can sometimes appear perverse to the casual observer. In today's marketplace, for example, baseball players earn much more than tenured professors. But that discrepancy expresses the market fact that more people are willing to pay to see a ball game than to attend a college lecture. I may not personally hold the same relative valuation of those activities as others, but that is what free markets are about. They reflect and give weight to the values of the whole of society, not just those of any one segment. Market doubters sometimes respond that consumers' values are manipulated by corporate advertising that induces people to purchase goods and services they do not really want. Most corporate advertising directors would wish that were true. Instead, they will argue that the evidence suggests that only the best products in the marketplace win over time. Consumers are not foolish; indeed, it would be an act of considerable hubris to argue otherwise. What are the dissidents' solutions to the alleged failures of globalization? They are, in fact, seemingly quite diverse. Frequently, they appear to favor politically imposed systems, employing the power of the state to override the outcomes arrived at through voluntary exchange. The historical record of such approaches does not offer much encouragement. One would be hard pressed to cite examples of free and prosperous societies that shunned the marketplace. Contrary to much current opinion, developing countries need more globalization, not less. Such a course would likely bring with it greater economic stability and political freedom. Indeed, probably the single most effective action that the industrial countries could implement to alleviate the terrible problem of poverty in many developing countries would be to open, unilaterally, markets to imports from those countries. Setting aside the arguments of the protestors, even among those committed to market-oriented economies, important differences remain about the view of capitalism and the role of globalization. These differences are captured most clearly for me in a soliloquy attributed to a prominent European leader several years ago. He asked, "What is the market? It is the law of the jungle, the law of nature. And what is civilization? It is the struggle against nature." While acknowledging the ability of competition to promote growth, many such observers, nonetheless, remain concerned that economic actors, to achieve that growth, are required to behave in a manner governed by the law of the jungle. In contrast to these skeptical views, the ethical merits of market-driven outcomes are argued with increasing vigor by many others, especially in the United States: The crux of the argument is that because unencumbered markets reflect the value preferences of consumers, the resulting price signals direct a nation's savings into those capital assets that maximize the production of goods and services most valued by consumers. Largely unfettered markets create a consumer-led society. In such an economy, the value of reputation, capitalized as good will in the market value of companies, competitively encourages perseverance in pursuing the objectives of quality and excellence. Moreover, the limited role for government in these arrangements is conducive to greater political freedom. Such a paradigm, however, is viewed by many at the other end of the philosophical spectrum as obsessively materialistic and largely lacking in meaningful cultural values. But is there a simple tradeoff between civil conduct, as defined by those who find raw competitive behavior demeaning, and the quality of material life they, nonetheless, seek? It is not obvious that such a tradeoff exists in any meaningful sense when viewed from a longer-term perspective. Clearly not all activities undertaken in markets are civil. Many, though legal, are decidedly unsavory. Violation of law and breaches of trust do undermine the efficiency of markets. But solid legal foundations and the discipline of the marketplace limit these aberrations. On net, vigorous competition over the years has produced a significant rise in the quality of life for the vast majority of the population in market-oriented economies, including those at the bottom of the income distribution. During the past century, economic growth created resources far in excess of those required to maintain subsistence. That surplus in democratic capitalist societies has, in large measure, been employed to improve the quality of life along many dimensions. To cite a short list: (1) greater longevity, owing first to the widespread development of clean, potable water, and later to rapid advances in medical technology, (2) a universal system of education that enabled greatly increased social mobility, (3) vastly improved conditions of work, and (4) the ability to enhance our environment by setting aside natural resources rather than employing them to sustain a minimum level of subsistence. At a fundamental level, we have used the substantial increases in wealth generated by our market-driven economy to purchase what many would view as greater civility. If the issue of a tradeoff between growth and civility were not in dispute, much of the debate that surrounds globalization today would have long since been silenced in its favor. But even if open and free global markets are consonant with political freedom and have in the past contributed greatly to raising world standards of living, there still remains the important practical issue: Can globalization continue to work? Is it as viable a model for world economic growth now as it has been in the past? Despite globalization's patent capacity to elevate standards of living over time, we have been challenged by periodic disruptions in the system's functioning. The financial crises of 1997-98 and the stresses apparent in some emerging-market economies over the past year underscore evident structural weaknesses in our global system. It can readily be argued that certain conditions of stress increase the probability of emerging-market country default and potential contagion. For example, extensive short-term foreign currency liabilities of financial intermediaries that are used to fund unhedged long-term lending in a domestic currency are tinder awaiting conflagration. This is especially the case if foreign currency reserves are inadequate and exchange rates are fixed. But why has this phenomenon in different garb reappeared so frequently in the postwar era? No nation deliberately seeks to expose itself to financial distress and bankruptcy. But political pressures can lead to actions that increase these risks. In all economies, political constituencies seek to employ the powers of the state to increase their share of limited government resources. While the record of developed economies is far from unblemished, they have had greater success in fending off such demands. One indication of that success is that exchange rate regimes have not often been upended by domestic political pressures in these economies. Although the range of outcomes has been wide, many emerging-market nations have had less success in insulating their international financial positions from domestic political pressures. Those pressures, at times, have become exceptionally difficult to deal with. To close the gap between the financial demands of political constituencies and the limited real resources available to their governments, many countries too often have bridged the difference by borrowing from foreign investors. In effect, the path of least resistance has been external borrowing rather than confronting politically difficult tradeoffs. Periodically, as an economy borrows its way to the edge of insolvency with debt denominated in foreign currency, government debt-raising capacity appears to vanish virtually overnight. It is this vanishing capacity that characterizes almost all financial crises. Lending institutions will provide funds beyond the immediate visible short-term cash flow of a borrower only if they perceive that maturing debt will be capable of being rolled over. The first whiff of inadequacy in debt-raising capacity induces a run to the exits -- not unlike a bank run. Thus, an economy's necessary condition for solvency, indeed, a necessary condition for the stability of global finance, is the maintenance of significant unused financing capacity. A developed nation's financial status is largely defined by an unquestioned capacity to roll over its debt seemingly without limit into the future. Developed nations, of course, have on occasion run into refunding difficulties and found international lending markets closed. But those occasions have been rare. What then is an adequate buffer? What level of foreign currency reserves and tradeable real assets does an emerging-market economy need to obtain and sustain debt-capacity credibility? That level, of course, can be known only in retrospect. One measure of the probability that the current or prospective level of reserves will be adequate can be gleaned from the yield spread of dollar-denominated government debt over U.S. Treasuries. That spread reflects not only the risk of dollar credit default but also the underlying strength of the domestic currency. Exchange-market pressures on the latter obviously reduce dollar debt-raising capacity. Debt capacity, by this model, is reached before rising nominal interest rates and, hence, payments on government debt threaten a vicious fiscal cycle of ever-growing deficits and debt. Unless debt capacity is continuously confirmed in the marketplace by modest spreads, "bank run" crises seem inevitable in such a leveraged system. How then does an emerging-market nation obtain and sustain debt-capacity credibility? First, it needs to create a much larger relative reserve buffer than that of a developed nation -- which has a larger capacity to draw on real resources, through taxation if necessary, to make good on its obligations. Nations that have met the market test no longer need to put up "collateral" to certify their financial prudence. Of course, even adequate or outsized reserves may not be perceived as sufficient for some, if the political system is judged unstable. In this regard, there are two critical criteria that all lenders require for government debt issuance: (1) a legal system that is presumed to protect property rights of the lender through the maturity of the debt instrument and (2) if the debt is denominated in a foreign currency, a fiscal and monetary regime that is presumed to be sufficiently responsible to ensure repayment in equivalent real resources. To be sure, one can borrow with these conditions less than fully satisfied, but only at interest rates that price the risk. Too often these rates are at levels inconsistent with fiscal stability or ongoing debt-raising capacity. At root, debt-raising capacity is not a technical issue; it is a profoundly political one, which means that it is driven by the values and culture of the society. Unless consensus exists within a society as to resource limits to which all must adhere, an adequate debt-capacity buffer will be difficult to achieve and maintain. The United States has benefited enormously from the opening up of international markets in the postwar period. We have access to a wide range of goods and services for consumption; our industries produce and employ cutting-edge technologies; and the opportunities created by these technologies have attracted capital inflows from abroad. These capital inflows, in turn, have reduced the costs of building our country's capital stock and added to the productivity of our workers. It would be a great tragedy if progress toward greater openness were stopped or reversed. Rather than inhibiting international competition to assist those displaced by "creative destruction," we should be directing our efforts at enhancing job skills and retraining workers--a process in which the private market is already engaged. If necessary, selected income maintenance programs can be employed for those over a certain age, where retraining is problematic. Protectionism will only slow the inevitable transition of our workforce to more productive endeavors. To be sure, an added few years on the job may enable some workers to reach retirement with reasonable security and dignity, but if we hinder competitive progress, we will almost certainly slow overall economic growth and keep frozen in place younger workers whose opportunities to secure jobs with better long-run prospects diminish with time. Terrorism poses a challenge to the remarkable record of globalization. A global society reflects an ever more open economic environment in which participants are free to engage in commerce and finance wherever in the world the possibilities of increased value added arise. It fosters ever greater cross-border contact and further exploitation of the values of specialization but on a global scale. Fear of terrorist acts, however, has the potential to induce disengagement from activities, both domestic and cross border. If we allow terrorism to undermine our freedom of action, we could reverse at least part of the palpable gains achieved by postwar globalization. It is incumbent upon us not to allow that to happen. I trust that we will go forward expeditiously with the pending new trade round. The differences to be resolved in such talks are small relative to the larger issue of maintaining our freedoms to travel and trade on a global scale. Globalization admittedly is an exceptionally abstract concept to convey to the general public. Economists can document the analytic ties of trade to growth and standards of living. A far greater challenge for us has been, and will continue to be, making clear that globalization is an endeavor that can spread worldwide the values of freedom and civil contact -- the antithesis of terrorism. Globalization, in addition to its myriad material benefits, needs to be seen as a reflection of human freedom in economic terms by a vast majority of its participants. It needs to be seen as offering opportunities to raise the standards of living of all participants in the world trading system. If we fail to make that case, renewed barriers to commerce could fill the void, and the advances associated with globalization could be slowed or even reversed. Should that occur, a few might be better off. Surely, the world will not.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of a consent Order of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty against the McIlroy Bank and Trust, Fayetteville, Arkansas, a state member bank. The McIlroy Bank and Trust, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order in connection with its alleged violations of the Board's regulations implementing the National Flood Insurance Act. The McIlroy Bank and Trust is paying a civil money penalty of $10,500. A copy of the Order is attached.
No content found
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan The importance of financial education and literacy Before the National Council on Economic Education, Chicago, Illinois (via videoconference) October 26, 2001 I am pleased to address your conference today. Education is a critical issue for our country, and economic education is of particular concern to those of us at the Federal Reserve. Throughout our economic history, we have seen significant adjustments to enable markets to respond to the demand for services. Structural changes in recent years have heightened competition, encouraging market efficiencies that continue to help drive down costs, and fostered the emergence of increasingly diverse and highly specialized organizations. These organizations--ranging from firms that offer their services through electronic delivery mechanisms to local partnerships that provide one-on-one counseling and financing arrangements--provide consumers increased access to a variety of credit and savings instruments. For this ever-more complex financial system to function effectively, widespread dissemination of timely financial and other relevant information among educated market participants is essential. Informed judgments by consumers are required to foster the most efficient allocation of capital. Constant change, of course, can be unsettling no matter how beneficial, and one challenge economic and financial educators face is overcoming consumer anxiety about the new products and choices they encounter. But just as the rapid adoption of new information technologies has expanded the scope and utility of our financial products, so too has it increased our means for addressing some of the associated educational challenges. For example, universities provide remote learning options to allow students to pursue continuing education via the Internet. Financial service consumers can use web-based calculators to create customized budgets, or to develop long-term savings strategies for retirement or a college education. In both scenarios, technological advances represent the opportunity for achieving efficiencies and exercising preferences. This promise can only be met, however, when the end-users know how to obtain pertinent information and how to capitalize on the available knowledge. Education enabling individuals to overcome their reluctance or inability to take full advantage of technological advances and product innovation can be a means of increasing economic opportunity. As market forces continue to expand the range of financial services, consumers will have more choice and flexibility in how they manage their financial matters, and they will demand education about use of the new technologies to make informed decisions. Indeed, surveys repeatedly demonstrate a strong link between education and the use of new financial technologies. For example, data from the Federal Reserve's periodic Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) suggest that a higher level of education significantly increases the chances that a household will use an electronic banking product. In particular, in 1998, the typical user of an electronic source of information for savings or borrowing decisions had a college degree--a level of education currently achieved by only about one-third of U.S. households. The most recent data from the survey reveal a good news-bad news picture of the financial status of households, providing evidence that we need to reach further to engage those who have not been able to participate fully. For example, while the median real net worth for all families increased 17-1/2 percent between 1995 and 1998, this trend did not hold true where the head of the household had a high-school level of education or less, family earnings were less than $25,000 annually, or the ethnicity of the respondent was non-white or Hispanic. That families with low-to-moderate incomes and minorities did not appear to fully benefit from the highly favorable economic developments of the mid-1990s is, of course, troubling, and the survey results warrant a closer look. In the details, we find that families with incomes below $25,000 did increase their direct or indirect holdings of stock, and more reported that they had a transactions account. However, they were less likely to hold nonfinancial assets--particularly homes, which constitute the bulk of the value of assets for those below the top quintile according to income. At the same time, one encouraging finding from surveys conducted by the Bureau of the Census is the increasing homeownership rates for minorities. For example, the homeownership rate for blacks increased from 42.9 percent in 1995 to 48.6 percent through the second quarter of 2001. The homeownership rate for Hispanics also rose, from 42.0 percent in 1995 to 46.1 percent through the second quarter of 2001. This trend may be a sign of improved access to credit for minorities. Other recent findings of the SCF include a rise in families' median level of debt burden, financial stress (defined as debt payments that represent more than 40 percent of income), and incidence of late payments on debt. The findings showed increases in each of these categories across all income and age groups, with the highest levels of financial stress among households headed by people 65 and older and earning less than $25,000 annually. Obviously, falling into financial distress is not solely the result of lack of knowledge about finance. But in many cases such knowledge could avoid or ameliorate the negative consequences of uninformed decisions. Thus, in considering means by which to improve the financial status of families, education can play an important role. While data to measure the efficacy of financial education are not plentiful, the limited research available is encouraging. For example, a recent study by one of the nation's largest purchasers of home mortgages finds that homebuyers who obtain structured homeownership education have reduced rates of loan delinquency. Similarly, an evaluation conducted by the National Endowment for Financial Education on its high-school-based programs found that participation in financial-planning programs improved students' knowledge, behavior, and confidence with respect to personal finance, with nearly half of participants beginning to save more as a result of the program. Another study of the relationship between financial behavior and financial outcomes revealed that comprehension of the general principles of sound financial behavior, such as budgeting and saving, is actually more beneficial in producing successful financial results over time than specific and detailed information on financial transactions. These findings underscore the importance of beginning the learning process as early as possible. Indeed, in many respects, improving basic financial education at the elementary and secondary school level can provide a foundation for financial literacy, helping younger people avoid poor financial decisions that can take years to overcome. In particular, competency in mathematics--both in numerical manipulation and in understanding its conceptual foundations--enhances a person's ability to handle the more ambiguous and qualitative relationships that dominate our day-to-day decisionmaking. For example, through an understanding of compounding interest, one can appreciate the cumulative benefit of routine saving. Similarly, learning how to conduct research in a library or on the Internet can be instructive in where and how to look for information to evaluate decisions. Educational efforts to improve fundamental mathematic and problem-solving skills can foster knowledgeable consumers who can take full advantage of the sophisticated financial services offered in an ever-changing marketplace. Many of you are involved in institutions that are working hard to enhance basic education about economics and finance, and it is a challenge the Federal Reserve takes seriously as well. Gary Stern, President of the Minneapolis Federal Reserve Bank, has been an inspiration in the Fed as well as within National Council on Economic Education. The economic educators of the Federal Reserve System have recently launched an interactive web site offering students, educators and the general public an introduction to the workings of the Fed and the nation's banking system. The goal is to offer consumers a clearer picture of how, for example, the Federal Reserve's decisions influence the economy and consequently impact their monetary choices. The Federal Reserve also has a keen interest in encouraging and measuring the effectiveness of financial literacy programs. Last year, for example, we hosted a forum at the Federal Reserve Board in Washington on credit education that focused on identifying the most effective tools and techniques. More recently, we have asked for studies that evaluate the impact of such training initiatives in our call for papers for the Community Affairs Research Conference scheduled for the spring of 2003. Measurement of the quality and long-term success of these efforts will be particularly useful to the Federal Reserve System as we develop and distribute financial and economic literacy products through our Community Affairs and Public Affairs Offices. I hope our efforts in this regard will be of assistance to you as well. In closing, let me reiterate that the pace of technological change and competitive pressures in the economy can only increase. These changes will affect both financial and nonfinancial institutions around the world. We cannot know the precise directions in which technological change will take us, but the role of banks and other providers of financial services will continue to be significantly affected by the same basic forces that guide the real economy. Building bridges between our educational institutions, the business sector, and community organizations will no doubt be an essential aspect of our efforts to increase familiarity with new technological and financial tools that are fundamental to improving individual economic well-being. Such efforts, and educators like you, will have a critical bearing on how well we meet the challenges of an increasingly knowledge-based global economy.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application of McIlroy Bank & Trust, Fayetteville, Arkansas, to merge with Central Bank and Trust, Little Rock, Arkansas; The Farmers & Merchant Bank, Prairie Grove, Arkansas; and Springdale Bank & Trust, Springdale, Arkansas. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.