Testimony of Governor Laurence H. Meyer Merchant banking Before the Subcommittee on Capital Markets, Insurance, and Government Sponsored Enterprises and the Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit of the Committee on Financial Services U.S. House of Representatives April 4, 2001 I am pleased to appear before the Subcommittee on Capital Markets, Insurance, and Government Sponsored Enterprises and the Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit to outline the rules recently adopted jointly by the Federal Reserve Board and the Secretary of the Treasury to allow financial holding companies to engage in merchant banking activities under the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act. I will also discuss the proposal recently published by the Federal Reserve, the OCC and the FDIC to establish regulatory minimum capital requirements for equity investment activities conducted by banking organizations. When I last appeared before this Subcommittee to address the topic of merchant banking, the Board and the Department of the Treasury were in the middle of considering comments on rules we had proposed only recently before the testimony. As I indicated at that time, our experience has been that public comments are generally very helpful, and provide us with valuable insights and information from practitioners, analysts, other policy makers and informed members of the public. That is in fact what happened in this case. The Board and the Treasury received a significant amount of useful information and comment that led us to revise in some important respects the rules that implement the merchant banking powers in the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act. The comments also caused the Board to rethink and revise our proposed capital treatment for equity investment activities. We have also consulted with our fellow banking agencies regarding the appropriate capital treatment for equity investment activities. As a result of the comments and those interagency consultations, we have significantly revised our capital proposal and again sought public comment on a proposed capital approach. The comment period on that proposal is open until April 16. Before discussing the merchant banking rule and the capital proposal, I will outline both the final rule that we and the Secretary of the Treasury adopted to implement the merchant banking provisions and the revised capital proposal. Let me start with some background that I hope will help put both what we did and what we have proposed in context. A. The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act. The Bank Holding Company Act generally prohibits bank holding companies from owning more than 5 percent of the voting stock of non-financial companies, with limited exceptions. This prohibition was included in the Act in 1956 and extended in 1970 because Congress has long been concerned that the mixing of banking and commerce could result in a number of adverse effects. Among the concerns are that mixing banking and commerce could result in concentration of economic power in a few large conglomerates, less stringent credit standards for and higher risk exposures to affiliates, less attractive credit terms to unaffiliated commercial firms, and other similar conflicts of interest, all of which could reduce the availability of credit to unaffiliated companies and create greater risks to the federal deposit insurance funds and ultimately the taxpayer. The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act did not remove this general prohibition. In fact, as part of the consideration of that Act, Congress considered and rejected the idea of allowing banking organizations to affiliate broadly with commercial firms. At the same time, Congress recognized that there are some forms of ownership of commercial firms by banking organizations that are the functional equivalent of financing for small businesses. It was on this basis that Congress authorized financial holding companies to engage in merchant banking activities. Toward this end, the GLB Act contains several provisions in its authorization of merchant banking activities that are designed to distinguish merchant banking investments from the more general mixing of banking and commerce. In particular, the GLB Act defines permissible merchant banking investments as investments that meet two important requirements: the investment may only be held for a period of time to enable the resale of the investment, and, while the investment is held by the FHC, the investing FHC may not routinely manage or operate the commercial firm except as necessary or required to obtain a reasonable return on the investment on resale. In addition, the GLB Act imposed limits on bank funding of portfolio companies owned by the bank's parent holding company and on cross-marketing activities between banks and portfolio companies owned by the same financial holding company. These restrictions were also intended to reinforce the separation between banks and the commercial companies owned in reliance on the new merchant banking authority. B. Summary of the Final Rule governing Merchant Banking Activities. The final rule adopted by the Board and the Treasury in late January of this year focuses on defining these two important restrictions. In addition, the final rule explains the types of risk management policies, procedures and systems that the agencies expect will be in place at FHCs that engage in merchant banking activities, and the manner in which the cross-marketing restrictions and inter-affiliate lending restrictions imposed by the GLB Act apply. Finally, the rule temporarily establishes an interim procedure for agency review of a FHC's risk management policies and systems in the event the organization seeks to commit a significant portion of its capital to merchant banking activities. Together, these provisions are important for maintaining the difference between merchant banking activities and the authorization of banking and commerce within the same organization. They also support the important objective of encouraging the safe and sound exercise of the new merchant banking authority. As I suggested earlier, the final rule was modified in several important respects from the original interim rule that was the subject of my testimony last June. These changes reflect insights and suggestions made by commenters that we believe improve the workability of the rule while maintaining the differences required by the GLB Act and the BHC Act between merchant banking, on the one hand, and banking and commerce, on the other. Critically, the final rule also does not sacrifice the safety and soundness benefits of the rule. I will point out the most significant changes between the interim rule and the final rule in my remarks. The final rule provides guidance on the GLB Act's requirement that merchant banking investments be held only for a period of time long enough to enable the sale or disposition of each investment on a reasonable basis. Generally, the rule permits a 10-year holding period for direct investments and a 15-year holding period for investments in private equity funds. The Board may approve a longer holding period on a case-by-case basis. Many commenters acknowledged that merchant banking investments are rarely held beyond these periods and, in fact, are typically sold within 3 to 5 years after the investment is made. The longer holding periods permitted in the final rule allow some flexibility for FHCs to adjust their investment exit strategies to account for fluctuations in market conditions. While some commenters advocated no restrictions on holding periods, this approach did not appear to be either suitable or workable. The GLB Act itself contemplates that investments would not be held indefinitely, and the agencies believe that it is better to establish a regulatory safe harbor that gives assurance regarding holding periods, and thereby allow FHCs to plan their investment strategies, than for the agencies to forego providing regulatory guidance and impose decisions on holding periods for each investment on an ad hoc basis through the supervisory process. The uncertainty and potential for reaching different decisions regarding holding periods as different supervisors examine competing banking organizations would frustrate planning by investing companies and, we believe in the end, lead to a firm rule in any event. To accommodate situations in which the regulatory safe harbor is not sufficient in an individual case, the final rule allows financial holding companies to seek approval, when events require it, to hold an investment longer than the periods established in the rule. As I noted earlier, the GLB Act restricts the ability of FHCs to routinely manage or operate companies held under the merchant banking authority. The final rule contains several safe harbors and examples of routine management and operation. For example, the final rule allows representatives of a FHC to serve on the board of directors of a portfolio company without running afoul of the routine management restrictions. In addition, a FHC may enter into agreements that restrict extraordinary actions of the portfolio company, such as the sale of major assets or acquisition of other companies, without the approval of the investing company. Director interlocks and agreements that govern extraordinary transactions are common in connection with merchant banking investments and allow the investing company to monitor its investment and the activities of the portfolio company without becoming involved in the routine management or operation of the company. The final rule also identifies several situations that would be considered restricted routine management of the portfolio company. In particular, a FHC would be considered to be routinely managing or operating a company if an officer or employee of the FHC is also an executive officer of the portfolio company. In addition, agreements that restrict decisions made in the ordinary course of the business of the portfolio company are considered to be routine management of the company, and thus, are permitted by the final rule only in special circumstances. The interim rule originally provided that any type of officer or employee interlock between a FHC and a portfolio company would be considered to involve the FHC in routinely managing the portfolio company. Commenters argued that employee interlocks may allow FHCs to share expertise--both giving and gaining--with portfolio companies without becoming involved in the routine management or operation of the company. In response to commenters, the final rule has been modified from the interim rule to convert its absolute prohibition into a rebuttable presumption. This provides a mechanism for allowing a specific employee and junior officer interlock in the limited situation where the interlock does not rise to the level of routine management or operation of the portfolio company. The GLB Act allows an investing FHC to routinely manage or operate a portfolio company in special circumstances when intervention is necessary or required in order to enable the investing company to obtain a reasonable return on the investment on its resale or disposition. The final rule adopts this statutory standard. For example, a FHC may become involved in the routine management of a portfolio company to avoid or address a significant operating loss or in connection with a loss of senior management at the portfolio company. The final rule also replaces the interim rule's requirement that a FHC obtain Board approval to routinely manage a company for more than six months, with a provision that the FHC provide the Board with notice in the event that the FHC routinely manages a portfolio company for more than nine months. This notice provision will allow the Board to monitor management interventions to assure compliance with the limitations in the GLB Act and the final rule. The final rule also contains several provisions that are designed to encourage the safe and sound conduct of merchant banking activities. In particular, the final rule requires that FHCs establish policies, systems and procedures to monitor and address the risks associated with their merchant banking activities. The final rule provides FHCs with significant discretion in formulating the policies, systems and procedures that best fit the management style of the FHC and the type, scope and nature of the FHC's merchant banking activities. The Board recently issued supervisory guidance that outlines some of the best practices employed by merchant bankers for managing the risks of equity investment activities. That guidance has been well received by the industry as useful and flexible. The final rule also generally requires that FHCs retain records sufficient to allow the FHC to monitor and assess the risks and exposures associated with their merchant banking activities. The final rule allows FHCs to assemble the records that best fit these purposes, and contemplates that FHCs may satisfy these requirements with the types of records and reports kept in the ordinary course of conducting merchant banking activities. The final rule does not adopt the provision of the original interim rule that required these records to be maintained at a central location. FHCs must already make all of their records, including their merchant banking records, available to the Federal Reserve in the examination process. The interim rule included two reporting requirements for FHCs engaged in merchant banking activities. One was a relatively brief quarterly report of the gross amounts of investments made by the FHC, and the other required annual reporting of investments that were held for a substantial period--seven years or longer. The final rule does not include either of these reporting requirements. A limited amount of information regarding equity investments is already collected by the banking agencies on existing regulatory reports. The Board is in the process of developing other reports that would focus on collection of additional basic information regarding equity investment activities, such as the total amount invested in and carrying value of privately owned securities and publicly traded shares owned by the banking organization, and on individual merchant banking investments held for extended periods. The Board will separately invite public comment on any new reporting requirements in the near future. The interim rule contained two thresholds that triggered agency review of FHCs that devote significant amounts of capital to merchant banking activities. These thresholds--one triggered when total merchant banking investments exceed the lesser of $6 billion or 30 percent of the FHC's Tier 1 capital, and the other triggered when the direct investments of a FHC excluding investments in private equity funds exceed the lesser of $4 billion or 20 percent of the FHC's Tier 1 capital--were designed to allow the Board to ensure that FHCs that devote significant amounts of capital to merchant banking activities had in place the types of risk management policies, procedures and systems to conduct these activities safely and soundly. The Board and the Treasury indicated that they would review the continued need for these thresholds when a final capital requirement for merchant banking activities was adopted. Even though these thresholds were high and applied only to the newly authorized merchant banking activities, these thresholds were very controversial and were viewed by many commenters as, in effect, caps on their merchant banking activities. Consequently, commenters strongly urged the agencies to eliminate this review process, or, at a minimum, to remove the component of the thresholds that was based on the absolute dollar size of the FHC's merchant banking portfolio. The agencies continue to believe that capital and strong risk management policies and procedures provide the best protection for FHCs that engage in merchant banking activities. Consequently, in line with the comments on this matter and the intent behind the original proposal, the final rule takes two steps. First, the absolute dollar thresholds in the interim rule were eliminated from the final rule. Accordingly, the thresholds are triggered only when merchant banking activities are at high proportions to the FHC's capital. And recall, the thresholds trigger an agency review process--they are not an absolute cap on activity. Consistent with the original proposal, the final rule also contains a sunset provision that automatically eliminates the entire threshold review process once the banking agencies have implemented final rules governing the capital requirements for merchant banking activities. As I'll discuss in a moment, the agencies have already jointly proposed a new capital treatment for public comment, and are working toward adopting a final capital rule. I should note also that the thresholds may be exceeded with Board approval, and one experienced investment firm has already reached the thresholds and received Board approval to exceed the thresholds. The GLB Act contained two provisions that govern the relationship between depository institutions and portfolio companies owned by the same FHC: one prohibits cross-marketing activities and the other restricts credit and other funding transactions. Both are contained in the GLB Act to reinforce the separation between banking and commerce. The prohibition in the GLB Act on the ability of a depository institution controlled by a FHC to cross-market its products and services with a portfolio company that is held under the merchant banking authority is included in the final rule. The final rule also clarifies that this cross-marketing restriction does not prevent a depository institution from marketing the shares of private equity funds controlled by an affiliated FHC, and does not apply to situations in which the FHC owns less than 5 percent of the voting shares of the portfolio company. The final rule also adopts the presumption established by the GLB Act that applies the limits on inter-affiliate transactions contained in section 23A of the Federal Reserve Act to transactions between a depository institution controlled by the investing FHC and any portfolio company in which the FHC owns at least a 15 percent equity interest. In response to suggestions made by commenters, the final rule includes several safe harbors from this statutory presumption for situations in which the Board would consider, absent evidence to the contrary, that the presumption is rebutted and the restrictions of section 23A would not apply. C. Capital Proposal. An integral part of our original merchant banking proposal involved the regulatory capital that would be required to support merchant banking activities. As anyone who has experienced a down-turn in the stock market will attest, an investor's chances of financial survival are greater if the investor has used capital rather than debt to finance their investments. And in the case of banking organizations, it is also important that the organization have sufficient capital after losses associated with declines in stock prices to support its other activities. The Board's capital proposal was intended to offset some of the risks from merchant banking investments by requiring financial holding companies to limit the amount of debt they used to support their merchant banking activities. While many merchant bankers fund their merchant banking investments entirely with equity capital--that is, each dollar of investment is funded with one dollar of their own equity capital--the Board originally had proposed a regulatory minimum requirement of 50 cents of equity capital for each dollar invested in merchant banking. This proposal attracted quite a bit of comment, and is an example of an area where we learned from the public comments. Importantly, most of the commenters did not disagree with our concern that merchant banking activities are riskier than more traditional banking activities. Nonetheless, most commenters criticized our proposed capital treatment, and several offered constructive alternative approaches. In addition to reviewing the public comments, we worked with the other Federal banking agencies to improve the proposal in ways that took account of commenters concerns but also addressed the necessity for risky assets to be adequately capitalized by equity. Together with the other agencies we were able to develop a new, revised capital proposal that would apply uniformly to equity investments held by bank holding companies and those held by depository institutions. The banking agencies were guided by several principles in considering the appropriate levels of capital that should be required as a regulatory minimum to support equity investment activities. First, equity investment activities in nonfinancial companies generally involve greater risks than traditional bank and financial activities. As I noted, this is a principle over which there is little disagreement. Industry data on venture capital investments indicate losses on one-fourth to one-third of individual deals. For portfolio investments, studies suggest that, while some portfolios achieve extraordinary returns, nearly 20 percent lose capital. I explained in much more detail our analysis of the risks associated with equity investment activities in my testimony before this Subcommittee last June. If anything, the activity in the equity markets since last June has confirmed that analysis, and few of the commenters on our original capital proposal disagreed with the substance of that analysis or with its conclusion that equity investment activities are significantly riskier activities than most traditional banking activities. A second and related principle is that the financial risks to an organization engaged in equity investment activities increase as the level of its investments accounts for a larger portion of the organization's capital, earnings and activities. Banking organizations have for some time engaged in equity investment activities using various authorities, including primarily Small Business Investment Companies (SBICs) and the authority to make limited passive investments under sections 4(c)(6) and (7) of the BHC Act. When the current capital treatment, which requires a minimum of 4 percent Tier 1 capital (6 percent in the case of depository institutions that must meet the regulatory well-capitalized definition), was developed, these equity investment activities were small in relation to the more traditional lending and other activities of these organizations. The level of these investment activities has grown significantly in recent years, however. For example, investments made through SBICs owned by banking organizations have alone more than doubled in the past five years. Industry wide, investments have more than quadrupled over the same period. The grant to financial holding companies of a significant new authority to make equity investments under the GLB Act without many of the restrictions that apply to other authorities currently used by banking organizations to make these investments was an appropriate time to re-evaluate whether existing capital charges were adequate. A third principle guiding the agencies' efforts is that the risk of loss associated with a particular equity investment is likely to be the same regardless of the legal authority used to make the investment or whether the investment is held in the bank holding company or in the bank. In fact, the agencies' supervisory experience is that banking organizations are increasingly making investment decisions and managing equity investment risks as a single business line within the organization and across legal entities. These organizations use different legal authorities available to different legal entities within the organization to conduct a unified equity investment business. In light of these principles, the Board and the other agencies issued a revised proposal that would establish special minimum regulatory capital requirements for equity investments in nonfinancial companies. This capital treatment would apply symmetrically to equity investment activities of bank holding companies and banks. Under the original capital proposal made last March, the Board proposed to apply a uniform 50 percent capital charge to all equity investments made by bank holding companies. The revised proposal would apply a series of marginal capital charges that increase with the level of a banking organization's overall exposure to equity investment activities relative to the institution's Tier 1 capital. Under the new proposal, with several exceptions that I will discuss in a moment, a modest 8 percent equity capital charge would apply to the portion of the banking organization's equity investment portfolio that totals less than 15 percent of the Tier 1 capital of the organization, and a 12 percent equity capital charge would apply to the portion of the portfolio between 15 percent and 25 percent of the banking organization's Tier 1 capital. A 25 percent equity capital charge would be applied to the portion of a portfolio that exceeds 25 percent of the Tier 1 capital of the investing banking organization. These charges are regulatory minima, and FHCs are expected to hold capital based on their assessment of the nature of their capital investments and the quality of the over-all risk management of these portfolios. The agencies announced that they would intensify their supervisory review and oversight of the equity investment activities at all banking organizations, including in particular banking organizations with concentrations in this activity that exceed 50 percent of the organization's equity capital. The agencies also indicated that they would apply higher minimum regulatory capital charges on a case-by-case basis as appropriate in light of supervisory concerns regarding an organization's risk management systems; the risk, nature, size and composition of an organization's portfolio of investments; market conditions; and other relevant information and circumstances. The series of marginal capital charges in our revised proposal is somewhat more complex than the original single-charge proposal. However, we believe that it better reflects the reality that, as an organization concentrates greater amounts of its resources in riskier activities, the organization increases its overall risk profile. In order to continue to operate safely and soundly, a banking organization must increase its capital as it increases its risk profile. Commenters, including a number of members of this Subcommittee, strongly urged the agencies not to impose a higher capital charge than is currently applied on investments made through SBICs. These commenters argued that SBICs serve the important public purpose of encouraging investment in small businesses, are already subject to investment limitations imposed by Congress and the Small Business Administration, and to date have been generally profitable. Commenters made similar arguments in support of an exception from higher capital charges for investments made by state banks under special grandfathering authority preserved by section 24 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act. These investments have also been reviewed and limited by Congress and are subject to further review and limitation by the FDIC. The agencies recognized substantial merit in these arguments. Accordingly, we revised the capital proposal so that it does not generally impose a higher capital charge on investments made through SBICs. Because SBICs may, under certain conditions, hold investments that exceed the statutory limitations imposed on bank investments in SBICs, the revised proposal would apply the higher marginal capital charges to SBIC investments only when the total amount of these investments exceeds 15 percent of the parent bank or bank holding company's Tier 1 capital. This 15 percent threshold allows banking organizations a cushion for growth between the statutory investment limit and the higher capital charges under the revised proposal. The proposal also includes an exception for investments held by state banks in accordance with the special grandfather rights under section 24 of the FDI Act. As commenters noted, these investments are limited by statute in both amount and type, and may only be made by a small, and diminishing group of grandfathered companies. Section 24 of the FDI Act also permits other, non-grandfathered investments with the approval of the FDIC. In nearly all cases, the FDIC has imposed a higher capital charge on these investments than the marginal charges included in the revised interagency proposal. Consequently, although the proposal covers these investments, it would not have an effect on the regulatory capital required for these investments. The proposal would allow the FDIC, in exceptional individual cases, to impose a lesser minimum regulatory capital charge on investments under section 24 where the total of all investments made by the organization under section 24 and through an SBIC is less than 15 percent of the organization's Tier 1 capital. The FDIC also retains authority to impose greater capital requirements on any investment activities under section 24 of the FDI Act as it deems appropriate to protect the deposit insurance funds and assure the safe and sound operation of the investing bank. One of the comments made most often in response to our original capital proposal was that the Board had selectively adopted part of the internal risk models used by banking and securities firms to assess the capital risks and needs of their organization--the part of the model that recognized that equity investment activities are risky activities that require substantial capital support--without also adopting the parts of those internal models that assess lower capital charges to activities with less risk. Some commenters urged the Board to rely on internal capital models for assessing all aspects of regulatory capital requirements. Internal risk-based models for assessing capital adequacy of an organization would, indeed, better reflect the individual risk profile of individual organizations than the more general formulas that currently underlie the agencies' regulatory capital requirements. As a result, we believe that internal capital models are important and ideally should serve as the basis for both economic and regulatory capital requirements. However, the development of internal risk models is still in its infancy, with many organizations only beginning to develop internal models, and, even with those that have begun this task, with categories of assets and activities--such as portfolios of equities--still not adequately factored into most models. We are committed to enhancing our ability as supervisors to assess and aid in the development of strong internal models. We have been working with the Basle Capital Committee on a proposal, recently published for public comment, that would focus regulatory capital requirements at least at large banking organizations on internal risk models developed by the organization and verified by the regulatory agencies. But neither the banking agencies nor most banking organizations are at the stage where we can rely on these models as a replacement for regulatory minimum capital requirements. We view our revised capital proposal for equity investment activities as a bridge to a robust internal model approach--one that covers a banking organization's assets generally and not just a subset of those assets. When we cross that bridge will depend on a number of factors, including how the Basle proposal is received and develops, on the ability of banking organizations to develop their own models, and on our own ability to evaluate and verify the models that develop. For those banking organizations that engage in equity investment activities but choose not to adopt internal capital models, the revised capital proposal will help provide a standard against which we can analyze the organizations' capital adequacy. The invitation for public comments on the revised capital proposal is still open, and will remain open until April 16, 2001. We find the public comment process to be a useful and instructive discipline, especially for analyzing rules that will govern new activities and the banking industry broadly. As always, the Board will carefully review all of the comments that we receive. While we have not reached a final decision on the capital proposal, we believe that we are homing in on a final rule that addresses the information and concerns of commenters, will be workable, and, importantly, will enhance safety and soundness.
Remarks by Governor Edward M. Gramlich At the Community Affairs Research Conference of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, D.C. April 5, 2001
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan The importance of education in today’s economy At the Community Affairs Research Conference of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, D.C. April 6, 2001 I am pleased that this conference has drawn together such a knowledgeable group of economists, academics, lenders, practitioners, and other experts to address issues of great significance to consumers and banking communities. There are, no doubt, many different views on the effects that credit scoring, wealth creation strategies, and the Community Reinvestment Act are having on the availability and accessibility of financial services to lower-income populations and small businesses. But I think we would all agree that sound analysis and open discussion in meetings like this are essential to furthering our understanding of financial markets and how they serve the diverse financial needs of our populace. In my remarks today, I would like to offer some observations on how the rapid adoption of new information technologies has expanded the scope and utility of our financial products and on how we can address some of the challenges these changes pose to our efforts to ensure that our financial system meets the evolving needs of businesses and consumers. Given the importance of accurate and timely information in the financial services industry, it is not surprising that this sector has been affected enormously by the adoption of new technologies. The resultant advances in the flow of information have greatly facilitated the development of a wide range of new financial products. Similarly in the case of household and business credit, computer and telecommunications technologies have lowered the cost and broadened the scope of financial services. As a consequence, we have seen a proliferation of specialized lenders and new financial products that are tailored to meet very specific market needs. At the same time, the development of credit-scoring tools and the securitization of pools of loans hold the potential for opening doors to national credit markets for both consumers and businesses. Overall, our evolving economic and financial systems have been highly successful in promoting growth and higher standards of living for the majority of our citizens. But we need to reach further to engage those who have not been able to participate fully. The results of the Federal Reserve's most recent Survey of Consumer Finances, for example, indicate that families with low-to-moderate incomes and some minority groups did not appear to fully benefit from the highly favorable economic developments of the mid-1990s. Between 1995 and 1998, the median real net worth for all families increased 17-1/2 percent, whereas the median net worth for families with incomes below $25,000 declined and medians for non-whites and Hispanics were little changed. Although this performance leaves much to be desired, positive signs can also be found. For example, between 1995 and 2000 the homeownership rate among minorities rose from 44 percent to 48 percent, and for the first time, the fraction of households without some kind of transaction account fell below ten percent. One challenge we face in expanding opportunity for all Americans is to overcome the anxieties created by technological innovation. In the workplace, for example, significant segments of our population have exhibited fears that their skills will not be adequate to deal with a rapidly changing work environment. Clearly, technological advances make some jobs obsolete--for example, switchboard operators and tenders of typesetting machines. But even for many other workers, a rapidly evolving work environment in which the skill demands of their jobs are changing can lead to very real concerns about losing their jobs. One very tangible response to this anxiety has been a massive increase in the demand for educational services. The day when a high-school or college education would serve a graduate for a lifetime is gone. Today's recipients of diplomas expect to have many jobs and to use a wide range of skills over their working lives. As a result, we are moving toward a more flexible educational system--one that integrates work and training and that serves the needs both of experienced workers at different stages in their careers and of students embarking on their initial course of study. Community colleges, for example, have become important providers of job skills training not just for students who may eventually move on to a four-year college or university but also for individuals with jobs--particularly older workers seeking to retool or retrain. As in the workplace, fostering education that will enable individuals to overcome their reluctance or inability to take full advantage of technological advances and product innovation in the financial sector can be a means of increasing economic opportunity. As market forces continue to expand the range of providers of financial services, consumers will have more choice and flexibility in how they manage their financial matters. They will also need to accumulate the appropriate knowledge on how to use new technologies and on how to make financial decisions in an informed manner. Indeed, surveys repeatedly demonstrate a strong link between education and the use of new financial technologies. For example, data from the Survey of Consumer Finances suggest that a higher level of education significantly increases the chances that a household will use an electronic banking product. In particular, in 1998, the typical user of an electronic source of information for savings or borrowing decisions had a college degree--a level of education currently achieved by only about one-third of U.S. households. Similarly, education can play a critical role in equipping consumers with the fundamental knowledge required to choose among the myriad of products and providers in the financial services industry. This is especially true for populations that have traditionally been underserved by our financial system. In particular, financial literacy education may help to prevent vulnerable consumers from becoming entangled in some types of financially devastating credit arrangements. One long-standing source of concern is abusive lending practices that target specific neighborhoods or vulnerable segments of the population and can result in unaffordable payments, equity stripping, and foreclosure. With this issue in particular consumer and community advocates, bankers, and policymakers have all sought to raise consumer awareness about the dangers of such aberrant lending practices, and financial education is an important component of their efforts. In addition, education can help to provide individuals with the financial knowledge necessary to create household budgets, initiate savings plans, and make strategic investment decisions for their retirement or children's education. Such financial planning can help families to meet their near-term obligations and to maximize their longer-term financial well-being. While data available to measure the efficacy of financial education are not plentiful, the limited research available on the benefits of financial education programs is encouraging. For example, a recent study by Freddie Mac, one of the nation's largest purchasers of home mortgages, finds that homebuyers who obtain structured homeownership education have reduced rates of loan delinquency. Similarly, an evaluation conducted by the National Endowment for Financial Education on its high-school-based programs found that participation in financial- planning programs improved students' knowledge, behavior, and confidence with respect to personal finance, with nearly half of participants beginning to save more as a result of the program. And a recent study of the relationship between financial behavior and financial outcomes revealed that comprehension of the general principles of sound financial behavior, such as budgeting and saving, is actually more beneficial in producing successful financial results over time than specific and detailed information on financial transactions. These findings underscore, in particular, the importance of beginning the learning process as early as possible. Indeed, in many respects, improving basic financial education at the elementary and secondary school level is essential to providing a foundation for financial literacy that can help prevent younger people from making poor financial decisions that can take years to overcome. For example, through a fundamental understanding of the mathematics of compounding interest, one can appreciate the cumulative benefit of routine saving. Similarly, learning how to conduct research in a library or on the Internet can be instructive in where and how to look for information to evaluate decisions. As I noted earlier, we have seen the market respond to an increased demand for conceptual job skills by increasing the range of educational options available to individuals. We are beginning to see similar efforts to provide consumers with information and training that will improve their knowledge on financial matters throughout their lives. For example, the U.S. military, in response to surveys that revealed that nearly one-third of enlisted service members reported moderate-to-severe difficulty in paying bills, has mandated that all incoming enlisted personnel receive financial education as a means of reducing stress related to personal fiscal matters. Similarly, we are starting to see some school systems introduce financial management classes as part of their high-school curricula and many employers are taking up the challenge as well. At the Federal Reserve Board, for example, interest in financial education prompted an employee committee to host a seminar on financial planning strategies, and our Consumer and Community Affairs staff recently hosted several well-attended educational programs for employees who are thinking of buying their first home. More fundamentally, the recognition that more-productive workers and learning go hand- in-hand is becoming ever more visible both in the workplace and in schools. Similar collaborative efforts to increase awareness of, and access to, information that promotes financial literacy are increasingly seen as necessary to ensure that consumers can meet their immediate obligations as well as achieve their broader goals of buying a home, funding higher education for themselves or their children, and preparing for retirement. Just as we have recognized how critical it is to demystify technology and to increase workers' comfort and familiarity with the new tools required for their success, so should we work to educate consumers on evaluating the broad array of products offered by financial service providers and to empower them to make the choices that contribute to their overall economic well-being. An example of a collaborative effort in which the Federal Reserve System is involved is the Treasury Department's financial literacy initiative. This nonpartisan, public-private endeavor promotes the development of personal financial literacy skills by capitalizing on the educational efforts of the partners. In particular, an Internet web site was created that offers users the ability to instantly access a broad spectrum of financial-management information from a wide variety of market participants, including governmental agencies, associations, and private-sector financial services providers. As researchers, lenders, and leaders in community economic development, you have all been dealing with the practical effects of technological change in the financial services industry, which have increased opportunity but have also presented important challenges. The twenty-first century will certainly bring us new technologies and, along with them, new challenges and new possibilities. We cannot know the precise directions in which technological change will take us, but as in recent years, the future role of banks and other providers of financial services will surely be significantly affected by the same basic forces that guide the real economy. Building bridges between our educational institutions, the private business sector, and community organizations will be an essential aspect of our efforts to increase familiarity with new technological and financial tools that are fundamental to improving individual economic well-being. And the success of such efforts will have a critical bearing on how well prepared we are to meet the challenges of an increasingly knowledge-based global economy.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Office of the Comptroller of the Currency Office of Thrift Supervision Agencies Issue Risk Management Practices for Leveraged Financing WASHINGTON -- The federal bank regulatory agencies today issued guidance concerning sound risk management practices for institutions engaged in leveraged financing. The guidance, issued by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of Thrift Supervision, augments previously issued individual statements. Over the past year, deterioration has emerged in leveraged finance portfolios of many banking organizations, driven in part by the relaxation of sound lending standards in past years. In response, affected institutions have strengthened their lending standards and are amending their risk management practices. The purpose of this guidance is to clarify supervisors' expectations regarding sound practices and facilitate their adoption. Leveraged financing has been an important financing vehicle for mergers and acquisitions, business recapitalizations, and business expansions. These transactions are characterized by a degree of financial leverage that significantly exceeds industry norms as measured by various debt, cash flow or other ratios. Consequently, leveraged borrowers generally have a diminished ability to respond to changing economic conditions or unexpected events, creating significant implications for an institution's overall credit risk exposure and challenges for bank risk management systems. Leveraged finance activities can be conducted in a safe and sound fashion if pursued with a risk management structure that provides for appropriate underwriting, pricing, monitoring, and controls. This guidance highlights the need for comprehensive credit analysis processes, frequent monitoring, and detailed portfolio reports to better understand and manage the inherent risk in these leveraged finance portfolios. Many leveraged transactions are underwritten with reliance on the imputed value of a business (ï¿½enterprise valueï¿½), which often exhibits a high degree of volatility. The guidance stresses the importance of sound valuation methodologies and ongoing stress testing and monitoring of enterprise values. The statement also provides guidance about risk rating leveraged finance loans and how enterprise value should be evaluated in the risk rating process. Media Contacts: Federal Reserve: Dave Skidmore (202) 452-2955 FDIC Rosemary George (202) 898-6530 OCC Kevin Mukri (202) 874-5348 OTS Sam Eskenazi (202) 906-6913 Federal Reserve: Dave Skidmore (202) 452-2955 FDIC Rosemary George (202) 898-6530 OCC Kevin Mukri (202) 874-5348 OTS Sam Eskenazi (202) 906-6913
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board is requesting public comment on a proposal that would amend Regulation H (Membership of State Banking Institutions in the Federal Reserve System) to expand the prohibition against deposit production offices to include any branch of a bank controlled by an out-of-state bank holding company. Comment is requested by June 8, 2001. Section 109 of the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act of 1994 (Interstate Act) prohibits banks from engaging in interstate branching primarily for the purpose of deposit production. It was intended to ensure that interstate branching authority would not result in the taking of deposits from a community without banks reasonably helping to meet the credit needs of that community. Section 106 of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act of 1999 expanded the coverage of section 109 of the Interstate Act to include any branch of a bank controlled by an out-of-state bank holding company. The Board's proposal amends the regulatory prohibition against branches being used as deposit production offices to include any bank or branch of a bank controlled by an out-of-state bank holding company, including a bank consisting only of a main office. The proposed amendment to Regulation H is similar to proposed amendments to regulations of the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
For immediate release The Federal Open Market Committee decided today to lower its target for the federal funds rate by 50 basis points to 4-1/2 percent. In a related action, the Board of Governors approved a 50 basis point reduction in the discount rate to 4 percent. The FOMC has reviewed prospects for the economy in light of the information that has become available since its March meeting. A significant reduction in excess inventories seems well advanced. Consumption and housing expenditures have held up reasonably well, though activity in these areas has flattened recently. Although measured productivity probably weakened in the first quarter, the impressive underlying rate of increase that developed in recent years appears to be largely intact. Nonetheless, capital investment has continued to soften and the persistent erosion in current and expected profitability, in combination with rising uncertainty about the business outlook, seems poised to dampen capital spending going forward. This potential restraint, together with the possible effects of earlier reductions in equity wealth on consumption and the risk of slower growth abroad, threatens to keep the pace of economic activity unacceptably weak. As a consequence, the Committee agreed that an adjustment in the stance of policy is warranted during this extended intermeeting period. The Committee continues to believe that against the background of its long-run goals of price stability and sustainable economic growth and of the information currently available, the risks are weighted mainly toward conditions that may generate economic weakness in the foreseeable future. In taking the discount rate action, the Federal Reserve Board approved requests submitted by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Atlanta, Minneapolis, Dallas, and San Francisco.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today approved actions by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond and Chicago, decreasing the discount rate at those banks from 4-1/2 percent to 4 percent, effective immediately. The Federal Reserve Board today also approved action by the Board of Directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, decreasing the discount rate at that bank from 4-1/2 percent to 4 percent, effective Friday April 20, 2001.
Remarks by Vice Chairman Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. Before the National Economists Club and Society of Government Economists, Washington, D.C. April 19, 2001 Transparency in Central Banking: Rationale and Recent Developments It is a pleasure to have this opportunity to address this joint meeting of the National Economists Club and the Society of Government Economists. I would like to discuss a topic that is of particular interest to me--the transparency of central banks. As you know, transparency relates broadly to the openness of a central bank in stating its monetary policy decisions and explaining the reasoning behind them. I would like to make two main points: First, there is a strong rationale for a high degree of transparency in central banking; second, the world's major central banks have become quite transparent in recent years. Of course, the views expressed are my own and should not be interpreted as the position of the Federal Open Market Committee or of the Board of Governors. The Past and Recent Trends in Transparency In the past, central banks around the world tended to operate with considerable secrecy. The need for and appropriateness of such secrecy was virtually unquestioned--it was part of the culture of central banking. Indeed, the one word of advice for a new central banker was probably "mystique." That single word encapsulated much of the tradition and wisdom of how central banks related to the public just a few years ago. As you are aware, the Federal Reserve and other central banks have moved considerably away from mystique and toward transparency in recent years. For example, the new European Central Bank has incorporated a number of transparency aspects in its policy process and has emphasized the importance of communications. To highlight this importance, Otmar Issing, the Bank's chief economist and a member of its Executive Board, characterized communications as the "hidden pillar" of the ECB's monetary policy strategy. The Bank of Japan, likewise, has taken steps toward greater transparency, particularly following the revision of its governing law in 1998. In the United Kingdom, the Bank of England Act of 1998, which established the operational independence of the Bank, also strengthened transparency measures that the Bank had implemented earlier in the 1990s. Like the Federal Reserve, these central banks announce policy changes after meetings of their monetary policy committees and hold press conferences or publish minutes to explain policy deliberations. They also regularly offer detailed accounts of developments in the economy and provide projections for inflation and economic activity. Reasons for Transparency Why is increased transparency viewed as such an important issue? The primary task of central banks is to get monetary policy right--that is, to pursue policies that effectively promote the objectives established by their legislatures or parliaments, such as stable prices, full employment, and maximum sustainable growth. Communicating what the central bank is doing, and why it is doing it, is of secondary importance to getting it right. Nonetheless, transparency is important, and even valuable, for two reasons. Transparency, Independence, and Accountability First, over recent decades it has become increasingly clear that central banks need to have a considerable degree of independence to carry out their jobs effectively. Of course, central banks are part of their governments, ideally subject to a well-defined legal framework. But there is now a broad consensus that central banks should be able to apply their own professional judgment in setting their operational instrument, usually a short-term interest rate. To be sure, this independence does not refer to the goals of monetary policy. In a democracy, it is appropriate that the central bank's ultimate goals should reflect the common good and, in that spirit, should be set by voters' representatives. Rather, independence applies to the instrument settings and other policy choices made by the central bank to achieve the ultimate policy goals. The main reason that central banks need to be independent in using their instruments is that effective monetary policy requires a distant time horizon. The monetary policy most appropriate for long-run stability and growth of an economy may not be politically popular in the short run. But along with a high degree of independence, central banks are required to account for their decisions in various ways. This, too, is appropriate in a democracy: The public has a right to know what its unelected, as well as elected, officials are doing, and why. And this is the reason that transparency is so important for supporting the independence of the central bank. Transparency facilitates a broad understanding of what the central bank is doing and thereby gives the public the tools to hold the independent central bank accountable. Transparency, in fact, can play a valuable role in reinforcing the institutional independence of a central bank. History has shown that, even with the best intentions and safeguards, the independence of a central bank can come under strain when the appropriate long-run policy is unpopular in the short run. The clarity transparency brings to the objectives and strategy of policy can greatly help a central bank explain its decisions in relation to the objectives of long-run price stability and sustainable economic growth. Transparency and Policy Effectiveness The second reason transparency is important is that clarity and predictability of policy decisions may enhance the effectiveness of monetary policy. The Federal Reserve controls a very short-term interest rate--the overnight federal funds rate--but, as you know, theory and empirical evidence make clear that longer-term rates matter most for the economy. Those longer-term rates, in turn, reflect expectations of future short-term rates, as well as premiums for uncertainty. If the monetary authority can be clearer about what it is doing now and what it plans to do--not in the sense of setting future moves in stone, but rather in terms of explaining risks that might influence future policy--then market participants can improve their expectations of future short rates. Also, less uncertainty about monetary policy might reduce the premium for uncertainty. Thus, transparency ought to bring the rates that matter most for the macroeconomy into closer alignment with the intentions of monetary policymakers. In effect, greater transparency allows policymakers to work with the market, not against it. The benefits from better communication and greater transparency can also be appreciated by considering the role of credibility and its effects on inflation expectations and, hence, the longer end of the term structure of interest rates. If the public is unclear about the strategy and objectives of the central bank, the credibility of monetary policy may suffer. Current economic developments or policy actions directed toward short-run concerns could have an outsized influence on perceptions regarding the more distant future--especially long-run inflation expectations and, therefore, long-term interest rates. Because such changes in perceptions could be counterproductive, concern about triggering them might discourage a central bank from taking action that otherwise could have been appropriate and beneficial for the economy in the near term. Lack of transparency and lack of credibility, in this sense, could reduce the effectiveness of monetary policy in stabilizing the economy against transitory shocks. A concrete example of this can be seen in recent developments in the United States. Consider the pickup in inflation that we saw last year, which many economists would attribute at least in part to the temporary effects of increased energy costs. Had the FOMC not been transparent and credible about its long-run objective of price stability, the public might have raised its perception of long-run inflation as a result of this unfavorable development. Such a shift would have greatly complicated the policy judgments that led to the easings that the FOMC implemented earlier this year. Transparency and credibility about the Federal Reserve's longer-term intentions, however, and the accompanying stability of longer-run inflation expectations, provided greater flexibility in taking action. To be sure, greater transparency on the part of the central bank does not guarantee that markets will accurately forecast interest rates. As you well know, forecasts can prove inaccurate simply because the economy changes unexpectedly. And, despite efforts toward better communication, neither market participants nor central banks can forecast all the twists of a rapidly evolving economy. The central bank needs to be flexible, acting prudently but forcefully when required. And another caveat: The accurate anticipation of policy by market participants is not a panacea. Though a tighter link between monetary policy expectations and long-term interest rates may lessen the need for the central bank to move its policy instrument as much or as quickly, market adjustments are not a substitute for monetary policy action. Market movements in response to anticipated central bank actions must be validated by the central bank when they are, in the view of the policymakers, correct, in order for financial markets to continue to reflect the intentions of policymakers. Definition of Transparency So far, I've avoided giving a precise definition of transparency. In part, that's because providing an exact definition is difficult. Fundamentally, transparency refers to being forthcoming about goals and short-term tactics and, therefore, being easily and clearly understood. But being understood can have very different meanings depending on the particular aspects of the monetary policy process one considers. Certainly, transparency should encompass clear communication of the longer-run objectives and strategy of monetary policy. In the United States, for example, by law we have objectives for both employment and price stability, neither of which is quantified in statute. Indeed, in our case, stating a numerical target for the inflation rate of some specific price index, for instance, might not enhance transparency but instead diminish it. One could argue that, despite the best efforts of government economists and statisticians, inflation measures based on our various price indexes are not sufficiently refined to offer an accurate basis for defining price stability. Some indexes undergo conceptual redefinitions from time to time and are subject to frequent revisions. And we all know that all price indexes can be subjected to outsized influences by special factors that may obscure meaningful underlying trends. For a variety of reasons, measures of inflation based on various indexes can differ considerably at any point in time. And none is known to always offer the superior reading. Thus, in evaluating risks with respect to our price stability objective, I believe that it is preferable to consider all the various measures and not be unduly influenced by a numerical target for any specific index. Obviously, under these circumstances, changing policy just because a single, specific price index is out of line might not always be sensible, especially if doing so might have detrimental consequences for our other objectives. For this reason, it seems to me that defining our price stability objective in terms of a numerical target for the rate of inflation of some specific price index could well be problematic. Indeed, I see considerable advantages to this operating definition of price stability: Price stability is a situation in which economic agents need not take account of expected changes in the general price level in their economic decisionmaking. A second aspect of transparency is public announcement of changes in the short-run operating target. In general, when central banks target a short-term interest rate, this aspect of transparency is reasonably easy to implement because an interest rate is easy for financial market participants, members of the legislature, and the general public alike to understand. But transparency may be more difficult to achieve when the central bank employs other operating targets, such as the reserve targets that the Federal Reserve used in the early 1980s. Changes in such targets could often reflect technical developments and not changes in the desired policy stance. And yet, there are instances when quantitative targets may be more informative about the basic intent of policymakers than a short-term interest rate. For example, when the overnight rate of interest is nearly zero, a monetary policy easing may be rather difficult to communicate in terms of that interest rate. Last monthï¿½s decision by the Bank of Japan to change its operating target from the overnight rate of interest, which was already near zero, to a target for reserves, may reflect, in part, this consideration. A third aspect of transparency has to do with the central bank's attitudes toward the future--the risks facing the economy. In pricing longer-term financial instruments--bonds, equities, and derivative instruments--market participants need to factor in the longer-term economic and policy outlook. Investors' ability to make such judgments is enhanced by giving them information about how the central bank sees the probable evolution of the economy in the foreseeable future, in part so that market participants can better judge the likely evolution of monetary policy. A fourth dimension of transparency has to do with the extent of information on the central bankï¿½s rationale for its policy moves. Such information helps market participants formulate their own outlook for the economy and monetary policy and therefore their projections of future interest rates and financial asset prices. And it also helps the public put monetary policy action in context so that accountability of the central bank is as informed as possible. And a final aspect has to do with the regularity and predictability of the timing of policy decisions and communications. When a central bank is reasonably predictable in its policy timing, its decisions are likely to raise fewer questions and are therefore relatively easy for the public to comprehend. When policy achieves a high level of transparency in this sense, unexpected or rapidly evolving economic developments and not policy changes are the news. This, of course, is not to say that a central bank will never surprise the market. As I mentioned earlier, the most important task of a central bank is to get monetary policy right. At times, getting policy right will involve taking action unexpected by the market--for example, in its timing or magnitude. This situation is most likely to arise when economic or financial conditions are changing particularly rapidly. This might be associated with financial or economic crisis--as in the fall of 1987 or 1998--but it need not be. These cases are relatively infrequent, but they do occur. The presumption against taking a surprise move, in timing or magnitude, should be strong, but it is a rebuttable presumption. The challenge is to weigh the good that comes from taking a move that a rapidly evolving situation appears to call for against the cost of a diminished sense of regularity in the policy process, which should be the norm in supporting transparency. U.S. Practices on Transparency In February 1994, the FOMC adopted the practice of immediately announcing changes in its policy stance and, in effect, began to disclose immediately the expected federal funds rate. In subsequent FOMC meetings, when no policy action had been taken, no formal announcement followed. However, in the absence of a policy action the media were informed that the meeting had ended and that there would be no further announcement. In this way, from that point on, the FOMC immediately disclosed changes in its policy and its decisions not to take policy action at its scheduled meeting. Though these steps clarified the current stance of monetary policy, the Committee recognized that it could further enhance the transparency of its actions by providing timely indications of factors that might influence the future direction of policy. The idea was that providing more information about the Committee's views of the economic outlook would allow financial market prices to reflect more accurately the probable future stance of monetary policy. When the stance of policy changed, the statement disclosing the action could be and was used to provide an indication of the factors likely to influence the Committee's future decisions. Such information, however, was not provided when the Committee decided not to change its policy since no announcement accompanied such decisions. To bridge this gap, the Committee decided at its December 1998 meeting to announce major shifts in its view about prospective developments even in cases when the current policy setting remained unchanged. This step toward additional disclosure was first implemented in May 1999. In August 1999, the FOMC established a Working Group on the Directive and Disclosure Policy to study the Committee's disclosure procedures and propose further improvements to them. After discussion of the Working Group's proposals, the Committee in December of that year adopted the procedures that are now in place. Under the current procedures, which were announced in January 2000, the FOMC issues a statement to the public immediately after every meeting. The statement provides information regarding the policy stance adopted at the meeting and the Committee's view about prospective developments. It is issued whether or not the Committee changes either its policy or its view about the future. With the new procedures, the Committee adopted new language to describe its views about the economic outlook. The language indicates the Committee's sense of the balance of risks in the outlook against the background of the Committee's long-run goals of price stability and sustainable economic growth. Specifically, it indicates whether the Committee believes that the risks are "balanced with respect to prospects for both goals," "weighted mainly toward conditions that may generate heightened inflation pressures," or "weighted mainly toward conditions that may generate economic weakness." By economic weakness, we do not just mean recession; I believe that the Committee would be justified in recognizing risks weighted toward economic weakness if it saw prospects for subpar growth--that is growth below the rate of increase in the economyï¿½s potential. None of these changes has altered the way in which the FOMC decides the appropriate course of policy action. The FOMC has not viewed the issuance of the balance of risks statement as a substitute for needed interest rate changes. To repeat, the most important task of a central bank is to get monetary policy right. Regardless of changes in its disclosure procedures, this has always been and remains the Committeeï¿½s foremost goal. Current Economic Conditions and Outlook Let me close by linking this discussion of transparency to the current economic situation. Since late last year, evidence has accumulated that the economy would be unlikely to meet the Committeeï¿½s goal of maximum sustainable noninflationary growth. Therefore, the FOMC has moved aggressively, cutting the federal funds rate 200 basis points since the turn of the year. Two of those actions were taken between meetings-- January 3 and, of course, yesterday. Over this period, economic conditions were changing rapidly. And, in the current situation, we were facing an unusually long intermeeting period. Although some fog always surrounds the outlook, there is more than the usual amount of uncertainty at this juncture about the economic future. Clearly, many businesses were surprised by the extent of the slowdown in sales late last year, and inventories became uncomfortably high in some sectors. There also is talk of an overhang of high-tech capital, although quantifying the magnitude of that overhang is very difficult. Some producers of high-tech equipment may have misjudged the short-term demand for such equipment, perhaps, in part, because they assumed that the strength in investment experienced during 1999 and the early part of 2000 would continue. Moreover, a number of high-tech companies have failed over the past year, reducing the demand for new investment--both directly through the absence of their own spending and indirectly by increasing the supply of nearly new equipment on the second-hand market. These imbalances will take some time to be corrected. But businesses are moving quickly to adjust levels of production. And final demand should be supported by the lower interest rates put in place by the financial markets and the Federal Reserve. Despite the decline in stock prices, I believe that the underlying technical advances that have been so important to macroeconomic developments over the last five years will continue and will provide support over time for business and consumer spending. But what interest rates will be associated with a return to healthy growth in spending remains an open question. Incoming data have remained mixed, but on balance suggest that the economy has been expanding very slowly. As our announcement yesterday noted, we are especially concerned about the outlook for capital investments. Profit expectations have been revised down, and reports that businesses have been postponing capital improvements are widespread. Moreover, the downward revisions to earnings expectations have hit the stock market hard since last fall, and declines in equity wealth could begin to show through more forcefully to consumption spending. All in all, I think it is too early to have a strong conviction that the economy is reaching the end of this period of quite slow growth. As the FOMC noted yesterday, the risks remain toward economic weakness. Conclusion Our announcement yesterday was part of an ongoing effort to communicate with the public at large and with markets. This desire to be transparent has led, in the last several years, to numerous changes in the procedures of many central banks. I do not know what future changes, if any, might be called for, but I am confident that central banks will continue to look for ways to make certain that their objectives and policies are clear. Thank you for your attention.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the proposal by Amplicon, Inc., Santa Ana, California, to become a bank holding company by acquiring California First National Bank, also of Santa Ana, and to retain certain permissible nonbanking businesses. Attached is the Board’s Order relating to this action.
Remarks by Vice Chairman Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. At the Eleventh Annual Hyman P. Minsky Conference on Financial Structure, Jerome Levy Economics Institute, Annandale-on-Hudson, New York April 26, 2001 Understanding Financial Consolidation It is my pleasure to speak to you today, and I thank Dimitri Papadimitriou and the Jerome Levy Economics Institute for inviting me to speak at this conference. Consolidation of all types of business activities has been a prominent feature of the economic landscape for at least the past decade. The financial sector has participated actively in this development. Indeed, the last few years have witnessed an acceleration of consolidation among financial institutions. In recognition of the importance of this marketplace evolution, and especially its potential effects on a wide range of public policies, the finance ministers and central bank governors of the Group of Ten nations in September 1999 commissioned a major study of the possible effects of financial consolidation on matters of policy concern to central banks and finance ministries in the G-10. This study, which I was privileged to direct, was released to the public in January 2001. Today I would like to discuss the study's major findings and their implications. The G-10 Study of Financial Consolidation The G-10 study had two primary objectives. It attempted to isolate the effects of consolidation from those of other powerful forces transforming our financial systems and to identify key areas in which financial consolidation requires new or accelerated policy development. The diversity of the economies involved--even among the G-10, Australia, and Spain--and the interdependent nature of many of the forces affecting our financial systems made achieving these objectives difficult, to say the least. However, I believe the study was a success. Patterns and Causes With a study of the depth, breadth, and quite frankly, the length of this one, it is always potentially dangerous and even possibly misleading to summarize the key points in a few words. However, I believe that policymakers should communicate to a wide audience their thinking on important policy concerns, and thereby stimulate and contribute to dialogues in the public and private sectors. Thus, despite the risks, I would like to highlight what are, in my judgment, the study's key findings and policy implications. The report documents that, in the nations studied, a high level of merger and acquisition activity occurred during the 1990s among financial firms, defined to include depository institutions, securities firms, and insurance companies. During the decade, approximately 7,500 transactions, valued at roughly $1.6 trillion, were consummated. Moreover, the pace of consolidation increased over time, including a noticeable acceleration in the last three years of the decade. For example, the annual number of deals increased threefold during the 1990s, and the total value of deals increased almost tenfold. In Europe, roughly two-thirds of merger and acquisition activity, as measured by the value of the European firm acquired, occurred during the decade's last three years. Using a variety of measures, the United States accounted for about 55 percent of M&A activity, partly because of our historically large number of relatively small financial firms. However, it is also true that many very large U.S. banking institutions expanded their geographic footprint by acquiring other very large banks, especially later in the decade. Most of the last decade's merger and acquisition activity in the financial sector involved banking organizations. Acquisitions of banking firms accounted for 60 percent of all financial mergers and 70 percent of the value of those mergers in the nations studied. In addition, most M&A transactions involved firms competing in the same segment of the financial services industry within the same country, while domestic mergers involving firms in different segments of the overall financial services industry were the second most common type of transaction. Cross-border mergers and acquisitions were less frequent, especially those involving firms in different industry segments. Still, all types of mergers and acquisitions, whether within one country or cross-border and whether within one industry segment or across segments, increased in frequency and value during the 1990s. Joint ventures and strategic alliances provide an interesting contrast with some of the patterns in outright mergers and acquisitions. As with M&A activity, the number of joint ventures and strategic alliances increased during the 1990s, with especially large increases in the last two years. In the United States, which accounted for nearly half of all joint ventures and strategic alliances, the arrangements were overwhelmingly domestic. However, in the other twelve countries studied, cross-border joint ventures and strategic alliances overall exceeded domestic deals. Our research shows that financial consolidation substantially decreased the number of banking firms during the 1990s in almost every nation studied, and measures of the national concentration of the banking industry have tended to rise. Still, at the national level, the structure of the banking industry continues to differ greatly, ranging from very unconcentrated in a few nations--the United States and Germany--to highly concentrated in about half of the nations in our study. In contrast to banking, there are no consistent patterns across countries in changes in the number of insurance firms or concentration in the insurance industry during the 1990s. Within the securities industry, several specific activities, such as certain types of underwriting, are dominated by a small number of leading institutions. It is unclear, however, whether this pattern changed much over the 1990s. One of the most important conclusions of our study is that financial consolidation has helped to create a significant number of large, and in some cases increasingly complex, financial institutions. In addition, these firms increasingly operate across national borders and are subject to a wide range of regulatory regimes. These observations have several important implications that I shall return to in a moment. Our work finds that the most important forces encouraging financial consolidation are improvements in information technology, financial deregulation, globalization of financial and nonfinancial markets, and increased shareholder pressure for financial performance. Because we expect these forces to continue, we expect financial consolidation to continue as well, even though the pace may be interrupted by swings in the macroeconomic cycle and other factors. The study considers few possible future scenarios but concludes that the likelihood of specific future developments is impossible to assess with confidence. My own guess is that various patterns will emerge. Globally active universal financial service providers will continue to emerge. We should also see the further development of firms specialized in the production of particular components of financial services or in the distribution to end-users of products obtained from specialized providers--providers that may exist within or outside the traditional financial services industry. I fully expect a large number of efficient and profitable small and medium-sized financial institutions to remain important players in the United States. I would guess this will also be the case in many other nations. In addition, the uncertainties of successful post-merger integration may well favor more use of looser forms of consolidation, such as joint ventures and strategic alliances. Monetary Policy One of our more important policy concerns in designing the study--and the issue of greatest relevance to the participants in this conference--was the potential effect of financial consolidation on the conduct and effectiveness of monetary policy. There were three broad areas of concern. First, it seemed possible that consolidation could make it more difficult for central banks to implement policy if it reduced the efficiency of the market for central bank reserves or the markets used in the conduct of monetary policy operations. For example, consolidation might reduce the liquidity or increase the volatility of the reserves market, making it more difficult for central banks to keep their policy rate near its target. The second possibility was that consolidation could affect the transmission mechanism linking changes in the policy interest rate to the real economy. Consolidation could do so if it affected the liquidity or volatility of key financial markets and so the arbitraging of interest rates across instruments and maturities. Moreover, consolidation could, at least in theory, alter the credit channels of monetary policy. For example, if consolidation fostered the creation of larger banks having better access to markets for managed liabilities, it could affect the way that the availability and pricing of bank loans adjust in response to changes in the stance of monetary policy. Third, consolidation might affect the environment in which policy is conducted. This could occur if consolidation led to the faster transmission of shocks across markets or geographical regions, or affected the behavior of indicator variables such as monetary and credit aggregates used by monetary policy makers. Consolidation could also affect the policy environment by contributing to the formation of very large and complex financial institutions: Difficulties at such firms could pose challenges for central banks in both their monetary policy and lender of last resort roles. Despite these concerns, the study finds that financial consolidation has not significantly affected the ability of central banks to achieve the objectives of monetary policy. Why is this? Let me try to explain briefly. As part of our research, we asked central banks in all the nations studied about their experiences with consolidation and the implementation of monetary policy. Virtually all reported that they had experienced at most minor effects, and that they did not expect the effects to be large in coming years. A key reason for this finding is that even with the substantial consolidation we have observed, the financial markets important for monetary policy have generally remained highly competitive. Even in those nations where consolidation has been considerable, competitive behavior has generally been sustained by the possibility that new firms could enter the markets at relatively low cost. It is also well worth noting that our work suggests that the development of the Euro has been particularly helpful in maintaining competition in Europe. The Euro has encouraged development of European money and capital markets, thus making the number of participants in a particular nation's markets less relevant. The central banks also indicated that the effects of consolidation on the monetary transmission mechanism have been small. Some of the central banks thought that consolidation could have more significant effects if its pace accelerated for a time, but the likely nature of the resulting changes was uncertain. Moreover, frequent reviews of the data should allow central banks to take account of any future changes when setting policy. Similarly, the central bankers we spoke with did not think that consolidation had importantly affected the environment for policy. They generally reported that consolidation had not adversely affected the operation of financial markets, and that the effect of consolidation on the behavior of indicator variables was quite small. Clearly, in the event of financial difficulties at a very large and complex institution, central banks would need to evaluate carefully the appropriate level and duration of emergency liquidity provision, as well as the possible need to adjust, perhaps only for a short period of time, the stance of monetary policy. On balance, and despite these positive results, our study recommends that central banks should remain alert to the implications of any future reductions in the competitiveness of the markets most important for monetary policy implementation. Similarly, we suggest that central banks ought to monitor potential future effects on the transmission mechanism for monetary policy. Monetary policy is simply too important to the health of all our economies to do otherwise. Financial Risk Financial consolidation can affect the risks to both individual financial institutions and the financial system as a whole. Importantly, our study concludes that existing policies appear adequate to contain individual firm and systemic risks now and in the intermediate term. However, looking further ahead, the study identifies several topics that deserve careful attention by policymakers. For example, we conclude that the potential effects of financial consolidation on the risk of individual financial institutions are mixed and that the net result is impossible to generalize. Thus, we must evaluate individual firm risk on a case-by-case basis. Consolidation seems most likely to reduce risk through diversification gains, although even here the possibilities are complex. On the one hand, diversification gains seem likely from consolidation across regions of a given nation and across national borders. On the other hand, after consolidation some firms shift toward riskier asset portfolios, and consolidation may increase operating risks and managerial complexities for those firms. Diversification gains may also result from consolidation across financial products and services, although research suggests that the potential benefits may be fairly limited. In part because the net impact of consolidation on individual firm risk is unclear, the net impact of consolidation on systemic risk is also uncertain. However, as I noted consolidation clearly has encouraged the creation of a number of large and increasingly complex financial institutions. Our study suggests that if such an institution became seriously distressed, consolidation and any attendant complexity might increase the chance that winding down the organization would be difficult or disorderly. We recommend that the risks to individual firms and to the financial system could be reduced by stepped-up efforts to understand the implications of working out a large and complex financial institution. Because no institution is too big to fail, I believe that regulators should develop a clearer understanding of, for example, the administration of bankruptcy laws and conventions across borders; the coordination of supervisory policies within and across borders; the treatment of over-the-counter derivatives, foreign exchange, and other "market" activities in distress situations; the roles and responsibilities of managers and boards of directors; and the administration of the lender-of-last-resort function. I say stepped-up discussions are needed in some of these areas because considering adverse developments is or should be a normal activity in all countries. Our study helped to clarify the need for international attention to this topic. Consolidation, and especially any resulting increased complexity of financial institutions, appears to have increased both the demand by market participants for and the supply by institutions of information regarding a firm's financial condition. The resulting rise in disclosures has probably improved firm transparency and encouraged market discipline and has thus lowered individual firm risk and perhaps increased financial stability. However, the increased complexity of firms has also made them more opaque, and their increased size has the potential to augment moral hazard. Thus, the net effect of consolidation on firm transparency and market discipline is unclear. Indeed, we conclude that there appears to be considerable room for improvement in disclosures by financial institutions. Our study suggests that both crisis prevention and crisis management could be improved by additional communication and cooperation among central banks, finance ministries, and other financial supervisors, domestically and internationally. Indeed, the study strongly supports existing efforts in these areas. In our view, the most important initiatives include proposals to improve the risk sensitivity of the international Basel Capital Accord and bank supervision and efforts aimed at improving market discipline. A critical element of improved risk-based supervision is risk-based capital standards that are tied more closely to economic risk. Capital standards provide an anchor for virtually all other supervisory and regulatory actions and can support and improve both supervisory and market discipline. For example, early intervention policies triggered by more accurate capital standards could prove to be important in crisis prevention. Payment and Settlement Systems Financial consolidation is affecting the market structures for payment and securities settlement as well as banks' internal systems and procedures for payment and back-office activities. Our study concludes that, on balance, financial consolidation has led to a greater concentration of payment and settlement flows among fewer parties. Fortunately, our analysis indicates that the greater concentration of payment flows does not appear to have decreased competition in markets for payment and settlement services. However, we suggest that it would be advisable for government authorities to continue to monitor competition in the payment system. In contrast, our work indicates we should closely monitor the risk implications of consolidation in payment and settlement systems. On the one hand, consolidation may help to improve the effectiveness of institutions' credit and liquidity risk controls. For example, increased concentration of payment flows may allow institutions to get a more comprehensive picture of settlement exposures or create a greater ability to net internal payment flows. In addition, central banks have made major efforts over recent decades to contain and reduce systemic risk by operating and promoting real-time gross settlement systems and by insisting on the implementation of risk control measures in net settlement systems. On the other hand, consolidation may lead to a significant shift of risk from interbank settlement systems, where risk management may be more robust and transparent, to customer banks and third-party service providers, where risk management practices may be harder for users to discern. In addition, to the extent that consolidation results in a greater concentration of payment flows, the potential effects of an operational problem may increase. These and other developments imply that central bank oversight of the risks in interbank payment systems is becoming more closely linked with traditional supervision of individual institution safety and soundness. As a result, we conclude that increasing cooperation and communication between banking supervisors and payment system overseers may be necessary both domestically and internationally. Efficiency, Competition, and Credit Flows Our study concludes with an extensive evaluation of the potential effects of financial consolidation on the efficiency of financial institutions, competition among such firms, and credit flows to households and small businesses. The study determines that although consolidation has some potential to improve operating efficiency, and has done so in some cases, the overall evidence in favor of efficiency gains is weak. Thus, we suggest that policymakers should carefully examine claims of substantial efficiency gains in proposed consolidations, especially in cases where a merger could raise significant issues of market power. Our work also attempts to shed some light on why academic researchers are less optimistic than business practitioners regarding the potential for consolidation to lead to efficiency gains. We suggest four possible reasons, which are not mutually exclusive. First, practitioners may consider cost reductions or revenue increases per se to be a success, without also taking into account independent industry trends as a benchmark. Second, managers may focus on absolute cost savings rather than on efficiency measures that compare costs to some other variable such as assets or revenues. Third, research finds little or no efficiency improvements on average, but this also means that some institutions may improve efficiency while some suffer from lower efficiency. Managers with inside knowledge of their firm may be justified in believing that their institution might be among those improving efficiency through a merger or acquisition. Lastly, past M&As may have suffered from regulations that reduced the benefits, and such regulations may not exist in the future. The effects of consolidation on competition and credit flows are case-specific and depend on the nature of markets for individual products and services. Some markets, such as those for wholesale financial services, generally show few problems. Others, such as those for retail products and services, sometimes experience problems from consolidation. Thus, as with other issues addressed by our study, a case-by-case evaluation of the relevant facts is required. Conclusion In conclusion, financial consolidation clearly is a powerful force that is deeply affecting the evolution of the financial system of the United States and many other nations. A thorough understanding of this force and its potential effects is critical for prudent decision-making in both the public and the private sectors. I believe the study that I have just summarized takes some major steps toward that understanding, and I hope that my remarks have helped you to comprehend our study's findings and implications. Still, all of us have much to learn, and much of what we know today will almost surely change in the future. I commend the Levy Institute for seeking to advance our knowledge, and I again thank you for inviting me to contribute.
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan The paydown of federal debt Before the Bond Market Association, White Sulphur Springs, West Virginia (via videoconference) April 27, 2001 I am pleased to be with you this morning and note the Bond Market Association’s twenty-fifth anniversary. Over the years I have enjoyed being associated with many of you in this audience. My very best wishes to Heather Ruth on the last day of her tenure as president and congratulations to Micah Green upon his appointment. Today I want to address a subject in which your group and the Federal Reserve share a keen interest--the paydown of the federal debt and its implications for the economy and financial markets. While the magnitudes of future federal unified budget surpluses are uncertain, they are highly likely to remain sizable for some time. The dramatic improvement in projections of the budget balance in recent years reflects, in large part, the pickup in underlying productivity growth in the U.S. economy, which has boosted corporate profits and household incomes and thereby tax receipts. In effect, we built a tax structure on the assumption that the economy would grow over time at rates around those seen from the early 1970s to the mid-1990s, and this structure has generated considerably more revenue as the economy’s underlying growth rate has risen. Restraint on expenditures also has contributed to the brighter outlook. Tight limits on spending were imposed in response to the large deficits of the 1980s and early 1990s, and defense spending was reduced following the end of the Cold War. Both the Office of Management and Budget and the Congressional Budget Office have assumed that much of the accelerated productivity growth of the late 1990s is likely to be sustained through the next decade. No doubt, a period of weakness in measured productivity is likely to accompany the current slowdown in economic activity. However, there is little in the recent data to suggest that any significant alterations in these agencies’ longer-term projections of structural productivity growth might be required. Should we infer from these positive budget developments that unified budget deficits are no longer conceivable? Hardly. The substantial surpluses in retirement programs (especially social security) in recent years and in the nearer-term budget projections are on a cash basis. Were we fully accruing the benefit liabilities inferable from existing law, these retirement programs would currently be in deficit, and contingent liabilities amounting to about $10 trillion for social security alone would have been added to the current debt to the public. When the baby boom generation retires, and as the population subsequently ages further, these contingent liabilities will come due and--barring an offsetting surplus in the remainder of the government’s budget--will be met by the issuance of Treasury securities, shifting much of total federal liabilities from contingent liability to debt to the public. At that point, of course, the unified budget will be in deficit. Of more relevance for the nearer term, current forecasts suggest that under a reasonably wide variety of possible tax and spending policies, the resulting surpluses will allow the Treasury debt held by the public to be paid off. Moreover, well before the debt is eliminated--indeed, possibly within a relatively few years--it may become difficult to further reduce outstanding debt to the public because the remaining obligations will mostly consist of savings bonds, well-entrenched holdings of long-term marketable debt, and perhaps other types of debt that could prove difficult to reduce. Whether economic developments and tax and budget choices will, in the end, produce surpluses of the order of magnitude currently projected is open to debate. But the probability of substantial continuing surpluses is sufficiently high to require that, at a minimum, we begin to address their potential implications for fiscal policy decisionmakers, financial markets, and the Federal Reserve. I have long argued that paying down the national debt is beneficial for the economy: It keeps interest rates lower than they otherwise would be and frees savings to finance increases in the capital stock, thereby boosting productivity and real incomes. But the current budget projections are such that we need to consider what path of debt reduction is best for the economy. The issue is complicated: On the one hand, higher national saving, by raising the nation’s capital stock, leaves the country better prepared to cope with the economic effects of the aging of the U.S. population--and one way to achieve that higher saving is to run budget surpluses. On the other hand, after a point, this increase in national saving comes at a cost. Once Treasury debt reaches its irreducible minimum, additional surpluses will, of necessity, lead to the accumulation of substantial private--that is to say, non-federal--assets either in the Treasury’s general fund or in government trust funds. The decisions on how such funds should be invested by the government would necessarily be political ones, and would lead to efforts by some groups to obtain via the political process funding that they could not obtain, at least at the same price, in private markets. These efforts would likely result in distortions in the allocation of capital that must be balanced against the benefit to the nation of the increase in saving. In fact, it is the market-driven allocation of capital and labor to their most productive uses that has fostered our recent impressive gains in productivity and encouraged inflows of capital that have enabled us to build an extraordinarily efficient capital stock despite quite modest levels of domestic savings. The effectiveness of our markets in allocating capital is one of our nation’s most valuable assets. We need to be careful not to impair their functioning. It is, regrettably, too easy to envision political pressure being exerted to use government financing of investments to offset perceived capital market imperfections. Experience suggests that in such cases the resulting returns earned on the investments are likely to fall short of market standards. Moreover, the social benefits of investment are likely to be very difficult to measure in practice, opening the door to political interference in the allocation of funds. It is difficult, for example, to envision effective constraints being placed on politically attractive investments by defined-benefit trust funds, such as the social security trust fund. Benefits are guaranteed by government, irrespective of any losses to the fund. Thus, one must presume that even if our social security trust funds were to be so seriously impaired by mismanaged government investment that they dried up, full benefits would be highly likely to be forthcoming despite the fact that under current law the social security trust fund has limited borrowing authority. As a result, prospective beneficiaries would have no incentive to police the investment policies of the trust fund. To be sure, we do have about $3 trillion of assets administered in the defined-benefit plans of state and local governments. While research in this area has been limited, it does indicate that state and local pension funds have tended to underperform private pension funds if required to direct a portion of their investment within the state or to make “economically targeted investments.” Some recent work has suggested that the negative effects of such requirements may have been less important in recent years than they were in the past, but that conclusion remains speculative. Along the same lines, there is some evidence suggesting that returns on state pension funds have been lower where the proportion of trustees who are political appointees is higher. Some have argued that methods could be devised to insulate government investment decisions from the political process even in defined-benefit funds, perhaps by limiting such investments to index funds. Even if such methods were successful, the government would be investing only in publicly traded securities, and so its investment might have an adverse effect on the relative financing costs of smaller, often quite productive, non-publicly-traded firms. Over time, these effects would presumably be arbitraged away. But such a process likely takes time, and capital market imperfections, in any event, are likely to impede full arbitrage. Arguably, defined- contribution funds, even if administered by a federal agency, could insulate investment policy from political interference, as well as potentially freeing investment from the straightjacket of holding only index funds. It is highly unlikely that the beneficiaries of such funds would countenance politically convenient investments in their retirement funds. Indeed, the $100 billion federally managed Thrift Savings Fund has been operated without such interference. I should note, however, that conversion of social security from a defined benefit plan to a defined contribution plan would fundamentally alter its nature. One way to employ unified budget surpluses to finance increased investment would be to convert such funds into individual retirement accounts owned and administered by beneficiaries, with the presumption that the funds would be fully dedicated to retirement. In such an instance, the resulting reduction in government saving would be offset by a rise in private saving, so that total domestic saving would be maintained, though the availability of newly owned private assets could reduce the propensity to save out of income somewhat. Given concerns about the potential distorting effects of asset accumulation by the Treasury or in government defined-benefit plans, we need to carefully consider the appropriate path of debt paydowns. By addressing this issue now, we can avoid an abrupt and potentially disruptive change in fiscal policy as the level of Treasury debt reaches its irreducible minimum. Despite the clear advantages of paying down the federal debt, I recognize that doing so has some potential adverse consequences even before the difficulties associated with government accumulation of private assets arise. The Treasury market serves a number of useful purposes (in addition to providing many of you with profitable employment). Most obviously, Treasury debt provides an asset that is free of credit risk--a characteristic that is desirable for many investors, especially in times of economic or financial turbulence. Treasury yields also provide a benchmark for the quoting and pricing of risky debt. In addition, the size and liquidity of the Treasury market allow market participants to hedge interest rate risks easily and at low cost. Moreover, the liquidity of these securities enables participants to make rapid adjustments to their portfolios in times of market volatility. Thus, the elimination of Treasury debt does remove something of economic value, and it will require that significant adjustments be made by market participants. Indeed, with marketable Treasury debt held by the public--that is, excluding the Federal Reserve but including foreign central banks--having declined about 20 percent in recent years, to less than $2.5 trillion, some of these adjustments have already begun. Reportedly, firms have increasingly turned to swaps, agency securities, and even larger corporate debt issues to do their hedging. After a period of transition, such shifts arguably should not have any significant adverse effect on risk management. As hedging activity moves from the shrinking Treasury market to alternative markets, the liquidity of those markets should improve. Yields on the alternative hedging instruments likely will track at least as closely with those on instruments commonly being hedged as do Treasury yields. Similarly, the loss of Treasury securities as benchmarks seems unlikely to result in major difficulties for market participants because alternative benchmarks are easy to envision. For example, in European bond markets, swaps are already the most common benchmark. Even in the United States, the Treasury bill market has lost its “benchmark status” in recent years, and has been replaced in that role by the eurodollar and eurodollar futures markets, with no evident adverse effects on the operation of short-term credit markets. All of these alternative assets, of course, involve some degree of credit risk. However, given sufficient demand, it seems likely to me that you or your colleagues could produce a nearly riskless security. For example, this could be accomplished with a very senior tranche of a collateralized debt obligation backed by high-grade corporate debt. In short, I am confident that U.S. financial markets, which are the most innovative and efficient in the world, can readily adapt to a paydown of Treasury debt by creating private alternatives with many of the attributes that market participants value in Treasury securities. Of course, the resulting adjustments will not be perfect and, in some cases, will impose costs on financial market participants, especially during the period of transition to new products and procedures. However, I believe that these costs are very likely to be outweighed by the benefits to the country of a higher capital stock and the resulting increases in productivity and income that appear to be the consequence of debt reduction. Moreover, competitive pressures and profit opportunities will provide a strong incentive for you and your colleagues in the financial industry to devise ways to minimize such costs. Still, the lack of Treasury securities might be a bigger problem for international investors than for domestic investors, because they may be less well informed about U.S. corporations. As a result, international investors--especially official ones--may have a strong preference for U.S. government instruments. In such circumstances, foreign investors may reduce, on net, their holdings of overall dollar assets as Treasury securities are paid down. By itself, such diminution in the demand for U.S. dollar assets would tend to raise interest rates for U.S. borrowers and, conceivably, put downward pressure on the dollar’s exchange rate. However, the evidence of the past year and a half gives little support to this notion: Foreign private investors, on net, have run off their holdings of U.S. Treasury securities, while they have built up their holdings of private dollar assets by an even larger amount, and the foreign exchange value of the dollar has appreciated. A final valuable feature of the Treasury market is that it is a remarkably efficient system for funding federal government deficits. Because demographic and other factors are surely likely to lead to the re-emergence of deficits in the future, one might argue that it would be best to continue to borrow at least limited amounts from time to time in order to keep the market operating, so that it will be available when it is needed again. While that is clearly an alternative, we should also keep in mind that re-establishing the Treasury security market likely would not be all that difficult. Borrowing needs, in all likelihood, would start out small, so the market would have time to develop. Moreover, I have great confidence in your ability--or that of your successors--to initiate a new market for Treasury debt when that becomes necessary. Like other financial market participants, the Federal Reserve will also have to adjust to the loss of Treasury debt. Currently, Treasury securities are the “permanent” assets that correspond to the currency that is the Federal Reserve’s main liability. Treasury securities have several features that make them particularly attractive assets for the Federal Reserve. First, the liquidity of the market allows the Federal Reserve to make substantial changes in reserves in a short period of time, if necessary. Second, the size of the market has meant that the effects of the Federal Reserve’s purchases on the prices of Treasury securities have been minimal. Third, Treasury securities are free of credit risk. Thus, the Federal Reserve does not itself take on such risk when it holds them. I should point out that we do not eschew risk because we fear becoming insolvent. Rather, we believe that the effects of Federal Reserve operations on the allocation of private capital are likely to be minimized when Federal Reserve intermediation involves primarily the substitution in the public’s portfolio of one type of instrument that is free of credit risk--currency--for another--Treasury securities. As I discussed earlier, it is important that government holdings of assets not distort the private allocation of capital, and this goal applies to the Federal Reserve System as well as to the Treasury. However, if the Treasury debt is paid down, as I trust it will be, then the Federal Reserve will have to find alternative assets that still provide substantial liquidity and minimize distortions to the private allocation of capital. Even before that time, the Treasury market may become less liquid, making it more difficult for the Fed to make purchases without affecting market prices. Moreover, declining Treasury debt presumably would, at some point, reduce the liquidity of the Treasury repurchase agreement (RP) market, complicating the use of such operations in adjusting the short-term supply of reserves. In the short run, the Federal Reserve will continue to purchase a substantial volume of Treasury securities. In order to minimize the effects of its purchases on the market, however, it has established limits on the fraction of individual issues that it will hold going forward. The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), as you know, has also decided, on a temporary basis, to allow the Open Market Desk at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to conduct RP operations with agency mortgage-backed securities as collateral as well as with Treasuries and direct agency debt. Other changes that are already allowed under current statutes could be implemented to substitute, to a limited extent, for our holdings of Treasury securities. For example, the Federal Reserve could purchase, outright, Ginnie Mae securities, which are fully backed by the Treasury. It could also further broaden the types of collateral allowed for RP operations, perhaps including certain municipal obligations or those of foreign governments. Such an expansion could reduce the effects of Federal Reserve operations in the market for any particular type of collateral. The FOMC has asked staff to explore all of these short-run alternatives. Over a longer time horizon, more fundamental changes could be considered. One possibility is to expand the use of the discount window by auctioning such credit to financially sound depository institutions. Such auctions would enhance our ability to adjust the supply of reserves as needed, and because these loans would be fully collateralized, they would offer considerable protection against credit risk. Another possibility is to add new assets to those the Fed is currently allowed by law to buy for its portfolio. These assets could be used to provide a broader range of RP collateral, a process similar in concept to the expanded use of the discount window, as well as ultimately being added to our permanent portfolio. One would hope that such additions would help to limit the distortions to particular markets caused by Federal Reserve purchases. Of course, what adjustments we make to our procedures--and when we make them--depend on how rapidly the supply of Treasury securities dwindles and on how long the Treasury market is not available. As I noted earlier, demographic forces are likely to cause unified budget deficits to re-emerge at some point in the future and fresh supplies of Treasury securities to be issued. At that time, the Federal Reserve presumably would begin to shift our portfolio back toward the Treasury market. The timing and extent of the re-emergence of Treasury issuance will depend on underlying productivity growth and, of course, on the degree of fiscal discipline exercised by future American governments. Finally, in the period ahead, the Federal Reserve will be seeking active consultations and discussions with you and other market participants, as well as with the Congress, before significant changes are made to Federal Reserve procedures and methods. While the prospective paydown of Treasury debt presents us with challenges, I am confident that, with your help, the Federal Reserve can make the needed adjustments and will be able to continue to implement monetary policy in the national interest. The benefits of reducing our federal debt make the associated challenges well worth meeting.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of supervisory guidance addressing how banking organizations should protect customer information against identity theft. Recommended steps to safeguard information include establishing procedures to verify the identity of individuals applying for financial products, preventing fraudulent address changes, and blocking pretext callers from using pieces of personal information to impersonate account holders and gain access to account information. Guidance is also provided on completing Suspicious Activity Reports that are filed by banking organizations with law enforcement agencies reporting offenses associated with identity theft and pretext calling. The guidance is consistent with the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, which directs the Board and other federal agencies to ensure that financial institutions have policies, procedures and controls in place to prevent the unauthorized disclosure of customer financial information and to deter and detect fraudulent access to such information. Supervisory letters are the Federal Reserveï¿½s primary means of communicating key policy directives to its examiners, supervisory staff and the banking industry. The supervisory guidance is attached.