For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among the Bank of Little Rock, Little Rock, Arkansas, the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, and the Arkansas State Bank Department. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan Globalization At George Washington University, the Robert P. Maxon Lecture, Washington, D.C. December 3, 2001 Chairman Greenspan presented identical remarks at the Institute for International Economics’ Inauguration of the Peter G. Peterson Building, Washington, D.C., October 24, 2001 It is a pleasure to be with you this evening, and with President Trachtenberg, former Governor Phillips, and President Broaddus. I have no doubt that Susan Phillips is as appreciated at George Washington University as she was at the Federal Reserve Board. Before the tragic events of September 11, discussions of the international economy had increasingly come to be centered on issues related to the growing integration of our economies. The strife we had witnessed over economic globalization was the twenty-first century's version of debates over societal organization that go back at least to the dawn of the industrial revolution, and many of the intellectual roots of those debates go back far longer. There has been a simmering down of the more vociferous protests against globalization since September 11. But the debate surrounding the increasing cross-border integration of markets inevitably will be rejoined. The issue elicits such strong reaction because it centers on the important question of how economies are organized and, specifically, how individuals deal with one another. Globalization as generally understood involves the increasing interaction of the world's peoples through their national economic systems. Of necessity, these economic systems are reasonably compatible and, in at least some important respects, market oriented. During the past half-century, barriers to trade and to financial flows have generally come down, resulting in a significant broadening of world markets. Expanding markets, in turn, have enhanced competition and nurtured what Joseph Schumpeter called "creative destruction," the continuous scrapping of old technologies to make way for the new. Standards of living rise because the depreciation and other cash flows of industries employing older, increasingly obsolescent, technologies are marshaled, along with new savings, to finance the production of capital assets that almost always embody cutting-edge technologies. This is the process by which wealth is created incremental step by incremental step. It presupposes a continuous churning of an economy in which the new displaces the old. The process is particularly evident among those nations that have opened their borders to increased competition. Through its effect on economic growth, globalization has been a powerful force acting to raise standards of living. More open economies have recorded the best growth performance; in contrast, countries with inward-oriented policies have done less well. Importantly, as real incomes have risen on average, the incidence of poverty has declined. Nevertheless technological advance and globalization distress those who once thrived in industries that were at the forefront of technology but which have since become increasingly noncompetitive. In each step of incremental advance, the distance between gainers and losers is necessarily narrow. So it is understandable that our exceptionally complex system for the international distribution of goods, services, and finance is not universally recognized as successful at enhancing standards of living and promoting civil values worldwide. Indeed, those who perceived the need to protect economies from open trade have endeavored since its inception to slow or even reverse the forces supporting global expansion. It would be most unfortunate if the wheels of progress were stopped because of an incapacity or unwillingness to assist those disadvantaged by these broader gains, an issue I will address later. In recent years, protectionism has also manifested itself in a somewhat different guise by challenging the moral roots of capitalism and globalization. At the risk of oversimplification, I would separate the differing parties in that debate into three groups. First, there are those who believe that relatively unfettered capitalism is the only economic organization consistent with individual and political freedom. In a second group are those who accept capitalism as the only practical means to achieve higher standards of living but who are disturbed by the seeming incivility of many market practices and outcomes. In very broad brush terms, the prevalence with which one encounters allegations of incivility defines an important difference in economic views that distinguishes the United States from continental Europe -- two peoples having deeply similar roots in political freedom and democracy. A more pronounced distinction separates both of these groups from a third group, which views societal organization based on the profit motive and corporate culture as fundamentally immoral. This group questions in particular whether the distribution of wealth that results from greater economic interactions among countries is, in some sense, "fair." Here terms such as "exploitation," "subversion of democratic choice," and other value-charged notions dominate the debate. These terms too often substitute for a rigorous discussion of the difficult tradeoffs we confront in advancing the economic welfare of our nations. Such an antipathy to "corporate culture" has sent tens of thousands into the streets to protest what they see as "exploitive capitalism" in its most visible form -- the increased globalization of our economies. Though presumably driven by a desire to foster a better global society, most protestors hold misperceptions about how markets work and how to interpret market outcomes. To be sure, those outcomes can sometimes appear perverse to the casual observer. In today's marketplace, for example, baseball players earn much more than tenured professors. But that discrepancy expresses the market fact that more people are willing to pay to see a ball game than to attend a college lecture. I may not personally hold the same relative valuation of those activities as others, but that is what free markets are about. They reflect and give weight to the values of the whole of society, not just those of any one segment. Market doubters sometimes respond that consumers' values are manipulated by corporate advertising that induces people to purchase goods and services they do not really want. Most corporate advertising directors would wish that were true. Instead, they will argue that the evidence suggests that only the best products in the marketplace win over time. Consumers are not foolish; indeed, it would be an act of considerable hubris to argue otherwise. What are the dissidents' solutions to the alleged failures of globalization? They are, in fact, seemingly quite diverse. Frequently, they appear to favor politically imposed systems, employing the power of the state to override the outcomes arrived at through voluntary exchange. The historical record of such approaches does not offer much encouragement. One would be hard pressed to cite examples of free and prosperous societies that shunned the marketplace. Contrary to much current opinion, developing countries need more globalization, not less. Such a course would likely bring with it greater economic stability and political freedom. Indeed, probably the single most effective action that the industrial countries could implement to alleviate the terrible problem of poverty in many developing countries would be to open, unilaterally, markets to imports from those countries. Setting aside the arguments of the protestors, even among those committed to market-oriented economies, important differences remain about the view of capitalism and the role of globalization. These differences are captured most clearly for me in a soliloquy attributed to a prominent European leader several years ago. He asked, "What is the market? It is the law of the jungle, the law of nature. And what is civilization? It is the struggle against nature." While acknowledging the ability of competition to promote growth, many such observers, nonetheless, remain concerned that economic actors, to achieve that growth, are required to behave in a manner governed by the law of the jungle. In contrast to these skeptical views, the ethical merits of market-driven outcomes are argued with increasing vigor by many others, especially in the United States: The crux of the argument is that because unencumbered markets reflect the value preferences of consumers, the resulting price signals direct a nation's savings into those capital assets that maximize the production of goods and services most valued by consumers. Largely unfettered markets create a consumer-led society. In such an economy, the value of reputation, capitalized as good will in the market value of companies, competitively encourages perseverance in pursuing the objectives of quality and excellence. Moreover, the limited role for government in these arrangements is conducive to greater political freedom. Such a paradigm, however, is viewed by many at the other end of the philosophical spectrum as obsessively materialistic and largely lacking in meaningful cultural values. But is there a simple tradeoff between civil conduct, as defined by those who find raw competitive behavior demeaning, and the quality of material life they, nonetheless, seek? It is not obvious that such a tradeoff exists in any meaningful sense when viewed from a longer-term perspective. Clearly not all activities undertaken in markets are civil. Many, though legal, are decidedly unsavory. Violation of law and breaches of trust do undermine the efficiency of markets. But solid legal foundations and the discipline of the marketplace limit these aberrations. On net, vigorous competition over the years has produced a significant rise in the quality of life for the vast majority of the population in market-oriented economies, including those at the bottom of the income distribution. During the past century, economic growth created resources far in excess of those required to maintain subsistence. That surplus in democratic capitalist societies has, in large measure, been employed to improve the quality of life along many dimensions. To cite a short list: (1) greater longevity, owing first to the widespread development of clean, potable water, and later to rapid advances in medical technology, (2) a universal system of education that enabled greatly increased social mobility, (3) vastly improved conditions of work, and (4) the ability to enhance our environment by setting aside natural resources rather than employing them to sustain a minimum level of subsistence. At a fundamental level, we have used the substantial increases in wealth generated by our market-driven economy to purchase what many would view as greater civility. If the issue of a tradeoff between growth and civility were not in dispute, much of the debate that surrounds globalization today would have long since been silenced in its favor. But even if open and free global markets are consonant with political freedom and have in the past contributed greatly to raising world standards of living, there still remains the important practical issue: Can globalization continue to work? Is it as viable a model for world economic growth now as it has been in the past? Despite globalization's patent capacity to elevate standards of living over time, we have been challenged by periodic disruptions in the system's functioning. The financial crises of 1997-98 and the stresses apparent in some emerging-market economies over the past year underscore evident structural weaknesses in our global system. It can readily be argued that certain conditions of stress increase the probability of emerging-market country default and potential contagion. For example, extensive short-term foreign currency liabilities of financial intermediaries that are used to fund unhedged long-term lending in a domestic currency are tinder awaiting conflagration. This is especially the case if foreign currency reserves are inadequate and exchange rates are fixed. But why has this phenomenon in different garb reappeared so frequently in the postwar era? No nation deliberately seeks to expose itself to financial distress and bankruptcy. But political pressures can lead to actions that increase these risks. In all economies, political constituencies seek to employ the powers of the state to increase their share of limited government resources. While the record of developed economies is far from unblemished, they have had greater success in fending off such demands. One indication of that success is that exchange rate regimes have not often been upended by domestic political pressures in these economies. Although the range of outcomes has been wide, many emerging-market nations have had less success in insulating their international financial positions from domestic political pressures. Those pressures, at times, have become exceptionally difficult to deal with. To close the gap between the financial demands of political constituencies and the limited real resources available to their governments, many countries too often have bridged the difference by borrowing from foreign investors. In effect, the path of least resistance has been external borrowing rather than confronting politically difficult tradeoffs. Periodically, as an economy borrows its way to the edge of insolvency with debt denominated in foreign currency, government debt-raising capacity appears to vanish virtually overnight. It is this vanishing capacity that characterizes almost all financial crises. Lending institutions will provide funds beyond the immediate visible short-term cash flow of a borrower only if they perceive that maturing debt will be capable of being rolled over. The first whiff of inadequacy in debt-raising capacity induces a run to the exits -- not unlike a bank run. Thus, an economy's necessary condition for solvency, indeed, a necessary condition for the stability of global finance, is the maintenance of significant unused financing capacity. A developed nation's financial status is largely defined by an unquestioned capacity to roll over its debt seemingly without limit into the future. Developed nations, of course, have on occasion run into refunding difficulties and found international lending markets closed. But those occasions have been rare. What then is an adequate buffer? What level of foreign currency reserves and tradeable real assets does an emerging-market economy need to obtain and sustain debt-capacity credibility? That level, of course, can be known only in retrospect. One measure of the probability that the current or prospective level of reserves will be adequate can be gleaned from the yield spread of dollar-denominated government debt over U.S. Treasuries. That spread reflects not only the risk of dollar credit default but also the underlying strength of the domestic currency. Exchange-market pressures on the latter obviously reduce dollar debt-raising capacity. Debt capacity, by this model, is reached before rising nominal interest rates and, hence, payments on government debt threaten a vicious fiscal cycle of ever-growing deficits and debt. Unless debt capacity is continuously confirmed in the marketplace by modest spreads, "bank run" crises seem inevitable in such a leveraged system. How then does an emerging-market nation obtain and sustain debt-capacity credibility? First, it needs to create a much larger relative reserve buffer than that of a developed nation -- which has a larger capacity to draw on real resources, through taxation if necessary, to make good on its obligations. Nations that have met the market test no longer need to put up "collateral" to certify their financial prudence. Of course, even adequate or outsized reserves may not be perceived as sufficient for some, if the political system is judged unstable. In this regard, there are two critical criteria that all lenders require for government debt issuance: (1) a legal system that is presumed to protect property rights of the lender through the maturity of the debt instrument and (2) if the debt is denominated in a foreign currency, a fiscal and monetary regime that is presumed to be sufficiently responsible to ensure repayment in equivalent real resources. To be sure, one can borrow with these conditions less than fully satisfied, but only at interest rates that price the risk. Too often these rates are at levels inconsistent with fiscal stability or ongoing debt-raising capacity. At root, debt-raising capacity is not a technical issue; it is a profoundly political one, which means that it is driven by the values and culture of the society. Unless consensus exists within a society as to resource limits to which all must adhere, an adequate debt-capacity buffer will be difficult to achieve and maintain. The United States has benefited enormously from the opening up of international markets in the postwar period. We have access to a wide range of goods and services for consumption; our industries produce and employ cutting-edge technologies; and the opportunities created by these technologies have attracted capital inflows from abroad. These capital inflows, in turn, have reduced the costs of building our country's capital stock and added to the productivity of our workers. It would be a great tragedy if progress toward greater openness were stopped or reversed. Rather than inhibiting international competition to assist those displaced by "creative destruction," we should be directing our efforts at enhancing job skills and retraining workers--a process in which the private market is already engaged. If necessary, selected income maintenance programs can be employed for those over a certain age, where retraining is problematic. Protectionism will only slow the inevitable transition of our workforce to more productive endeavors. To be sure, an added few years on the job may enable some workers to reach retirement with reasonable security and dignity, but if we hinder competitive progress, we will almost certainly slow overall economic growth and keep frozen in place younger workers whose opportunities to secure jobs with better long-run prospects diminish with time. Terrorism poses a challenge to the remarkable record of globalization. A global society reflects an ever more open economic environment in which participants are free to engage in commerce and finance wherever in the world the possibilities of increased value added arise. It fosters ever greater cross-border contact and further exploitation of the values of specialization but on a global scale. Fear of terrorist acts, however, has the potential to induce disengagement from activities, both domestic and cross border. If we allow terrorism to undermine our freedom of action, we could reverse at least part of the palpable gains achieved by postwar globalization. It is incumbent upon us not to allow that to happen. I trust that we will go forward expeditiously with the pending new trade round. The differences to be resolved in such talks are small relative to the larger issue of maintaining our freedoms to travel and trade on a global scale. Globalization admittedly is an exceptionally abstract concept to convey to the general public. Economists can document the analytic ties of trade to growth and standards of living. A far greater challenge for us has been, and will continue to be, making clear that globalization is an endeavor that can spread worldwide the values of freedom and civil contact -- the antithesis of terrorism. Globalization, in addition to its myriad material benefits, needs to be seen as a reflection of human freedom in economic terms by a vast majority of its participants. It needs to be seen as offering opportunities to raise the standards of living of all participants in the world trading system. If we fail to make that case, renewed barriers to commerce could fill the void, and the advances associated with globalization could be slowed or even reversed. Should that occur, a few might be better off. Surely, the world will not.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application of BNP Paribas, Paris, France ("BNPP"), to acquire 55 percent of the voting shares of BancWest Corporation, Honolulu, Hawaii ("BancWest"), which owns Bank of the West, San Francisco, California, and First Hawaiian Bank, Honolulu, Hawaii. Attached is the Order relating to this action.
Remarks by Governor Laurence H. Meyer At the Distinguished Lecture Program, Swarthmore College, Swarthmore, Pennsylvania December 5, 2001 The Future of Money and of Monetary Policy Money and the payment system have evolved over time. The earliest forms of money were commodities, such as cattle and grain, that came to be used as means of payment and stores of value, two properties that effectively define money. Over time, precious metals, specifically silver and gold, became dominant forms of payment. From the 1870s to World War I and, in some cases, into the Great Depression, many nations backed their currencies with gold. Later, fiat money--currency and coin issued by the government but not backed by any commodity--became the dominant form of money, along with deposits issued by banks. What has driven this evolution of money, and what is the future of money? This is the first set of questions that motivate this lecture. Money also provides a metric for the measurement of prices. That is, once you have defined the unit of exchange, you can measure the price of any other item in terms of that unit. Money is also obviously related to monetary policy. Another theme of the lecture is the relationship between the nature of money, the scope for changes in the overall level of prices, and constraints on or opportunities for discretionary monetary policy. The next step in the evolution of the nature and transfer of money appears to be the spread of electronic forms of money and payment. In the United States, deposit money issued by private banks grew rapidly in the late nineteenth and the twentieth centuries. From a historical perspective, a now well-established form of electronic money is the bank deposit stored on the computers of the banking industry. Ironically, the most widely used method by the general public for transferring this electronic type of money is still the paper check, although large-value transactions between banks and between some businesses are electronic. In the early-to-mid-1990s, a new generation of technology created the possibility of storing monetary value on a silicon chip embedded in a plastic card or in a personal computer. With these developments, the focus of payments development shifted to electronic money--e-money--using card-based and computer-based products (often referred to as stored-value cards and network money, respectively) that consumers might use as a general means of payment in both the physical and the virtual worlds. What is driving the evolution toward electronic payments and perhaps toward new forms of electronic money? How rapidly is the innovation catching on, and what will the payment system look like in the future? How would the spread of e-money affect financial stability and the conduct and effectiveness of monetary policy? This is a third set of questions that motivate my lecture. In the past, money was often privately produced, though today note and coin production has generally become a government monopoly. The development of e-money has generated a fascinating debate about the possibility of reintroducing privately issued currency in the United States. What would be the implications for the payment system and for the central bank of the reintroduction of what is in effect private currency? Could the development of private money and private clearing balances make the Fed obsolete? If so, what becomes of monetary policy, and how would the price level be determined? These are the final themes that motivate my lecture. The Evolution of Money The range of commodities used over time as money is very wide; it includes cattle, grain, knives, spades, shells, beads, bronze, silver, and gold. The oldest recorded use of money dates back 4,500 years to ancient Mesopotamia, now part of Iraq. About 3,500 years ago, cowrie shells from the Indian Ocean were used as a means of payment in China. Passages in the Bible indicate that silver was used as a means of payment in the time of Genesis. The first coins--lumps of "electrum," a natural mixture of gold and silver--were introduced in Asia Minor in the seventh century B.C. in Lydia, now part of Turkey. Driving the evolution of money, from the earliest emergence of commodity money, has been the desire to increase the efficiency of carrying out exchanges. In the absence of money, trade is accomplished by barter, the direct exchange of commodities or services to the mutual advantage of both parties. Such exchanges require a double coincidence of wants or multiple trades. If I have apples and want grain, I have to find someone who has grain and wants apples. Alternatively, I can engage in a series of intermediate trades that ultimately result in the exchange of apples for grain. In primitive societies with a small range of goods, barter can work well enough, but as the range of goods expands, barter becomes increasingly inconvenient and costly. Several considerations have affected the evolution of commodity money itself--from cattle and grain toward shells and then bronze and ultimately to silver and gold. Commodities are useful as a means of payment and store of value if they were are less bulky in relation to their value, more durable, more homogeneous, and more easily verified as to their worth than other commodities. These considerations favored the use of the precious metals, for example, over cattle and grain, encouraged the use of gold and silver rather than bronze and copper, and further affected the way that silver and gold were used as money over time. Early commodity money, for example, was weighed, not counted, including the early uses of silver and gold. The introduction of coins that were stamped with their weight and purity allowed money to be counted and again reduced the costs associated with making transactions. Silver became the dominant money throughout medieval times into the modern era. Relative to silver, copper was too heavy and gold was too light when cast into coins of a size and weight convenient for transactions. The next important evolution was the introduction of "representative" paper money. Warehouses accepted deposits of silver and gold and issued paper receipts. These paper receipts in turn began to circulate as money, used as a means of payment and held as a store of value. The paper was fully backed by the precious metals in the warehouse. Once again, efficiency was enhanced by the convenience of carrying paper money as opposed to the bulkier silver or gold coins. Owners of the warehouses soon learned that the holders of the paper receipts would not simultaneously redeem the gold deposited with them. The warehouses could therefore lend the gold--in turn, often converted into paper notes--holding a reserve of gold that allowed them to meet the normal demands for redemption. This is the beginning of fractional reserve banking. Seventeenth-century English goldsmiths are usually credited with this transition to modern banking, though the first paper money was introduced in China in the seventh century, a thousand years before the practice became widespread in Europe. Paper notes and early banking were introduced in Europe in medieval times and further advanced by the great banking families of the Renaissance. The spread of paper notes and fractional reserve banking opened up the potential for credit expansion to support economic development but also introduced the possibility of runs and liquidity crises as well as the risk of insolvency through the credit risk associated with the lending. In the nineteenth century, many countries were on a bimetallic standard, allowing the minting of both gold and silver coins. But by late in that century, many countries had moved to the gold standard, and currency and bank reserves were backed exclusively by gold. Barry Eichengreen (1996) describes the gold standard as "one of the great monetary accidents of modern times," owing to England's "accidental adoption" of a de facto gold standard in 1717. Sir Isaac Newton was master of the mint at the time and, according to Eichengreen, set too low a price for silver in terms of gold, inadvertently causing silver coins to mostly disappear from circulation. As Britain emerged as the world's leading financial and commercial power, the gold standard became the logical choice for many other countries that sought to trade with and borrow from, or emulate, England, replacing silver or bimetallic standards. England officially adopted the gold standard in 1816. The United States moved to a de facto gold standard in 1873 and officially adopted the gold standard in 1900. The international gold standard refers to the period from the 1870s to World War I, during which time the major trading countries were simultaneously on the gold standard. Though many countries went off the gold standard during World War I, some returned to a form of gold standard in the 1920s. The final blow to the gold standard was the Great Depression, by the end of which the gold standard was history. Eichengreen argues that the emergence of the gold standard reflected the specific historical conditions of the time. First, governments attached a high priority to currency and exchange rate stability. Second, they sought a monetary regime that limited the ability of government to manipulate the money supply or otherwise make policy on the basis of other considerations. But by World War I, economic and political modernization was undermining the support for the gold standard. Fractional reserve banking, according to Eichengreen, "exposed the gold standard's Achilles' heel." The threat and, indeed, reality of bank runs created a vulnerability for the financial system and encouraged governments to seek a lender of last resort to provide liquidity at times of distress. Such intervention was, however, inconsistent with the gold standard. The international gold standard involved adherence to certain "rules of the game." First, the national unit of currency had to be defined in terms of a certain quantity of gold. Second, central banks had to commit to buy and sell gold at that price. Third, gold could be freely coined, such coins represented a significant part of the money in circulation, and other forms of money were convertible into gold at a fixed price on demand. Fourth, gold could be freely imported and exported. With the collapse of the gold standard, countries moved to fiat money systems. Fiat money is inconvertible, meaning that it is not convertible into nor backed by any commodity. It serves as legal tender by decree, or fiat, of the government. Its value is based on trust--specifically that others will accept it in payment for goods and services and that its value will remain relatively stable. This trust is based, in part, on laws that make the fiat money "legal tender" in the payment of taxes and, in the United States, also in the payment of private debts. Fiat money consists of both paper currency and metal coins the face value of which exceeds the value of the metal content of the coins. The need to finance wars encouraged early efforts by governments to issue fiat money. Early examples include the continentals issued by the American government during the Revolutionary War, assignats issued during the French Revolution, and the greenbacks issued during the Civil War. Most such issues of fiat money were followed by severe increases in prices, as governments tapped to an ever greater degree the easiest--in some cases perhaps the only--source of revenue. These experiences highlight the importance of control of the money supply for achieving price stability. Today, money consists of currency, coin, and transactions deposits (that is, checking accounts) at depository institutions, including, in the United States, commercial banks, thrift institutions, and credit unions. It is not clear when the first check was written. The earliest evidence of deposits that might be subject to checks is from medieval Italy and Catalonia. But at that time, the depositor had to appear in person to withdraw funds or to transfer them to the account of another customer. Checks did not come into widespread use until the early sixteenth century in Holland and until the late eighteenth century in England. The payment system has evolved further in recent decades with the spread of credit cards and then debit cards. Credit cards allow consumers to purchase all kinds of goods "on credit," making payment to the credit-card company for a collection of purchases later by check. In effect, the use of credit cards separates the purchase of goods from the ultimate settlement but increases the efficiency of exchange. Debit cards allow the consumer to make a purchase from a checking account through an electronic instruction to debit the account instead of by writing a check, another advance in efficiency. Even more recently, electronic money has been introduced, still perhaps more in concept than in practice, at least in the United States. I will return to the role of electronic money today and the potential for the spread of electronic money in the future. Money, Monetary Standards, and Monetary Policy The nature of money determines some important properties of the economy, including the scope for changes in the overall price level and the opportunity for discretionary monetary policy -- that is, for control of the money supply in an effort to improve economic performance. The basic relationship between money and prices is often described in terms of the "quantity theory of money." In the long run, according to this proposition, the price level moves proportionately to the money supply. As a result, the rate of inflation depends on the rate of money growth. Though this proposition holds precisely only under restrictive conditions, it identifies in a more general sense an essential link between money and prices. It is therefore useful in understanding the way changes in the nature of money might affect the determination of the price level. Under commodity money systems, money is often privately produced, and the price level of non-money goods in terms of the commodity money depends on the supply of commodity money relative to the supplies of the non-money commodities. In a sense, there is no absolute price level of goods in such an economy, only a set of relative prices. However, the relative prices of non-money goods in terms of the commodity money become, in effect, a measure of money prices, as we would think of that term today. The supply of commodity money, in turn, depends on technology and--particularly in the case of precious metals--on the pace of discovery. Prices of non-money goods in terms of the commodity money need not be constant, but there is no opportunity for discretionary monetary policy. As states came at times to monopolize the issue of commodity money, such as gold or silver coins, they often were tempted to debase the currency by reducing the proportion of silver or gold in the coins in an attempt to realize "seignorage" or revenue from issuing money. Debasement of the currency typically resulted in inflation--a rise in the price of non-money goods in proportion to the debased currency, which, in effect, maintained the underlying relationship between the commodity, gold or silver, and the price of other goods. These are the first experiences with significant inflation induced by government's manipulation of money. The next evolutionary step was representative paper money. As long as the relationship between the commodity money and the amount of paper money backed by the commodity money is stable, inflation will be determined by the available supply of commodity money. But the beginning of modern banking, by breaking the strict link between the commodity money and the money supply, added an element of flexibility to the money supply and further opened up the possibility for inflation. During the international gold standard period, currency issue and coin production were linked to and convertible into gold, so that a country's total domestic money supply was tied to the domestic supply of gold. This situation did not guarantee a stable price level, but it did remove the risk of government-induced inflation. The result--and an indeed an important motivation--was to constrain and, in principle, eliminate the government's discretion regarding the supply of money. The gold standard, in effect, put in place a rule that governed monetary policy. If a country ran a trade deficit that exceeded private capital inflows, it would, in principle, finance the difference by shipping gold to other countries. Doing so reduced the money supply--and hence income and prices--in the country with the balance of payments deficit and increased the money supplies, incomes, and prices in the countries with balance of payments surpluses. As a result, the system had a built-in tendency to move the deficit and surplus countries toward balance. In fact, drains on a country's gold or foreign exchange reserves were typically countered by an increase in central bank's discount rate. The effect on income and prices was, in this case, not due directly to changes in the gold supply, but to the changes in interest rates that were implemented to limit the drain on gold. However, principle and practice differed under the gold standard. Richard Cooper (1992) summarizes the contrast in the following terms: "The idealized gold standard . . . conveys a sense of automaticity and stability--a self-correcting mechanism with minimum human intervention, which ensures rough stability of prices and balance in international payments. . . .The actual gold standard could hardly have been further from this representation." Cooper notes that economic growth during the late nineteenth century was respectable, but variability in income growth was substantially greater under the gold standard than during the period after World War II. But the gold standard was predominantly about price stability, so here we might give special weight to evidence pertaining to that characteristic. Cooper notes that short-run variations in wholesale prices were greater during the pre-war gold standard than during the period from 1949 to 1979. In assessing economic performance under the gold standard, one must also look at possible trends in prices. Here the story is more complicated. If one compares 1877 and 1913, for example, the price level is essentially unchanged. But the period covers a sharp and extended decline in the price level followed by an equally sharp and persistent increase. Prices from 1873 to 1896, for example, decreased 53 percent; this decrease was followed by an increase of 56 percent from 1896 to 1913. These swings can be explained, in large measure, by fluctuations in gold production driven by discoveries of new deposits. In the early post-World War II period, nations sought an alternative to the international gold standard to govern exchange rates and international economic relations. At a conference at Bretton Woods, New Hampshire, in 1944, participating governments agreed to maintain a fixed exchange rate system--more precisely, an adjustable peg. Exchange rates were mostly stable but could be altered in discrete amounts, under prescribed circumstances--allowing deviation from a fully rules-based system to one with more discretion. In practice, the system was implemented by the commitment of the United States to maintain a fixed relation between its currency and gold and other countries' agreement to fix their exchange rates relative to the dollar, at rates agreed to at the conference. Fixed exchange rate systems provide a degree of constraint on domestic monetary policies. Under such a system, imbalances in payments were settled by flows of acceptable assets, typically gold or dollars. Most countries, given limits on their international reserves, had to follow policies consistent with supporting their fixed exchange rates--though, as noted above, they had the option of changing the exchange rate. The United States, however, was in a unique position because it could print more of the assets--dollars--acceptable for settling payment imbalances. As long as the United States was prepared to convert dollars into gold, at a fixed exchange rate for official purposes, other countries seemed willing to hold dollars. As dollars grew relative to the U.S. gold supply, the sustainability of this system came into question. When the United States broke the link to gold in 1971, other major countries no longer were willing to accept dollars at the fixed exchange rate. The adjustable peg system broke down, and the world ended up, de facto, in a regime of floating exchange rates, with exchange rates determined by supply and demand in the foreign exchange market. Most countries were operating under fiat money systems by this time. The combination of fiat money systems and floating exchange rates removed the earlier constraints on domestic monetary policies for other countries and made price stability and other dimensions of domestic economic performance dependent on the conduct of their domestic monetary policies. Central banks had to learn how to exercise that discretion in support of the objectives usually dictated by their legislatures, almost always including price stability and, in the case of the United States, price stability and full employment. There have been disappointments as well as successes with monetary policy around the world. Over time, the number of independent central banks has increased significantly, and independence no doubt enhances the ability of central banks to achieve price stability. There has also been an advance in our understanding of how to conduct monetary policy to achieve stable rates of inflation, at least on average over a period of years, and perhaps also to contribute, at the same time, to smoothing output and employment growth. Over the last ten to fifteen years, coinciding with both an increased emphasis on the price stability objective and the advances in our understanding about the conduct of policy, inflation performance has been very good. However, some countries today continue to impose constraints on discretionary monetary policy through fixed exchange rate regimes, tying their inflation rates to inflation in the country to which their exchange rate is pegged. This system does not eliminate the influence of discretion, but it makes inflation in one country dependent on the discretionary monetary policy in some other country. A currency board and dollarization are tighter versions of a fixed exchange rate regime--that is, fixed exchange rate systems from which it is progressively more costly to exit. The Payments System Today The payment systems in use today rely on concepts developed in the eighteenth century and before as well as on those developed in the twentieth century. Paper instruments are vital to commerce and so are electronic systems. To understand the long-term incentive for the spread of electronic payments and potentially new forms of money, one must appreciate the complexities and costs associated with our current payment system. As checks came into more widespread use, banks that accepted checks for deposit had to find ways to exchange checks drawn on a variety of other banks and to receive appropriate value for those checks--processes called "collection" and "settlement." First, banks sent messengers directly to other banks to collect the money due to them and their customers, the direct presentment method of check collection. Second, out-of-town banks would send checks to a correspondent bank, which in turn would collect the check, the correspondent banking method. Both of these methods required significant travel and could require the movement of large amounts of banknotes or gold. According to banking lore, a third solution to the interbank check collection problem evolved at a British pub. A London bank messenger stopped by for a pint (or two) and allegedly met another bank messenger. They quickly discovered that they each had checks drawn on the other's bank and decided to save time by exchanging them on the spot. More messengers joined the group. These messengers found that they could not only centralize the exchange of checks, they could also net the amounts of money that had to be exchanged among them to settle (pay) the checks they exchanged. This arrangement, the clearinghouse method, was first adopted in the United States by the New York Clearing House in the mid-nineteenth century, and it is still used by banks all over the world today--although, generally speaking, the exchanges are not held at a drinking establishment. In fact, all three methods of interbank check collection still are in use in the United States. In the early twentieth century the creation of the Federal Reserve System helped to improve the efficiency of the payment system in at least two important ways. First, the Fed set up a national system of check-clearing, in which the Fed acts like a correspondent bank with an ability to collect checks throughout the United States. This system improved the existing localized check clearing system by facilitating the collection and settlement of interbank checks among banks scattered throughout the country. Second, the Fed was able to act as a central repository for the reserves of the banking system. Reserve balances held at the Fed are widely used as the settlement vehicle for interbank check-clearing. According to a new Fed survey, households, businesses, and government entities write approximately 50 billion checks each year. The costs of using these checks include processing by depositing and receiving banks and by intermediaries, transportation, accounting, and resolving problems. The estimated cost to the banking industry of operating the entire check clearing system range from approximately ï¿½ to 1 percent of GDP. In addition, fraud losses in connection with checks are significant, perhaps in the tens of billions of dollars annually, and are growing rapidly. The level of these costs provides an incentive to improve the efficiency of the check clearing process. These costs have also encouraged innovation in substitutes for checks, that is, electronic payments, and may foster the development of new payment instruments, such as electronic money. Of course, developing and implementing electronic payment alternatives is expensive; however, electronic payment methods tend to be characterized by high fixed investment costs but low marginal costs, so the average cost per transaction should fall as use rises. The process of innovation, driven by attempts to increase the efficiency of the payment system, is continuing. Banks and technology providers are attempting to develop new payment methods, in many cases building upon the underlying the automated clearing house (ACH), debit card, and credit card networks to find more convenient and secure ways to make purchases, pay bills, settle debts, and post credits, especially over the Internet. "On-line" banking involves electronic access to information over the Internet about accounts and loans--including current balances and transactions history--as well as providing the ability to carry out payment related transactions--including transfers among accounts, receiving and paying bills, applying for bank credit cards, and reordering checks. Some so-called virtual banks have been set up to service customers exclusively through electronic channels, but an increasing number of traditional "bricks and mortar" banks see the Internet as another delivery channel that improves convenience for some of their customers. Similarly, the emergence of e-money reflects the attempt to develop new payment methods as a more efficient alternative to existing electronic payment means. The Future of Money: The Spread of E-money Many innovations to existing payment systems have been successful, but the question remains as to how e-money, a fundamentally new payment system, has fared. As mentioned earlier, most types of e-money take one of two forms: stored value cards and network e-money. Initially, many believed that these innovations would allow more retail and smaller-value transactions to be made electronically, paralleling the move to electronic funds transfer for large-value payments. Of course, substantial investments were needed to provide the infrastructure for using these types of payment devices and to ensure that enough consumers and merchants would use them to make the investments worthwhile. In the end, despite optimistic predictions, this first generation of e-money products was not widely adopted in the United States. In general, stored-value cards have been successful in closed payment systems, where e-money was the primary payment instrument accepted, and have failed in open payment systems, where competing instruments were readily available. Examples of closed system successes include mass transit systems, college campuses, and military bases. Two well-publicized open system e-money experiments that fizzled (one at the 1996 Olympics in Atlanta and the other on the Upper West Side of Manhattan in 1997 and 1998) accepted e-money at only limited locations and suffered operational difficulties. Limited locations discouraged consumer use, while operational difficulties discouraged merchant use. Both consumers and retailers were able to substitute other payment instruments, which resulted ultimately in lack of either customer or retailer support for the product. Possibly as a result of these experiences, new e-money plans target captive markets, including corporate expense accounts, teenagers with allowances, and payroll for employees without bank accounts, and use the existing, well-functioning credit card and debit card networks. The fundamental e-money characteristic--that a liability is issued by an entity primarily for the purpose of making payments--is retained. However, these new products are similar to a standard debit card issued by the major networks in terms of technical implementation, institutional arrangements, value transfer, recording of transactions, and currency denomination. I should note, however, that it took years for ATMs and debit card networks to be widely used and accepted within the United States. Ultimately these innovations in the payment system have proved efficient and cost-effective for users. E-money may have a similar experience, with natural setbacks at first, further evolutionary development, and eventually a growing acceptance from the general public. E-money and Financial Stability The spread of e-money could have significant implications for the size of central bank balance sheets, for depository institutions (depending on which are allowed to provide network money), for financial stability, and possibly for the implementation of monetary policy. Let me begin with the implications of the spread of e-money for financial stability. One possible problem is that those issuing the stored-value cards or network money, or clearing the transactions in them, could fail to make good on the promise of convertibility. The situation would be like that of banks issuing private notes under a gold standard. In the period before the founding of the Federal Reserve, bank failures were a common feature of the financial landscape, especially in times of economic and financial stress. Such failures presumably resulted from the effects of poor, dishonest, or excessively aggressive bank management, as well as the impact of adverse economic shocks on poorly diversified banks. While modern-day private money issuers should be able to hold diversified asset portfolios, they could still face strains as a result of larger-than-expected shocks or of management difficulties. Thus, one could imagine "runs" on a particular brand of stored-value card, for example, if the issuer were thought to be in financial trouble. If the issuers were banks and the stored-value cards were, in a legal sense, deposits, then such runs could be managed in the usual way, via the discount window and, if need be, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. If the issuers were not banks, however, then the introduction of new types of private money could increase financial instability and pose difficulties if--and this is a big if--the scale of operations were large relative to the financial system. E-money and Monetary Policy To appreciate the implications of the spread of e-money for monetary policy, it will be helpful to understand the concept of the monetary base (B). The monetary base consists of currency held outside the banking system (C) and bank reserves (R). In the United States, depository institutions hold reserves either in the form of currency--so-called vault cash--or balances at Federal Reserve Banks. Banks are required to hold reserves against their transactions deposits (required reserves), and they voluntarily hold a small amount of excess reserves. Monetary policy is implemented through the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) setting a target for the federal funds rate. This is the rate at which banks borrow reserves from one another. The FOMC then gives instructions to the manager of the Fed's portfolio (called the System Open Market Account, or SOMA) to carry out open market operations to hit the target funds rate. The Fed injects the monetary base into the economy through open market operations, purchases or sales of securities from its portfolio. When the Fed purchases securities for its portfolio, it pays for the purchase by creating a balance at one of its regional Reserve Banks--in other words, by creating reserves. The federal funds rate is determined by the supply and demand for such reserves. Through open market operations, the Fed can adjust that supply of reserves so that the market clears at the desired funds rate. The implications of the spread of e-money for monetary policy would arise from the substitution of e-money for both currency and deposits, shrinking the size of the monetary base. Taken by itself, the decline in the demand for currency would have no direct implications for the conduct of monetary policy because what matters for monetary policy is the supply of and demand for reserves. A decline in the demand for currency would, however, lower the monetary base and hence reduce the size of the Fed's portfolio of securities. The size of the Fed's portfolio, in effect, determines the seignorage the government obtains through the issue of the monetary base. To the extent that the demand for currency declines, the monetary base and hence the Fed's portfolio would shrink, and the interest earnings on that portfolio would diminish. The Fed uses the interest earnings, along with revenue from fees for check clearing, Fedwire, and other priced services, to cover the cost of its operations. The costs today are a small fraction of the interest earnings; the remainder is returned to the Treasury. The Treasury and hence the American taxpayer are the ultimate beneficiary of the seignorage. The interest earnings also allow the Fed to cover its costs outside the federal government budget and appropriations process, contributing to the independence of the Fed from the executive and legislative branches. Given that the Fed's cost of operations today are less than 10 percent of its interest earnings, the substitution of stored-value cards for currency would have to be very substantial before the budgetary independence of the Federal Reserve would be threatened--though, of course, the Treasury would lose seignorage even from the first dollar of substitution of e-money for currency. If the Fed were to lose so much seignorage that it could not cover its costs under current arrangements, it would have to look for other arrangements to cover its costs in a way that supported its independence. One reason for doubting that currency would dramatically decline is that much of it--at least half and maybe as much as two-thirds--is held abroad mostly as a store of value, not as a means of payment. A further significant portion of outstanding currency is held in connection with criminal activities, because of the anonymity it offers its holders. More interesting is the possibility that the spread of network e-money might dramatically reduce the demand for deposits and hence correspondingly reduce the amount of bank reserves. The effect of the spread of e-money on reserves would depend on who provides it and on the regulatory and statutory responses. For example, will providers be restricted to depository institutions? In this case, the e-money balances could be subject to required reserves, in which case its spread would not reduce reserves. Depository institutions could have a competitive advantage in offering e-money, if it were treated as another form of bank deposit and insured by the FDIC. In that case, the spread of e-money would not significantly reduce the effectiveness of monetary policy. But what if other financial or even nonfinancial firms were allowed to issue e-money? Again, reserves would not be affected if the other providers were subject to reserve requirements, though making them so would require a statutory change. However, the prospect that the spread of e-money could reduce reserves has generated many articles and an interesting debate. To address the issues in debate, let's assume that network e-money is not subject to reserve requirements. In this case, reserves would decline, so we would need to analyze the implications of such a decline for the conduct of monetary policy. Fortunately, we already have some experience with earlier innovations that have reduced the demand for reserves. Over the past decade, for example, banks have implemented retail sweep programs. These programs sweep excess funds not immediately needed for transactions from reservable transactions accounts into nonreservable saving accounts, allowing banks to reduce their required reserves. Banks have an incentive to use sweeps to reduce required reserve balances because they pay no interest. As a result of the spread of sweep accounts, the level of required reserve balances has declined from about $28 billion in late 1993 to only about $6 billion today. The Fed has worried that this decline in the level of required reserve balances could result in increased volatility of the funds rate and require the Fed to alter the way it conducts monetary policy. The concern here is the same that would present itself if the spread of network money substituted for transactions deposits and further reduced the level of reserves. If binding, a reserve requirement raises the level of reserves relative to what banks would otherwise hold. In the absence of a reserve requirement, banks would still hold reserves for settlement or clearing purposes. But without the cushion provided by required reserves, the intraday and interday fluctuations in the demand for reserves could increase the volatility of the federal funds rate. I should note, however, that to date, despite the sharp decline in required reserve balances, there has not been an increase in the volatility of the funds rate. The Fed has asked the Congress for statutory authority to pay interest on required reserve balances as well as on excess reserves. Paying interest on required reserve balances would greatly reduce the incentive for banks to conduct sweep programs and would therefore raise the level of transactions deposits and hence reserves. This would diminish the risk that further declines in required reserve balances would increase the volatility of the funds rate. In the absence of such new statutory authority, the Fed has indicated it might need to alter the way it implements monetary policy, in the event that required reserve balances fell further and the volatility of the funds rate increased. To date, because the volatility of the funds rate has not increased, moving in this direction has not been necessary. However, if the volatility of the funds rate did increase, one possibility would be to introduce a regime of floors and ceilings that would limit the fluctuation in the federal funds rate to an acceptable range. The ceiling could be set through a so-called Lombard facility at which banks would be able to borrow at a penalty rate, perhaps 50 basis points above the target funds rate. Banks would never pay more than 50 basis points above the target funds rate to borrow reserves if they had access to such a facility and if borrowing from the facility had no nonpecuniary cost. The floor would be set through a re-deposit facility at which banks could deposit any unwanted reserves with the Fed at a rate perhaps 50 basis points below the target funds rate. Banks would never lend in the market at a rate lower than 50 basis points below the target funds rate if they had access to such a re-deposit facility. The funds rate would thus be limited to a 100-basis range, and open market operations would aim to keep the funds rate on average near the midpoint. In principle, the system could work with somewhat narrower or wider ranges. The same system could be implemented if the spread of e-money reduced the demand for transactions balances and hence the level of required reserves. Such a system is common, indeed almost the norm for other central banks, in the conduct of monetary policy. So there has been a lot of experience with it and the United States could presumably implement it, although a statutory change might be needed to set up a re-deposit facility. But what if the spread of network money fully replaces transactions deposits and if reserves are not required against such money? Several countries have eliminated required reserves, and we appreciate today that reserve requirements are not essential for the conduct of monetary policy. In any case, under these assumptions, there would be no demand for required reserve balances at the central bank. Nevertheless, if trust in e-money instruments were not complete, holders would presumably demand that e-money be exchangeable for notes and coin at par. In this case, there may be no problem for monetary policy. To make good on the promise of convertibility, the issuers and their clearing and settlement banks would probably hold some notes and coin and some balances at the central bank. The resulting demand for the monetary base would allow the Fed to set the federal funds rate (by setting the supply of reserves, or by setting the terms on deposit and borrowing facilities). If trust in the private provider or providers were complete, and nobody ever doubted their ability to convert stored-value or network money into dollars, then demand for the monetary base could fall to zero. But providers of stored-value cards and network money would still need funds to meet demands as holders of the e-money use it to buy goods and services. Today such so-called settlement balances are held as reserve balances at the central bank. Even if there were no required reserves, banks would still hold settlement balances to meet liquidity needs and might continue to hold these reserves at the central bank. In this case, once again, there does not appear to be a problem for monetary policy. But, just to be sure we have covered all the possibilities, let's assume that banks or other providers of e-money choose to hold settlement balances to meet liquidity needs in the form of interbank deposits--deposits with other banks--instead of balances at the central bank. In this case, perhaps the large money center and regional banks would collectively take on the role of providing settlement balances to the providers of e-money. Let's call them the settlement banks. Let us also assume that such settlement balances were convertible into balances held at the central bank, a link that would enhance the acceptability of and confidence in e-money. This hypothetical situation--perhaps one more interesting as an intellectual challenge than as a plausible outcome--forces us to try to understand what the minimum requirements are for an effective monetary policy, defined as one that can maintain control of some short-term interest rate. Michael Woodford (2001) considers this problem (or at least a closely related problem) in a paper presented at the most recent Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Jackson Hole conference. He convincingly argues that monetary policy could still maintain control over interest rates--provided that the central bank can pay interest on the deposit balances it offers. The central bank can conduct monetary policy in this case by setting an interest rate on balances held at the central bank. Banks cannot pay a rate on interbank deposits lower than the rate offered on the balances banks could hold at the central bank. Otherwise, banks would convert their interbank deposits into central bank balances. Banks have no incentive to offer a rate on interbank deposits higher than the rate offered by the central bank because they would experience a loss as other banks give them low-yielding central bank liabilities in exchange for their high-rate interbank deposits. The minimum requirement for an effective monetary policy is, therefore, the ability of the central bank to set an interest rate on balances held by banks with the central bank. Woodford does not address the possibility that banks might not have a positive demand for central bank balances. Even in this case, the availability of central bank balances and credit at an interest rate set by the central bank would, in my view, effectively control the interest rate on interbank deposits and therefore continue to allow the central bank to conduct monetary policy. The availability of balances at and borrowing from the central banks would limit and effectively control the rates that settlement banks paid on their interbank deposits. Charles Freedman (2000b) makes a strong case that the possibility that banks would prefer to use interbank deposits for clearing purposes rather than central bank money is far-fetched. Central bank money has some unique properties that likely ensure it a comparative advantage relative to interbank deposits. First, central bank balances carry no default risk. No private bank or other financial firm can match this. Second, central banks typically provide access to liquidity through a discount window or other standing facility, especially important in the event of a serious liquidity problem. Banks may want to maintain a clearing account at the central bank to obtain funds quickly and conveniently from the discount window. Third, banks have a long tradition of holding reserve (settlement) balances at central banks. Therefore, the spread of e-money is unlikely to reduce the demand for reserve balances at the central bank to such an extent that the central bank could not conduct monetary policy by controlling an overnight interest rate. First, e-money that substitutes for bank deposits could be subject to a reserve requirement. Second, even if these deposits were not reservable or if reserve requirements were eliminated, banks would most likely continue to hold clearing balances with the central bank. In this case, a system of floors and ceilings, as described above, complemented by open market operations, should ensure the continued effectiveness of monetary policy. E-Money and the Reintroduction of Private Money: Is the Fed Obsolete? This leaves one last interesting set of issues to explore. Could e-money issuers successfully introduce new monetary standards-independent of the dollar-and either compete with the Federal Reserve as central banks, or operate without a central bank? Alternatively, what if the Federal Reserve were privatized, its role taken by a successful issuer of e-money? After all, the United States has not always had a central bank. Before 1914, private firms managed many of the activities now handled by the Federal Reserve. Thus, one can at least imagine a world in which central banking, to the extent there is such a thing, is in private hands. The result, in any of these very speculative cases, would clearly be that the factors shaping monetary policy and the determination of the price level would be greatly changed. Consider first the possibility that privately produced e-money replaced the Federal Reserve's monetary base, and allowed the establishment of several competing private central banks, each with its own money (say, red dollars, blue dollars, and yellow dollars). Of course, legal tender laws linked to government-issued currency make such a development very unlikely. Still, if a private bank were somehow able to establish its currency as a fiat currency (that is, without making it convertible into Fed dollars or some other asset), then its monetary policy over time would determine the value of its currency, interest rates on its currency and its inflation rate. If competing banks provided their own currencies, there would be multiple price levels, depending on the currency, and a number of cross exchange rates. But such an outcome would be extremely inefficient and is therefore hard to imagine as the ultimate outcome. Indeed, the euro area is going the other way to avoid the costs of dealing with multiple currencies. Though technology may reduce the costs of handling multiple currencies and prices, we are not at the point where the costs of doing so are negligible. Alternatively, the private money issuers might adopt a commodity standard, so that one could transact business with money backed by gold or other commodities, for example. In that case, the price level in each currency would reflect the relative price of the commodity chosen by the respective issuer. Some, like Lawrence White (1992), argue that free entry into the business of providing media of exchange tied to a commodity standard can lead to good outcomes even without a central bank, as he argues was the case in Scotland in the eighteenth century and first half of the nineteenth century. But that outcome may have depended on some special factors (including the unlimited liability of banks' shareholders). In the current environment, some issuers of private money would, from time to time, likely fail to be able to redeem the money in the underlying commodity. Moreover, it is not clear that the private issuers would have the appropriate incentives to hold capital and act as lender of last resort in a crisis. Indeed, as I noted earlier, central banks, at least in developed economies, issue currency and provide clearing services, at least in part, because their services offer features, such as freedom from default risk and finality of settlement, that private providers cannot match. What about a private institution taking over the (monopoly) role of the Fed (with the Fed disappearing)? Or, equivalently, the privatization of the Fed? In that case, the overall price level would be the result of the monetary policy chosen by the firm running the private central bank. It is not clear that a private monopoly central bank has the incentives to produce good monetary policy. Indeed, given the externalities involved, it seems plausible that a monopoly central bank that issued fiat money would not respond optimally to crises (it would charge too much for liquidity) or to cyclical variations (it would be maximizing the present discounted value of its seigniorage income rather than minimizing some weighted sum of discounted inflation and output losses). If the private central bank were to adopt a commodity standard, then its actions would be constrained and might lead to stable prices over the longer term, subject to all the limitations of the gold standard discussed earlier. But the central bank's incentives in terms of serving as a lender of last resort and holding capital and reserves would presumably still be wrong because of macro externalities that it would not take into account. Ultimately, it is essential, in my view, to require the central bank to act in the national interest and not as a profit-maximizing firm and that the government back it in a crisis to ensure that it has the ability to take any required actions without being constrained by its own financial resources. Conclusion The evolution of money is clearly a dynamic and on-going process, driven by the incentive to improve the efficiency of exchange. Even today, after a long historical process of evolution, we are left with a payment system that is very costly to operate, requiring tons of paper checks to be flown around the country and reunited with the person or firm that wrote the check in the first place. It seems inevitable that further evolution lies ahead. The spread of computers, advances in telecommunications, and the dramatic growth in the use of the Internet point to innovations in e-money. These will ultimately reshape the payment system and, along the way, present challenges to the Federal Reserve and monetary policy. Given the slow pace of progress and the strong likelihood that stored-value cards will substitute only for a portion of currency, there is little danger that the Fed's portfolio will shrink to the point at which the Fed will be unable to cover its costs of operation. The spread of network money, on the other hand, might not reduce the demand for reserves, if network money is subject to reserve requirements. In the absence of reserve requirements against network money, it is still likely that central bank balances would dominate settlement balances at private banks, given the former's lack of default risk. In this case, a system featuring floors and ceilings appears well designed to allow the Fed to continue to implement monetary policy by controlling the federal funds rate. Appendix 1: Innovations in Retail Payment Systems Important advances have been made in improving the efficiency of retail payment systems. For example, check collection costs may be lowered by the use of check truncation. In this case, a paper check is stopped - "truncated" - at some point in the processing cycle, but information continues to flow. Typically today, the truncation of the check occurs at the paying bank and the check is not returned to the check writer. Credit unions have been handling checks in this manner since the late 1970s. The earlier the paper flow is stopped, the greater the proportion of costs saved. For instance, cost savings can be greater when one bank in the check collection chain transmits information electronically to the paying bank. The payee's bank or an intermediary such as the Fed reads the information on a check and presents that information electronically to the paying bank. This form of truncation can be supported by the use of imaging technology that allows the digital check images to be captured and archived and used for information purposes or, perhaps, used in lieu of the original check. These images may then be returned to the check writer. Currently, this arrangement must be agreed upon by the parties to the check, which may include all banks in the stream of collection, and the check writer. The Federal Reserve Board is developing a draft law that would facilitate check truncation by removing several existing legal impediments to the use of electronics in check processing. Another form of truncation occurs at the point of sale, where the check is written. In this approach, a customer's check is scanned, converted into an electronic payment, and handed back to the customer. In this case, the payer's check is used as a source document from which to create an electronic payment. Truncation and imaging can potentially improve the efficiency of clearing paper checks. In addition, existing electronic funds transfer systems--ACH, debit cards, Fedwire, and CHIPS--have already substituted electronic transfers for paper checks for many transactions. The recent Federal Reserve study of retail payments found that Americans' use of credit cards, debit cards, and other electronic payments have been gaining relative to their use of checks. For example, from 1979 to 2000, while the number of checks written per year increased by 53 percent (or a 2ï¿½ percent compound annual growth rate), electronic payments increased by 500 percent (or an 8 percent compound annual growth rate). As a result, electronic payments accounted for roughly 40 percent of all retail payments other than cash in the United States in 2000 up from 15 percent in 1979. Credit card transactions today account for about half the electronic retail payments, and debit cards account for a little more than a quarter, and the remainder is primarily ACH payments. These trends are expected to continue. As part of this movement to electronic payments, the federal government encourages recipients to receive benefit payments electronically, and an increasing number of taxpayers are filing electronically. The Debt Collection Improvement Act of 1996 required that most Federal payments, except for tax refunds, were to be made electronically by 1999. While the "requirement" has been eliminated, in Fiscal Year 2001, 32.6 percent of federal tax payments were made electronically, and approximately 76 percent of all other Treasury disbursements were made electronically, representing more than 900 million payments. Today, the Federal Reserve operates an extensive check clearing system and an electronic automated clearinghouse (ACH) system, alongside and in competition with private check and electronic clearinghouses. Daily the Reserve Banks receive more than 50 million checks, which they sort on high-speed machines and route to paying banks in the local area and throughout the country. The Fed's check-processing operations also electronically capture payment data on all the checks and create digital images of many of the checks. ACH payment instructions flow from one bank computer to another via Federal Reserve computers. The value of these check and ACH payments are settled between banks on the Fed's books. Questions have been raised over the years about the rationale for a direct role for the Federal Reserve in the retail payment system. In 1996 and 1997, a Federal Reserve study group, under the direction of Alice Rivlin, who was then Vice Chair, considered the future role of the Fed in retail payments. After extensive discussions with banking industry representatives, the group concluded that the Federal Reserve should continue to provide check-clearing and ACH services and, at the same time, work with the private sector to encourage payment system innovations. Appendix 2: Electronic Payment Systems E-money is not the only potential type of electronic money. There are already important electronic elements of the payments system that have been operating since the 1970s. One is the automated clearinghouse (ACH) through which retail payments can be made electronically. This system is used primarily for pre-authorized recurring payments, such as payroll, corporate payments to vendors, social security benefits, insurance premiums, and utility payments. More recently, its use has expanded to include processing one-time payments, such as the checks that merchants truncate at the point-of-sale or, occasionally, as "e-checks" for Internet transactions. In 2000, the ACH system processed 6.9 billion transactions with a total value of $20.3 trillion. Two other electronic elements of the retail payments system are the debit card and automated teller machine (ATM) networks. The use of debit cards with personal identification numbers (PINs) for making consumer purchases is growing, and the use of signature-based cards sponsored by the major credit card companies has grown even more rapidly during the past decade. In 2000, there were approximately 3 billion PIN-based debit transactions with a total value of $138.2 billion and 5.3 billion signature-based debit transactions with a total value of approximately $210 billion. Credit cards, the largest share of electronic payments, have both a payment function and a credit function. Credit card payments represent approximately 50 percent of electronic payments. In 2000, there were approximately 15 billion credit card transactions with a total value of approximately $1.23 trillion. Large dollar, or wholesale, payments are processed electronically through either the Fed's Fedwire system or the private sector's Clearing House Interbank Payment System (CHIPS). Fedwire is available to depository institutions that have accounts with Federal Reserve Banks. It is used by about 9,000 depository institutions to make electronic funds transfers, on their own behalf or on behalf of their customers. Fedwire is especially useful for large-value and time-sensitive payments, such as payments for interbank settlement of purchases or sales of federal funds (borrowing and lending of reserves among banks), purchases and sales of securities, distribution or repayment of loans, and settlement of real estate transactions. The Federal Reserve began operating Fedwire through the nation's telegraph system in 1918 as an underpinning of the national money markets. In 2000, Fedwire, which has long-since become fully electronic, processed 108 million funds transfers, with a total value of $380 trillion and an average of $3.5 million per transaction. Also in 2000, CHIPS processed 45 million funds transfers with a value of $237 trillion and an average transaction value of $5.3 trillion. References Bagehot, Walter, Lombard Street , London: John Murray, 1873. Bank for International Settlements, Implications for Central Banks of the Development of Electronic Money , Basel, October 1996. Blinder, Alan, Statement before the Subcommittee on Domestic and International Monetary Policy of the Committee on Banking and Financial Services, U.S. House of Representative, October 11, 1995. Bloomfield, Arthur I., "Gold Standard," in Douglas Greenwald, ed., Encyclopedia of Economics (McGraw Hill, 1981). Committee on Financial Markets, Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, Electronic Finance: Recent Trends and Future Prospects , March 2001. Committee on Payments and Settlement Systems, S urvey of Electronic Money Developments , Basel: Bank for International Settlements, October 2001. Cooper, Richard, "The Gold Standard: Historical Facts and Future Prospects," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity , 1992, pp. 1-45. Davies, Glyn, A History of Money: From Ancient Times to the Present Day , Cardiff: University of Wales Press, 1994. Eichengreen, Barry J., Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard and the Great Depression, 1919 - 1939 , New York: Oxford University Press, 1992. Eichengreen, Barry J., "The Gold Standard," Ch. 1 in Globalizing Capital: A History of the International Monetary System , Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1996. Fisher, Irving, The Purchasing Power of Money , New York: The Macmillan Company, 1913. Freedman, Charles, Electronic Money: Monetary Policy and Seignorage Issues , Report prepared by the Steering Committee on the Monetary Policy and Seignorage Implications of Electronic Money, Basel: Bank for International Settlements, February 2000. Freedman, C., "Monetary Policy Implementation: Past, Present and Future--Will Electronic Money Lead to the Eventual Demise of Central Banking?", International Finance , June 2000, pp. 211-27. Friedman, Benjamin, "The Future of Monetary Policy: The Central Bank as an Army with only a Signal Corps?" International Finance , 1999 Goodhardt, Charles, "Can Central Banks Survive the IT Revolution," International Finance , June 2000, pp. 189 -209. King, Mervyn, "Challenges for Monetary Policy: New and Old," in New Challenges for Monetary Policy , Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 1999. Meyer, Laurence H., "Payment of Interest on Reserves," Testimony before the Financial Services Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit, U.S. House of Representatives, March 13, 2001. White, Lawrence H., "Free Banking in Scotland Before 1844," in Kevin Dowd, ed., T he Experience of Free Banking , New York: Routledge. 1992. White, Lawrence H., "In What Respects Will the Information Age Make Central Banks Obsolete?", prepared for the Cato Institute's 18th Anniversary Monetary Conference with The Economist , October 19, 2000, Washington, D.C. Williams, Jonathan, ed., Money: A History . New York: St. Martin's Press, 1997. Woodford, Michael, "Monetary Policy in an Information Economy," prepared for the Symposium on Economic Policy for the Information Economy, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, August 30-September 1, 2001. Footnotes Williams (1997) begins chapter 1 of Money: A History with the following quote from Genesis: "Then there passed the Midianites, merchant-men, and they drew and lifted up Joseph out of the pit, and sold Joseph to the Ishmaelites for twenty pieces of silver, and they brought Joseph into Egypt." Williams notes that the transaction in this passage is quite plausible for the historical period in which it is supposed to have occurred (early second millennium, B.C.), but with "one vital qualification." He argues that the seventeenth-century English translators of the text mistakenly thought the reference was to coins ("pieces of silver"). But, at the time, silver was used as medium of exchange as bullion, weighed for each transaction, not counted as with coins. Bloomfield (1981) refers to the strict version of the gold standard described here as the "gold-coin standard." He notes that some countries operated under a variant he calls the "gold-exchange standard." In this case, the monetary authorities held their reserves in gold or in claims on currencies (foreign exchange) that were redeemable in gold. Instead of moving gold around to settle payment imbalances, they stood ready to buy or sell these currencies at fixed exchange rates, which enabled them to economize on gold and earn interest on the reserves. Gold coins either did not circulate at all or circulated to only a limited extent in countries operating under a gold exchange standard. Section 102 of the Coinage Act of 1965 provides in part: "All coins and currencies of the United States, regardless of when coined or issued, shall be legal tender for all debts, public and private, public charges, taxes, duties, and dues." Thus when you tender U.S. currency to your creditor, you have made a legal offer to pay your debts. However, private businesses are not required to accept currency as a form of payment and may develop their own policies in this respect, unless state law says otherwise. However, the government is required to accept currency in payment of taxes and for other public charges. I am defining money "narrowly," to include only the means of payment, not broadly to include other highly liquid deposits. The quantity theory of money can be understood in terms of Irving Fisher's (1913) equation of exchange: MV=PQ, where M= the money supply, V= velocity (which is defined as the ratio of nominal income (PQ) to money), P = the price level, and Q= the level of real output. V summarizes the features of the payment system that determine how much money is needed to carry out a given volume of transactions. Fisher assumed V was constant and that in the long run Q would be determined by the economy's productive capacity and be independent of the money supply. In the face of ongoing financial innovations, V is not constant, and the link between money and prices, even in the long run, is not as precise. In a strict gold standard, there is not opportunity for discretionary monetary policy. However, many countries did not strictly follow the gold standard "rules," and, as a result, squeezed a degree of flexibility for discretionary policy out of the gold standard in practice. The concern that the gold standard increased the volatility of output is reinforced by Barry Eichengreen's (1992) conclusion that the gold standard contributed to the severity of the Great Depression. He finds, for example, that countries that were still operating under the gold standard throughout the Great Depression suffered the most, while those that were not on the gold standard in 1929 or that had quickly abandoned it by and large escaped. The precise language of the Federal Reserve Act, as amended in 1977, is that the Federal Reserve should promote price stability and "maximum employment." To ensure the consistency between the two objectives, the latter objective has been interpreted as maximum "sustainable" employment or "full employment," meaning the maximum employment level sustainable without rising inflation. See for a discussion of important recent advances in improving the efficiency of the retail payment system. See for a fuller discussion of existing electronic elements in the payment system, including the automated clearing house (ACH) and credit and debit cards for retail payments, and Fedwire for large dollar or wholesale payments. Today, open market operations are carried out partly to neutralize the effect of swings in currency demand on the level of reserves. In the absence of such offsetting operations, a decrease in currency demand would raise the amount of reserves and hence lower the federal funds rate. For example, if the demand for currency declined as a result of the spread of stored value cards, and there were no offsetting open market operations, reserves would increase as banks converted currency into deposits. The debate was touched off by a provocative paper by Friedman (1999) which in turn provoked a series of papers on the same topic, including King (1999), Freedman (2000a and b), Goodhardt (2000), and Woodford (2001). For some reasons, however, such a system might not work quite as well in the United States as in other countries. The stigma against borrowing from the Fed is entrenched in the United States. It is not clear whether or to what extent that stigma would be overcome with the introduction of a Lombard facility. In recent testimony, the Federal Reserve opened the possibility that the required reserve ratio could be reduced over time and that reserve requirements could even be ultimately eliminated. See Meyer (2001). Specifically, if the Fed were allowed to offer interest on reserve balances, the demand for voluntary reserve balances to facilitate settlements across banks could rise. Today some banks voluntarily hold operating balances, above the level of their required reserves, to facilitate settlements. These balances pay implicit interest, in the form of credits against priced services provided by Reserve Banks But the amount of priced services purchased by a bank limits the amount of balances on which it can make use of implicit interest. Payment of explicit interest might permit the Fed to ensure a high enough level of voluntary reserves to avoid undesirable volatility of the federal funds rate with a lower required reserve ratio or, in principle, without any reserve requirement.
For immediate release A preliminary test of mail delivered to a secure, closed mail-handling facility outside the main Federal Reserve Board building tested positive for anthrax exposure late Thursday afternoon. Board officials notified, and are working with, the FBI. This mail, handled by three Board and three contract employees, all wearing protective environmental suits, has been secured within the mail-handling facility. Further testing will be conducted within this secured facility. Any mail found to be contaminated will be sent to a military facility for analysis by the FBI. Since the first public reports of anthrax-contaminated mail surfaced, the Board has processed all mail through the secure mail-handling facility and it is not distributed inside Federal Reserve buildings until it has been cleared. The Board will be open for business on Friday. However, while the investigation is underway, the Board has decided to postpone public events for security reasons. A public Board meeting scheduled for 10 a.m. Friday will be rescheduled as soon as possible.
For immediate release Susan Schmidt Bies and Mark W. Olson on Friday took the oath of office as members of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. The oath was administered by Chairman Alan Greenspan in the Chairman's office. President Bush announced his intention to nominate Dr. Bies on June 8 and his intention to nominate Mr. Olson on July 10. The Senate confirmed them on December 6. Dr. Bies was nominated to a vacant seat last held by Susan M. Phillips, whose term expired. Dr. Bies' term expires January 31, 2012. Mr. Olson was nominated to the seat vacated by the resignation of Alice M. Rivlin on July 16, 1999. The term expires January 31, 2010.
No content found
For immediate release Edward W. Kelley, Jr., submitted his resignation Wednesday as a member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, effective December 31, 2001. Kelley, who has been a member of the Board since May 26, 1987, submitted his letter of resignation to President Bush. In view of his impending departure and in keeping with Board practice, he did not attend the December 11 meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee. "During his more than fourteen years on the Board, I have valued his sound judgment, hard work and, above all, his friendship," Chairman Alan Greenspan said. "I know of no one in public life with greater integrity or higher principles." Kelley, the senior member of the Board, said he was resigning to turn his attention to family and other personal interests. He had announced on June 4 that he planned to leave the Board after at least one of two vacant seats was filled. Susan Schmidt Bies and Mark W. Olson were sworn in to fill those seats on December 7. Kelley, 69, was first appointed to the Board by President Ronald Reagan. President George H.W. Bush reappointed him in 1990 to a term that expires on January 31, 2004. During much of his tenure, he served as Chairman of the Board's Committee on Reserve Bank Affairs, overseeing the operations and payment services of the twelve Federal Reserve Banks. He led the Reserve Banks' efforts to prepare their computer systems for a smooth transition during the century date change. Before becoming a member of the Board, Kelley had been Chairman of the Board of Investment Advisers, Inc., in Houston, Texas, and President and Chief Executive Officer of Kelley Industries, Inc., a Houston-based company with subsidiaries in manufacturing, distribution and business services. Attached is a copy of his letter of resignation.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday approved actions by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, Minneapolis, Kansas City, and Dallas, decreasing the discount rate at the banks from 1-1/2 percent to 1-1/4 percent, effective immediately.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the names of four new members of its Thrift Institutions Advisory Council and designated a new President and Vice President of the Council for 2002. The Council is an advisory group made up of twelve representatives from thrift institutions. The panel was established by the Board in 1980 and includes savings and loan, savings bank, and credit union representatives. The Council meets three times each year with the Board of Governors to discuss developments relating to thrift institutions, the housing industry, mortgage finance, and certain regulatory issues. The new President of the Council for 2002 is Mark H. Wright, President and CEO, USAA Federal Savings Bank. The new Vice President is Karen L. McCormick, President and CEO, First Federal Savings and Loan Association, Port Angeles, Washington. The four new members, named for two-year terms beginning January 1, 2002 are: John B. Dicus President Capitol Federal Savings Bank Topeka, KS Kevin E. Pietrini President and CEO Queen City Federal Savings Bank Virginia, MN William J. Small Chairman and CEO First Federal Bank Defiance, OH David L. Vigren President and CEO ESL Federal Credit Union Rochester, NY Council members whose terms continue through 2002 are: Ronald S. Eliason President and CEO Utah Community Federal Credit Union Provo, UT D. R. Grimes Vice Chairman and CEO NetBank Alpharetta, GA James F. McKenna President and CEO North Shore Bank, FSB Brookfield, WI Charles C. Pearson, Jr. Co-Chairman and CEO Waypoint Bank Harrisburg, PA Herbert M. Sandler Chairman and CEO World Savings Bank, FSB Oakland, CA Everett Stiles President and CEO Macon Bank Franklin, NC
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the proposal of SunTrust Bank, Atlanta, Georgia, to acquire the Florida operations of The Huntington National Bank, Columbus, Ohio, and to establish branches at the Florida locations of Huntington. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
Remarks by Governor Laurence H. Meyer At the Center for Strategic and International Studies, Washington, D.C. December 18, 2001 Financial Stability in Emerging Markets: What Have We Accomplished and What Remains To Be Done? Economic crises in emerging-market economies were a prominent feature of the economic landscape during the second half of the 1990s. Though such crises were by no means a new phenomenon, what brought special attention to the recent episodes was the perception of a heightened possibility of contagion--the spread outward of pressures from one crisis country to other countries. The risk of such contagion became evident when the collapse of Thailand's currency triggered a cascade of crises in other Asian emerging markets. Pressures could also spread through world financial markets to industrial economies, as happened with the Russian financial crisis. In the wake of the Asian crises in particular, initiatives were launched on several fronts to improve financial stability in emerging-market economies and thus to reduce the frequency and intensity of future crises. These initiatives have ranged widely, from efforts to improve policymaking in emerging-market economies in areas such as choice of exchange rate regime and debt management to development of international standards and codes of best practices and to reforms of international financial institutions. Today, I venture an assessment of how much progress has been made and how much remains to be done. I believe that there have been improvements in our understanding of the causes of crises, in economic policymaking in emerging-market economies, and in international institutional arrangements. The key to preventing future financial crises is for emerging-market economies themselves to institute sound domestic economic policies and to build robust domestic financial institutions. No improvements in international financial architecture can make up for deficiencies in these crucial areas. Reducing Contagion and Promoting Financial Stability Before I evaluate prescriptions for reducing the likelihood of emerging-market financial crises, I need to examine the causes of such crises. In general, financial crises result from adverse shocks to an already vulnerable economy. External shocks that a robust economy would shrug off can have a disproportionate impact on an economy beset by speculative excesses in asset markets, poor risk management, and inadequate regulation and supervision of the banking system. In broad terms, this describes the Asian emerging-market economies in the run-up to their crises in the late 1990s. Countries in the region did experience external shocks, including a slump in the semiconductor market and an appreciation of the dollar relative to the yen, that undermined their competitiveness. However, these shocks alone were not sufficient to account for the dimensions of the ensuing crises. The problem was that the shocks hit economies suffering from speculative excesses in their financial and real estate markets. Serious deficiencies in corporate governance and prudential oversight resulted in inadequate restraint on firms' indulgence in risk. Financial sectors were weakened by political interference in lending decisions and the moral hazard associated with wide-ranging, albeit often implicit, government credit guarantees. As a result, banks had insufficient incentives to manage their credit risks, and firms had inadequate incentives to limit their leverage and make sound investments. In particular, the corporate sector was enormously leveraged, and longer-term domestic investment projects were financed with shorter-term foreign-currency-denominated borrowing. Pegged exchange rate regimes in the presence of volatile international capital flows created additional vulnerabilities. Financial sector weaknesses, rigid exchange rate regimes, and volatile capital flows combined to yield a highly combustible mixture that, with the spark of adverse external shocks, ignited currency and debt crises, including the collapse of banking systems throughout the region The Asian crisis experience highlights the crucial importance of robust institutions and sound policies in mitigating the risks emanating from external financial shocks. One implication of this view is the importance of policy "sequencing" in emerging-market economies. Sequencing involves constraining the pace of increased participation in global financial markets to the pace at which a sound domestic economic infrastructure can be put in place. In particular, capital account liberalization in emerging-market economies needs to be preceded by significant progress in strengthening domestic financial systems. If liberalization proceeds too rapidly, the economy becomes vulnerable to risks associated with volatile capital flows. In the years leading to the Asian financial crises, the region moved toward capital account liberalization while domestic financial institutions and regulations were still underdeveloped. This mismatch encouraged excessive foreign borrowing, especially at short-term maturities, that greatly exacerbated the impact of the crises. Of course, some policymakers could use sequencing as a pretext to put off capital account liberalization indefinitely. With this concern in mind, some have argued that we really need to encourage rapid liberalization, independent of the state of financial sector institutions, in the hope that financial liberalization would pressure the authorities to improve supervision and regulation more quickly. I believe that the Asian crisis provides a strong argument against this approach. Before proceeding with capital account liberalization, a country needs to carefully consider deficiencies in domestic financial institutions, corporate governance, and bank regulation and supervision. Emerging-market economies in which such financial market infrastructure is still in an early stage of development should consider the use of prudential regulations that discourage capital inflows, especially short-term capital flows, along the lines of the approach formerly in place in Chile. Such regulation of capital flows may be appropriate in the period before robust domestic institutions and sound policies are fully in place and tested by experience. The Process The Asian financial crises generated several initiatives aimed at preventing or better managing future crises. The academic and policy communities have sought a better understanding of the causes and transmission mechanisms of crises. There have also been initiatives to reform what has come to be called the international financial architecture. Issues related to the prevention and management of emerging market financial crises have entered the agenda--and sometimes dominated the discussions--of the G-7 in recent years. In addition, some groups have been formed specifically to study such issues. The G-20, which includes finance ministers and central bank governors from major emerging-market countries in addition to the G-7, was launched in September 1999 to facilitate dialogue between systemically important countries and to promote international stability. The G-20 has recently focused on reform of the international financial architecture and the implications of globalization. I have participated in two of the new groups established in response to the Asian financial crisis: the Manila Framework Group and the Financial Stability Forum. I represented the Federal Reserve at the first Manila Framework meeting and in the Financial Stability Forum for the last few years. My focus in these groups has reflected my specialties at the Board, including Asia-Pacific developments and bank supervision and regulation. The Manila Framework Group was founded in November 1997, in the throes of the Asian crisis, with the aim of restoring financial stability in the region. It consists of finance ministry and central bank officials from fourteen Pacific countries, including the United States. The group has met twice a year and has undertaken a number of studies and launched cooperative ventures among its members. The Financial Stability Forum was established by the G-7 in April 1999, after the Asian and Russian financial crises, to provide a means for cooperation in the supervision of financial markets among national governments, international financial authorities, regulatory groups, and other experts. The forum's membership includes central bank and treasury representatives and a financial services supervisor from each of the G-7 countries; a single representative of a few more economies; and representatives of several international financial institutions and of global standard setters for banking, securities, and insurance. The forum is supported by working groups, committees, and task forces, which often include the participation of several emerging-market countries. The forum's mandate is to identify vulnerabilities affecting the international financial system and to improve coordination and information exchange among the various authorities responsible for financial stability. Its working parties have addressed issues such as off-shore financial centers, highly leveraged institutions, and short-term capital flows. The international official community has also taken up initiatives to reform the international financial institutions, inspired in part by proposals put forth in 1999 by Lawrence Summers, then Treasury Secretary. As a result of this process, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the multilateral development banks have instituted many changes, which I will discuss in more detail later, and reform initiatives continue. What We Have Accomplished Recent work, both under the auspices of the groups I just enumerated as well as elsewhere, has resulted in substantial achievements. We have a better understanding of the policies and institutional frameworks best suited to creating financial market stability in emerging-market economies, and changes in the international institutional environment have facilitated the adoption of such policies. I want to discuss five of the most important changes--choice of exchange rate regime, debt management policies, promulgation of standards and codes, reform of the international financial institutions, and private-sector involvement in debt restructurings. Exchange Rate Regimes The financial crises that enveloped Mexico, Russia, and several Asian developing countries in the 1990s reinforced what already appeared to be a growing consensus against pegged exchange rates. The experiences of these countries showed that pegged exchange rate regimes greatly limited the ability of real exchange rates to adjust in reaction to external shocks and restricted monetary authorities' ability to correct excessive growth of credit or to act as lender of last resort. Fixed rates also tended to encourage excessive borrowing of foreign currency, by reducing concerns about exchange rate risk, and contributed to particularly abrupt and disruptive reversals of investor confidence once exchange rate pegs were broken. Some countries, particularly those in which monetary policy has had low credibility, have felt that the adoption of a fixed exchange rate was necessary to reduce inflationary expectations. In particular, countries with histories of high inflation and poor macroeconomic management may have felt the need for fixed exchange rates, at least for a transitional period, until they developed a better track record for policy performance. In such cases, a key question is how long the rigid exchange rate regimes must stay in place before inflationary expectations can be reduced. The experience of the 1990s suggests that, in the context of rapid international capital mobility, sustaining a fixed exchange rate in the face of domestic policy imbalances or international financial market shocks is very difficult, and a forced abandonment of a pegged rate under pressure has proved quite disruptive. To provide greater stability to fixed-rate regimes, some countries have adopted currency board systems or moved to full-blown dollarization. However, such moves are by no means panaceas, as evidenced by Argentina's current difficulties. Considerably more countries have moved in the opposite direction--toward more freely floating exchange rates--often following experiences in which their pegged exchange rates proved not to be viable. I believe that, as a general rule, flexible exchange rate regimes are the best choice for emerging-market economies. A fixed-rate regime is appropriate only in the relatively rare instances in which it can be fully credible. The fact that many policymakers in emerging-market economies seem to have adopted a similar viewpoint in recent years provides some grounds for optimism that, in the future, emerging-market economies may experience fewer and less severe financial crises. Debt Management In recent years, a broad consensus has emerged within the international official community that prudent debt and liquidity management is a key element of crisis prevention. Emerging-market economies that experienced financial crises in the late 1990s generally had significant mismatches in the composition and maturity of their liabilities and assets that left them vulnerable to external shocks. In particular, almost all the crisis countries had high ratios of short-term external debt to foreign reserves. There was too much emphasis on borrowing strategies that aimed simply at minimizing short-term funding costs and that, in the process, created significant rollover risks. Authorities also failed to adequately monitor national balance sheets on a consolidated basis, while taking into account off-balance-sheet obligations, implicit government guarantees, and various other contingent liabilities that might arise if the private sector were unable to honor its obligations. One general principle to draw from this experience is that emerging-market countries should avoid issuing large quantities of short-term debt because ongoing exposure to rollover risk intensifies vulnerability to changes in market conditions. Some initial fiscal cost may be associated with lengthening debt maturities because long-term interest rates generally are higher than short-term rates. However, to the extent that lengthening the maturity of a country's debt improves its fiscal viability and reduces the likelihood of having to borrow at the high rates charged during a crisis, any increase in debt-service costs should be seen as a prudent insurance premium. In addition, the development of domestic government securities markets, in which debt denominated in local currency can be issued, can help reduce the vulnerability to shifts in global capital flows. The international financial institutions have launched several initiatives to help emerging-market countries improve their debt- and risk-management policies. Last year, the IMF and World Bank staffs, responding to discussions initiated by the Financial Stability Forum, completed a document entitled "Guidelines for Public Debt Management" that was based on some of the principles just discussed. These guidelines will be used to inform the IMF's technical assistance and surveillance efforts. The IMF is also conducting research examining various indicators that may serve as guideposts for debt and may help in managing reserves in emerging-market economies. Standards and Codes Among the initiatives that arose from the emerging-market crises was the international official community's effort to articulate "standards and codes" to encourage improved practices in the economic and financial policies of emerging-market countries. Some noteworthy progress has been made in this area. Standards and codes have been developed that cover a wide array of areas, including data quality and dissemination, transparency in monetary and fiscal policy, and best practices in banking supervision, payment systems, and accounting standards. The Financial Stability Forum has focused on ways to provide incentives for greater compliance with the standards and codes. The IMF is leading the implementation of this effort, but other international bodies--including the World Bank, the Basel Committee, and the Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development--are also taking part. Examples of actions so far include the Financial Sector Assessment Program, under which IMF and Bank staff assess the strengths and vulnerabilities of member countries' financial sectors, and the IMF preparation of reports on the observance of standards and codes, which address a country's progress on meeting standards in a broad range of areas. While promising, these initiatives have not been without difficulties. Implementation and compliance in the emerging-markets countries is uneven, and much remains to be done. Market participants are beginning to pay more attention to compliance with standards and codes, but scope for significant progress in this area remains. For example, compliance does not appear to be important in setting credit ratings or lending terms. More fundamentally, some emerging-market countries have complained of a lack of sensitivity to their particular circumstance, and have called for a more realistic view of the feasible pace of reform and clearer priorities. For emerging-market economies, it makes sense for standards and codes to focus on minimum standards because the appropriate standards will vary across countries depending on the resources and experience of officials, the structures of financial systems, and the cultural values and norms. Because a country may have unique circumstances, not all international standards are appropriate for each emerging-market economy. In the Basel II process, for example, standards appropriate for large, internationally active banks in the developed industrial economies may be inappropriate for emerging-market economies. Reform of International Financial Institutions Another focus of reform efforts in recent years has been the international financial institutions. Changes have been made, and more are planned. The IMF's lending facilities have been modified, including the introduction of an "expectation of early repurchase," which will tend to reduce the maturity of IMF lending, and an escalation of loan charges once a country's outstanding obligations to the IMF exceed certain thresholds. These measures are intended to encourage countries' return to capital markets as quickly as possible and to discourage excessive dependence on IMF financing. The IMF also has recently moved to make the pricing of its Contingent Credit Lines, or CCL, more attractive to potential borrowers. The CCL was established in 1999 to provide liquidity to prequalified countries with track records of sound policies. However, this facility has never been used. Countries have expressed concerns that the benefits of being prequalified are more than offset by the potential costs of being disqualified if their policies subsequently are deemed to have weakened. Countries have also voiced concerns that simply applying for the CCL may be interpreted by the markets as a signal of vulnerability. As mentioned previously, the IMF has also moved to improve its ability to assess the economic and financial vulnerabilities of its members, including efforts to identify national balance sheet and liquidity risks, as part of a broader initiative to strengthen the IMF's surveillance efforts. Measures to discourage misreporting have been strengthened, and efforts have been made to make the IMF's operations more transparent, including the publication of policy documents. The role of conditionality in IMF programs has been a subject of ongoing debate. Critics have argued that these programs, particularly those constructed during the Asian crises, have carried too many detailed conditions and have focused disproportionately on structural objectives rather than on the macroeconomic issues that are the IMF's core mandate. It has been argued that this represents micromanagement and reduces the scope for country ownership of adjustment programs. In response to this critique, the IMF has said that it is moving to streamline and focus conditionality, particularly with respect to structural measures, and to provide greater clarity as to why conditions in certain areas are included in or excluded from programs. Though efforts to provide greater focus to conditionality are welcome, they should not come at the expense of the underlying rigor of Fund programs or the protection of its resources that conditionality provides. There have also been initiatives to reform the multilateral development banks. It has been suggested that there should be increasing selectivity in projects, a reform in pricing policies involving more differentiation across lending activities and borrowers, and improved methods of monitoring the compliance of borrowers. In addition, there have been calls for the IMF and the World Bank to show greater sensitivity to the needs of the world's poorest countries. The process of translating these general principles into concrete policies has somewhat progressed, but it appears still to be in its early stages. Private-Sector Involvement An important and evolving aspect of dealing with emerging-market financial crises is what has come to be referred to as private-sector involvement. The central issue here is the role of private-sector creditors during default or restructuring of an emerging-market economy's debt. Unlike the bankruptcy of a firm in a domestic market, for which procedures are generally codified and settled, the default of a sovereign nation currently involves no binding legal jurisdiction or enforcement mechanism. The goal of private-sector involvement is to ensure that, in a crisis, private-sector creditors, particularly bondholders with instruments denominated in or linked to a foreign currency, participate in efforts to resolve the problem. Such participation can take various forms--debt exchanges, rollovers, restructurings, provision of new money, or outright losses. The extent to which the private sector has helped resolve emerging-market crises has evolved over time. During the debt crises of the 1980s, official support generally was focused on financing current account shortfalls and easing the macroeconomic adjustment process. Bank creditors restructured old loans, extended new loans, and eventually--under the Brady plan--exchanged their loans for bonds with diminished value. During the 1990s, however, bonds became much more important as sources of credit for many countries. This greater importance raised new issues for debt restructuring, given the more atomistic and dispersed nature of bondholders as a group. The emergence of very large international support packages--for Mexico in 1995, several Asian countries and Brazil in 1997 and 1998, and Turkey and Argentina more recently--may be seen in part as a response to the perceived difficulties of engaging private creditors, particularly bondholders, in the resolution of emerging-market debt problems. This point, however, should not be overstated. Many private investors--most notably those who invested in equities--have taken substantial losses during recent crises. The provision of large financial-assistance packages has been criticized because of a focus on only two possible outcomes for emerging-market economies facing financial difficulties--either default or no default, with the international official community viewed as often endeavoring to avoid default at all costs. Developing procedures aimed at facilitating intermediate solutions--namely, some form of debt restructuring with private-sector involvement--might, in this view, help avoid disruptive, corner solution outcomes. Moreover, large support programs have been criticized for exacerbating so-called moral hazard by encouraging overborrowing and overlending through leading investors to believe that the official community will bail them out should debt repayment problems arise. A key argument for private-sector involvement is that markets will price risk properly and allocate resources efficiently only if investors are forced to bear the costs of their bad decisions. The hope is that, if the broad principles for achieving private-sector involvement are known in advance, they might reduce investors' uncertainty about the rules of the game and help to ensure that workouts proceed smoothly and predictably. The principles could facilitate orderly resolution of financial crises and might also help prevent crises by reducing uncertainty as to how investors would be dealt with during times of crisis. In recent years, a tremendous amount of discussion has been devoted to considering means by which private investors could be involved during financial crises on an orderly, systematic, and predictable basis. Yet these efforts still have a long way to go. Some members of the official community find it difficult to accept the notion of sanctioning arrears or default. Also, some have concerns that strict limitations on official IMF support could constrain the official sector when such support was genuinely needed to avert international contagion. Agreement on abstract principles of private-sector involvement remain elusive, but on the practical level, instances of private-sector involvement are accumulating, laying down a foundation of practices and precedents that should serve to make future restructurings more orderly and predictable. In recent years, international bond restructurings have been conducted by Pakistan, Ukraine, and Ecuador as a means of either dealing with an existing default or avoiding an impending default. In addition, the IMF-led financial assistance to both Turkey and Argentina has included various forms of private-sector involvement. The authorities in Argentina are currently exchanging government debt on terms that involve significant concessions from the private sector. IMF First Deputy Managing Director Anne Krueger has recently weighed in on the issue of international bankruptcy arrangements. She proposed that, in the event of an imminent financial crisis by an IMF borrower, there should be, among other policies, an IMF-sanctioned temporary standstill on debt-service payments and negotiated restructurings under IMF auspices of debts to private-sector creditors. Though better international bankruptcy arrangements have certainly been a longstanding need--as noted by Chairman Greenspan as far back as 1995, immediately after the Mexican crisis--an initial reading of Krueger's proposal suggests that it would face very significant practical problems. The major problem with the Krueger proposal, as with any scheme to establish international bankruptcy arrangements, stems from the fundamental fact of the political sovereignty of nations. Debtor and creditor countries alike would have to cede significant sovereignty to the IMF under Krueger's proposal and would almost certainly prove reluctant to do so. Krueger's proposal merits further study, but some of the more evolutionary, piecemeal changes in international debt-restructuring arrangements, which I discussed under the general rubric of private-sector involvement, probably represent a more realistic hope for near-term improvement in international bankruptcy arrangements. What Is Left To Be Done? I have outlined some of the main efforts to prevent or mitigate financial crises in emerging-market economies. Now the question arises--What are the main tasks that remain to be accomplished? Many of the initiatives that I have discussed, such as formulation of standards and codes, reform of the international financial institutions, and development of procedures for private-sector involvement in debt restructurings, are processes that are already well under way and that have a momentum of their own. These areas do not so much need new initiatives as they do the extending, improving, and implementing of existing initiatives. For the future, the main objective should be to improve economic policymaking and institutions in the emerging-market economies. All economies are subject to periodic external financial shocks. But these shocks are unlikely to turn into financial crises if the country experiencing the shock has a sound macroeconomic environment and robust, well- regulated financial institutions. It is hard to think of an emerging-market economy experiencing a crisis over the past decade in which preexisting financial market weaknesses were not a prominent feature. They certainly played a central role in the Asian financial crises of the late 1990s, and financial-sector reform was a key ingredient in the IMF programs that these countries entered. Though significant progress has been made in this regard, much remains to be done. In particular, sometimes governmental initiatives have been launched in areas such banking reform or corporate governance without sufficient followup. Once more stable financial-market conditions have returned, the hard work of implementing financial-sector reform has sometimes slackened. However, to the extent that significant financial-sector weaknesses remain, so too does the potential for future crises. Economic crises in emerging-market economies usually manifest themselves in the form of financial-market pressures, but unsound fiscal policies are frequently at the root of the problem. An unsustainable fiscal position has often proved to be the main threat to financial stability. Fiscal problems were an important factor in the crises experienced by Mexico and Russia in the second half of the 1900s and by Argentina currently. If market participants come to perceive high levels of government debt and continuing fiscal deficits as threatening a government's ability or willingness to meet its debt obligations, capital flight can be triggered. When the government's fiscal position is truly unsustainable, international financial assistance aimed at providing temporary liquidity will not suffice, and some form of debt restructuring becomes unavoidable. Thus, a sound fiscal position is as important as a healthy financial sector in preventing emerging-market financial crises. We must be realistic about the feasible pace of improvement in economic policymaking in many countries. Economic institutions and practices take a long time to develop--they cannot be put in place or changed radically overnight. Furthermore, as I argued previously, efforts to introduce policies that open an economy to international markets before the appropriate legal and institutional infrastructure is in place--for example, taking all controls off short-term capital movements when the banking system is underdeveloped and inadequately regulated--can be counterproductive. Thus the importance of sequencing--of coordinating the timing of policy reforms with the evolution of supporting institutions. Some of the changes in the international economic environment in recent years appear favorable to a reduction in the likelihood of financial crises in emerging-market economies. Although it is difficult to generalize, macroeconomic policymaking in emerging-market economies seems to have improved somewhat in recent years. The trend toward adoption of more flexible exchange rate regimes has already been mentioned. Also, over the past decade policymakers in emerging-market countries seem to have developed a heightened recognition of the costs of high inflation, as evidenced by the general reduction of inflation rates in such economies over this period. The behavior of investors in international capital markets appears to have evolved in ways that make future financial crises somewhat less likely also. The composition of international capital flows has shifted toward relatively more foreign direct investment and longer-term portfolio investment and relatively less flows into shorter-term "hot money" investments. Also, international investors seem to be differentiating more clearly among emerging-market economies, as indicated by the current wide dispersion of debt spreads across countries. This situation could mean less potential for serious contagion if one country gets into trouble, since there would be a reduced tendency to treat all emerging-market countries alike. The so far minimal financial market spillover to other emerging-market economies from the current difficulties in Argentina and Turkey is consistent with such a trend. Furthermore, to the extent that international investors have differentiated among emerging markets, countries have incentives to improve the availability and quality of their economic data as a way of favorably distinguishing themselves. Conclusion In conclusion, it is worth reiterating that the most important consideration in preventing future emerging-market financial crises is establishing sound domestic policies and robust financial institutions in individual economies. No reforms of the international financial architecture can, by themselves, overcome deficiencies in these critical areas. However, an incremental contribution can nonetheless be made through improvements in the international financial system and in international institutions. Such initiatives can provide information, incentives, and assistance to emerging-market economies to encourage them to adopt sound policies and can mitigate the damage to international financial markets when problems do arise. A number of such initiatives are under way, and they hold the promise of reducing the incidence and severity of emerging-market financial crises in the future.
For immediate release
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today the approval of the application of Caixa de Aforros de Vigo, Ourense e Pontevedra, Vigo, Spain, to establish an agency in Miami, Florida. Attached is the Order relating to this action.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application by Independence Bancshares, Inc., Independence, Iowa, to acquire all the voting shares of Fairbank Bancshares Corporation, and thereby acquire Fairbank Bancshares' subsidiary bank, Fairbank State Bank, both of Fairbank, Iowa. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice by The Annapolis Banking and Trust Company, Annapolis, to operate a mobile branch in Annapolis and Anne Arundel County, all in Maryland. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Friday released the minutes of its discount rate meetings from October 15 to November 6, 2001. The minutes are attached.