For immediate release The Federal Open Market Committee decided today to lower its target for the federal funds rate by 50 basis points to 6 percent. In a related action, the Board of Governors approved a 25-basis-point decrease in the discount rate to 5-3/4 percent, the level requested by seven Reserve Banks. The Board also indicated that it stands ready to approve a further reduction of 25 basis points in the discount rate to 5-1/2 percent on the requests of Federal Reserve Banks. These actions were taken in light of further weakening of sales and production, and in the context of lower consumer confidence, tight conditions in some segments of financial markets, and high energy prices sapping household and business purchasing power. Moreover, inflation pressures remain contained. Nonetheless, to date there is little evidence to suggest that longer-term advances in technology and associated gains in productivity are abating. The Committee continues to believe that, against the background of its long-run goals of price stability and sustainable economic growth and of the information currently available, the risks are weighted mainly toward conditions that may generate economic weakness in the foreseeable future. In taking the discount rate action, the Federal Reserve Board approved requests submitted by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of New York, Cleveland, Atlanta, St. Louis, Kansas City, Dallas and San Francisco.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board has published an interim rule defining three categories of activities listed in section 4(k)(5) of the Bank Holding Company Act as financial in nature or incidental to a financial activity. The interim rule also establishes a mechanism through which financial holding companies or other interested parties may request that the Board find, by order, that particular specific activities fall within one of the three categories. The Board voted to approve the interim rule at its meeting on December 21, 2000. The interim rule became effective on January 2, 2001 . The Boardï¿½s notice is attached.
For immediate release Malcolm M. Bush President The Woodstock Institute Chicago, Illinois Willie Jones Deputy Director The Community Builders, Inc. Boston, Massachusetts Mary Ellen Domeier President State Bank & Trust Company of New Ulm New Ulm, Minnesota Anne S. Li Executive Director New Jersey Community Loan Fund Trenton, New Jersey John C. Gamboa Executive Director The Greenlining Institute San Francisco, California Gary S. Washington Senior Vice President ABN AMRO Chicago, Illinois Marta Ramos Vice President & CRA Officer Banco Popular de Puerto Rico San Juan, Puerto Rico Robert L. Wynn II Financial Education Officer Department of Financial Institutions Madison, Wisconsin Council members whose terms continue through 2002 are: Teresa Bryce General Counsel Nexstar Financial Corporation St. Louis, Missouri M. Dean Keyes Senior Vice President Firstar St. Louis, Missouri Robert Cheadle Chief Executive Officer Indian Territory Development Ada, Oklahoma Jeremy Nowak Chief Executive Officer The Reinvestment Fund Philadelphia, Pennsylvania Lester Wm. Firstenberger Deputy General Counsel American General Finance Evansville, Indiana Russell Schrader Senior Vice President and Assistant General Counsel Visa U.S.A. San Francisco, California
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System U.S. Department of the Treasury FEDERAL RESERVE AND TREASURY DEPARTMENT ANNOUNCE FINAL RULE ON MERCHANT BANKING ACTIVITIES The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and the Secretary of the Treasury today approved a joint final rule governing the merchant banking activities of financial holding companies. The rule, effective February 15, 2001, implements provisions of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act. The Board and Secretary believe it permits a "two-way street" between securities firms and banking organizations while, at the same time, giving effect to the statutory limitations and framework adopted by Congress to help maintain the separation of banking and commerce and ensure the safety and soundness of depository institutions. The final rule incorporates a number of amendments in response to public comments on the interim rule issued March 17, 2000. These changes include: Modifying the provisions defining when a financial holding company routinely manages or operates a portfolio company. Eliminating the dollar-based threshold for the review of a financial holding company's merchant banking activities and adopting a sunset provision for the remaining capital-based investment threshold. Streamlining the rule's reporting and recordkeeping requirements. Broadening the definition of "private equity funds" and clarifying the rule's application to such funds. Modifying when transactions between insured depository institutions and portfolio companies are subject to sections 23A and 23B of the Federal Reserve Act. Revising the restrictions that apply to merchant banking investments held beyond the permissible holding period. Expanding the definition of "securities affiliate" to include a department or division of a bank registered as a municipal securities dealer. Media Contacts: Federal Reserve: Dave Skidmore (202) 452-2955 Treasury Bill Buck (202) 622-2960 Federal Reserve: Dave Skidmore (202) 452-2955 Treasury Bill Buck (202) 622-2960
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Office of the Comptroller of the Currency U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission AGENCIES RELEASE RECOMMENDATIONS OF WORKING GROUP ON PUBLIC DISCLOSURE A private-sector working group today recommended enhanced and more frequent public disclosure of financial information by banking and securities organizations. Market risk information previously disclosed annually should be disclosed quarterly and the content of these disclosures should be improved, the group said. Additional credit risk information on wholesale credit exposures also should be made available quarterly, it said. The Working Group on Public Disclosure, established in April by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, was chaired by Walter V. Shipley, retired chairman of Chase Manhattan Bank. He delivered the group's findings in a letter to Board member Laurence H. Meyer. Copies were provided to Comptroller of the Currency John D. Hawke, Jr., and Securities and Exchange Commission Chairman Arthur Levitt, Jr. The OCC and SEC participated with the Board in support of the effort. In addition to calling for more frequent public disclosure, the working group said financial information should be disclosed based on a firm's internal methodologies and exposure categories. It said quantitative information on a firm's risk exposure should be balanced with qualtitative information describing its risk management process. Public disclosures should vary among institutions to reflect legitimate differences in internal management processes and disclosure practices should change in step with innovations in firms' risk management and measurement practices, the group said. Mr. Shipley, in the letter to Gov. Meyer, said the outcome of the group's deliberations "creates a common platform to move ahead with suitable steps towards enhanced public disclosure." Gov. Meyer, Comptroller Hawke and Chairman Levitt, in their reply, said, "We ï¿½ think that your recommendation for disclosure of credit risk based on banks' internal ratings is especially useful." "We hope that the working group's work encourages all large banks and securities firms to adopt enhanced practices for public disclosure," they wrote. "We look forward to continued discussion with market participants about public disclosure. In particular, we thank the members of the group for their offer to participate in future advisory efforts." The members of the working group, in addition to Mr. Shipley, were: Clemens Boersig, Deutsche Bank AG, Frankfurt, Germany; Patrick de Saint-Aignan, Morgan Stanley Dean Witter, New York; Dina Dublon, J.P. Morgan Chase & Co., New York; Douglas Flint, HSBC Holdings PLC, London; James Hance, Bank of America Corp., Charlotte, N.C.; Ross Kari, Wells Fargo Corp., San Francisco; Thomas H. Patrick, Merrill Lynch and Co., New York; Marcel Rohner, UBS AG, Zurich, Switzerland; Charles W. Scharf, Bank One Corporation, Chicago; Todd S. Thomson, Citigroup, New York, and Barry L. Zubrow, Goldman Sachs and Co., New York. Media Contacts: Federal Reserve: Dave Skidmore (202) 452-2955 OCC: Bob Garsson (202) 874-5770 SEC: Chris Ullman (202) 942-0020 Federal Reserve: Dave Skidmore (202) 452-2955 OCC: Bob Garsson (202) 874-5770 SEC: Chris Ullman (202) 942-0020
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System U.S. Department of the Treasury FEDERAL RESERVE AND TREASURY DEPARTMENT RELEASE REPORT ON FEASIBILITY OF MANDATORY SUBORDINATED DEBT The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and the Secretary of the Treasury found that subordinated debt issuance by large depository institution organizations may encourage market discipline and generate other supervisory benefits. A joint report released today also indicated that the Board and the Treasury's Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and Office of Thrift Supervision (agencies) will consider ways to enhance their use of voluntarily issued subordinated debt in supervisory monitoring. The Board and the Secretary, however, chose not to recommend that Congress make subordinated debt issuance mandatory at this time. The report to Congress, required by the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, called for continued research and, most importantly, continued evaluation of financial institution supervisors' experience in using information derived from voluntarily issued subordinated debt. Virtually all of the largest banking organizations already issue subordinated debt. The agencies monitor subordinated debt yields and issuance patterns in evaluating the condition of large depository institution organizations. The study found that existing evidence supports the use of subordinated debt to encourage market discipline. But it said that the net benefits of a mandatory policy are not clear enough to justify such a policy. Going forward, if additional evidence suggests that requiring institutions to issue subordinated debt is appropriate, either the Board or the Secretary may recommend legislation. Copies of the report, The Feasibility and Desirability of Mandatory Subordinated Debt , are available on the web sites of the Board, , and the Treasury Department, . Media Contacts: Federal Reserve: Dave Skidmore (202) 452-2955 Treasury Bill Buck (202) 622-2960 Federal Reserve: Dave Skidmore (202) 452-2955 Treasury Bill Buck (202) 622-2960
Remarks by Vice Chairman Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. At the Bay Area Council 2001 Outlook Conference, Oakland, California January 12, 2001 Domestic Macroeconomic Developments: Past, Present, and Future Thank you for inviting me to the Bay Area Council 2001 Outlook Conference. As always, the views I will be expressing are my own and are not necessarily shared by other members of the Board of Governors or of the Federal Open Market Committee. Before I discuss the current economic environment and recent monetary policy actions, let me set the stage with a brief review of the extraordinary performance of the U.S. economy in the second half of the 1990s. From 1995 to 1999, real gross domestic product grew, on average, about 4 percent per year. This pace was significantly above that in the previous five years, and you would have to go back to the 1960s to find even closely comparable periods of consistently robust economic expansion. In this environment, the unemployment rate fell to 4 percent, and the underlying rate of price inflation slowed, on net, despite very high rates of resource utilization. Even the most optimistic of forecasters could not have anticipated such a favorable confluence of economic events. Productivity Growth and Cost Reductions So, how did this confluence of positive events come about? As a policymaker, Iï¿½d like to think that well-executed monetary and fiscal policies--each focused importantly on their respective long-run goals of achieving price stability and reining in deficit spending-- played some role in creating economic conditions that fostered noninflationary economic growth. Our economy has also benefited from past actions by the government to deregulate industries. The removal of unnecessary government regulation started more than twenty years ago, during the Administration of President Ford, and gathered momentum during the Carter years. It has altered the business landscape by allowing, indeed forcing, businesses to focus more clearly on a more competitive marketplace with fewer constraints and increased flexibility. But the dominant force of late appears to have been a significant increase in the rate of productivity growth: Output per hour in the nonfarm business sector--a conventional measure of productivity--increased at an annual rate of almost 3 percent between 1995 and 1999, well above the pace earlier in the decade. Cyclical forces such as the inability of businesses to add to their payrolls as rapidly as they would have liked in response to the rise in demand probably played some role in these productivity gains. But probably more important, I suspect, were longer-term, structural changes arising from the boom in capital spending and the revolution in information technology. Let me turn to the evidence on this point. Technology Change and Productivity Growth Bob Solow--the MIT economist who won the Nobel Prize in economics for his work on the theory of economic growth--once quipped that you can see computers everywhere except in the productivity statistics. A few years ago that situation began to change, and we now have strong evidence that the faster productivity growth our economy has experienced is, in fact, due partly to newer technologies. Research by Federal Reserve Board economists Steve Oliner and Dan Sichel sheds some light on the sources of this faster productivity growth. The high (and rising) levels of business investment raised the amount of capital per worker and thereby boosted productivity. About 1/2 percentage point of the increase in productivity growth over the 1995-99 period can be attributed to this so-called ï¿½capital deepening,ï¿½ most of which reflected greater spending by businesses on computers, software, and communications equipment. Another 1/2 percentage point of the pickup in productivity growth reflected technological innovations in the actual production of computer hardware and semiconductors as well as better management--perhaps assisted by these high-tech investments--of the nationï¿½s capital and labor resources. Oliner and Sichel estimate that the consolidated influences of high-tech investments account for about two-thirds of the acceleration in productivity since 1995. This research supports the view that fundamental changes are under way in our economy. Whatï¿½s So Special about this Capital? That trend productivity has picked up and that high-tech investments are the source of the acceleration are important facts, but by now they are not new observations. Perhaps at this stage it would be useful to explore in greater detail this positive ï¿½shockï¿½ to the ability of our economy to produce goods and services. What is so special about computers and other information technologies that they can have such a strong influence on our economy? Let me highlight three special characteristics of high-tech equipment. First, computers and communications equipment depreciate at a very rapid pace. The current best estimate is that computers probably depreciate about 30 percent annually, although that estimate might be low, while other equipment probably depreciates at a rate of less than 15 percent annually. Therefore, computers are retired, on average, after three years, and the useful life for other equipment is about seven years. Firms must invest in computers at a faster rate than that for other forms of capital just to maintain a given level of the capital stock. The rapid replacement of high-tech capital means that technological progress becomes ï¿½embodiedï¿½ in the capital stock at a faster rate than is the case for longer-lived assets. The second feature of high-tech equipment that sets it apart from other classes of capital is the sensitivity of its demand to fluctuations in the cost of capital. Economists have debated for decades about the magnitude of cost-of-capital effects on traditional capital goods. A past consensus was that the cost-of-capital effect was small and very difficult to identify empirically. A somewhat different conclusion has arisen lately when the same basic models of investment are applied to spending on computers alone. The latest research suggests that computers are quite sensitive to movements in the cost of capital. The combination of an apparently high price elasticity and a rapid decline in relative computer prices -- 20 percent per year over the past decade -- likely led to the boom in high-tech investment. A third characteristic of high-tech investment is the magnitude of ï¿½externalï¿½ or ï¿½spilloverï¿½ effects that it generates. High-tech equipment generates benefits not only to the owner of the machine but to other agents in the economy as well. I am thinking in particular about so-called network effects--that is, linking computers together makes possible larger productivity gains than do computers operated as stand-alone units. Although difficult to measure, such network effects certainly have stimulated the demand for high-tech equipment and have helped to speed up the dispersion of new technologies. Supporting Structural Changes The technological changes inspired by investments in computers have enhanced the ability of businesses to reduce their operating expenses. In many industries, investments in information technologies have helped firms to cut back on the volume of inventories that they hold as a precaution against glitches in their supply chain or as a hedge against unexpected increases in aggregate demand. Product development costs have probably also been reduced through the use of better computer hardware and software, and new communications technologies have increased the speed with which firms can share information--both internally and with their customers and suppliers. This is the intersection of macroeconomics and management. Many business observers now believe that these newer technologies are not only reducing the cost of transforming inputs into outputs but also decreasing ï¿½interaction costs,ï¿½ the costs incurred in getting different people and companies to work together to exchange goods and services. Obviously, the line between ï¿½transformationï¿½ and ï¿½interactionï¿½ is not clear, but consultants who have studied this topic believe that these interaction costs account for 55 percent of all labor costs, with some industries, such as financial services, estimated to have interaction costs as high as 70 percent of labor costs. I cannot verify these numbers, but the general concept seems useful. Largely as a result of the increase in productivity in the recent past, we have experienced a remarkable stability in unit labor costs. During the past five and a half years, unit labor costs for nonfinancial corporations, which are the most accurately measured, increased an annual average of 0.2 percent. This compares quite favorably with the experience in the preceding ten years of a 2.2 percent annual rate of increase. If in fact ï¿½interactionsï¿½ account for 55 percent of labor costs, this relatively flat trend in unit labor costs is consistent with the concept that the newer technologies are allowing easier, less labor-intensive, interactions. Importantly, given the high rate of depreciation and the steep declines in costs of high-tech equipment, these savings in unit labor costs are not being undermined by offsetting increases in unit nonlabor costs. Moreover, given intense competition and the resultant lack of pricing ï¿½leverage,ï¿½ ongoing programs to reduce costs have become a key part of corporate strategies to maintain or improve profit margins. The focus on cost reduction has worked to head off the development of inflationary pressures in this expansion. The Macroeconomic Implications of Faster Productivity Growth Theory teaches us that the step-up in the growth rate of technological change certainly has important implications for economic activity and inflation. The main reason policymakers and economists are interested in the growth rate of productivity is that it helps us to understand the economyï¿½s potential to supply goods and services. The effects on the economyï¿½s ability to produce goods and services are clear, but theory predicts that a higher level of productivity growth would also affect the demand for goods and services. The most immediate effects would be on capital investment, as we have seen. Businesses recognize the new technological possibilities, and capital spending accelerates to take advantage of the new profit opportunities. The employment and income generated by business spending on capital goods boosts consumer outlays and sets off another round of investment spending. Through this process, an innovation on the supply side of the economy generates a comparable increase in aggregate demand. It is important to emphasize that higher productivity growth translates into higher real income growth for employees. This added income is seen most clearly in the higher wages paid to that growing number of workers whose cash compensation is tied to company performance either directly or through stock options. But real incomes should increase even for workers whose compensation is not directly linked to company performance, as profitable business opportunities bolster the demand for scarce labor. Theory also teaches that the increase in the rate of return on capital--even if generated by a rise in the growth rate of technical change--ultimately requires an increase in real market interest rates. All else equal, market interest rates must rise in order to maintain equilibrium between the higher demand for investment funds and the supply of investment funds. This somewhat abstract description of the effects of a step-up in the growth rate of technical change bears a striking resemblance to the developments of recent years in labor markets, prices of goods and services, capital investments, and fixed-income markets. But thereï¿½s still an element missing: the stock market. A higher rate of technical change that raises the productivity and hence the profitability of capital should elevate the value of equities. Since equity prices reflect market expectations of future cash flow and dividends, any adjustment in profit expectations can and does lead to a resetting of equity prices. Are stocks today overvalued, correctly valued, or undervalued? I certainly do not know, and I am not aware of anyone who does. As a result, I believe that it would be unwise--and indeed impossible--for the Federal Reserve to target specific levels of valuations in equity markets. However, equity markets obviously do have spillover effects on the real economy and, thus, need to be considered in assessing the aggregate balance of supply and demand. Given the efficiency and forward-looking nature of financial markets, even expected future technical innovations will have an immediate effect on equity valuations. Equity values, in turn, can influence consumer behavior. As you know, economists often speak of the "wealth effect," and econometric modeling indicates that consumers eventually tend to raise the level of their spending by 2 to 5 cents for every incremental dollar of wealth. As a consequence, equity valuations can have a noticeable effect on consumption and on macroeconomic performance. To put a rough number on these influences, simulations by the Board staff using our econometric model of the economy suggest that wealth generated in the equity markets over the past four years added about 1 percentage point to the growth rate of real GDP. Of late, equity markets have given up some of their gains. However, economists who have studied the topic generally think that the consumption effect of a change in wealth generated by the stock market begins to build in the first year and may take two to three years to be fully felt. Additionally, equity markets are a source of investment capital, and valuations in the stock market are one determinant of the cost of capital for businesses. External financing conditions, including equity valuations, are important because recent investments have increasingly been financed from external sources. External funds raised now account for about 20 percent of nominal capital expenditures--close to the highs of the past two decades. The Year 2000: A Period of Transition Productivity-led growth continued through the first half of 2000, with real GDP racing ahead at a breakneck 5-1/4 percent annual rate. The growth of aggregate demand was clearly outpacing even the most optimistic projections for the growth of potential supply, and the dangers of an increase in inflation pressures were higher. In order to promote better balance between aggregate demand and potential supply and to contain inflationary pressures, the Federal Open Market Committee took additional firming actions, raising the benchmark federal funds rate 1 percentage point between February and May. Even with these increases, the Committee felt that the balance of risks to the economic outlook still was tipped toward greater inflation. Signs of adjustment to a more sustainable level of growth of aggregate demand began to emerge over the course of the summer. But with no evidence either of a significant deterioration in price trends or a serious softening in economic activity, the FOMC entered a period of watchful waiting. As you know, monetary policy works with long and variable lags, and the Committee believed it appropriate to monitor how its earlier actions were affecting the economy before taking additional steps. As the second half of the year wore on, the data confirmed that a slowdown was under way. But for a while its extent and likely duration were still open questions. By the time of the November meeting of the FOMC, the statistical evidence and developments in financial markets suggested that the growth of aggregate demand had slowed to a more sustainable pace that might even be a bit below the growth rate of the economyï¿½s potential to produce. But with the labor markets quite tight and energy prices rising, the Committee still saw a continuing risk of heightened inflation. Economic conditions changed dramatically late in the year, though. By the December meeting, the ï¿½hardï¿½ statistical data on economic expansion, which are available with a lag, showed some signs of weakness, but aggregate economic activity still appeared to be expanding moderately in the fourth quarter. In contrast, other, anecdotal indicators turned decidedly more bearish. For example, warnings of slower sales and earnings growth resulted in substantial markdowns in the valuations of many leading high-tech companies, and consumer confidence swooned in December. Were these the signs of the inevitable ï¿½bumps in the roadï¿½ that occur during a period of transition from rapid growth to a more sustainable pace of expansion, or were they the early warning signs of a more serious slackening in demand? The FOMC wrestled with this issue at its December meeting. The risks clearly had shifted toward a period of subpar growth, but as of the middle of December, the evidence in hand did not appear sufficient to justify a rate cut. Following the December meeting of the FOMC, Committee members remained on ï¿½high alertï¿½ for signs of additional slowing in the pace of economic activity. As 2001 began, evidence accumulated that sales and production were weakening. The National Association of Purchasing Managers report suggested widespread softness among manufacturers. Auto sales and production were taking a hit. Revisions to the data on orders and shipments of nondefense capital goods provided hard evidence of a slowdown in business spending on high-tech capital goods, and more companies announced disappointing sales and earnings. Initial claims for unemployment insurance moved up further at the end of December, and layoff announcements increased. The reports of consumer spending at year-end were disappointing. In light of these factors, the FOMC acted on January 3 to cut the federal funds rate 50 basis points. Taking a policy action between meetings surprised some observers, and some have asked, ï¿½What does the Fed know that we don't?ï¿½ The answer to this question now, as in nearly every situation in which we change policy, is--"very little, if anything." Although I generally favor making policy decisions at our regularly scheduled meeting, we must remain flexible and be prepared to respond quickly and firmly to developments that deviate significantly from our expectations. 2001 Outlook Although some fog always surrounds the outlook, there is more than the usual amount of uncertainty at this juncture about the economic future. Private sector forecasters have been marking down their forecasts in response to incoming data, and most now fall somewhere between 2 and 3 percent for real GDP growth this year. Clearly, demand has weakened faster than most businesses anticipated, and inventories have become uncomfortably high in some sectors. But businesses are moving fast to adjust levels of production. And final demand should be supported by the lower interest rates put in place by the financial markets and the Federal Reserve. Consequently, I would expect a period of notable weakness early in 2001, followed by a pickup in activity. Despite the sharp correction in ï¿½new economyï¿½ stock prices, I believe that the underlying technical advances I discussed earlier in this talk will continue and will provide considerable support over time for business and consumer spending. In its most recent announcement, the FOMC indicated that risks remain weighted toward economic weakness. While the scenario I outlined seems the most likely to occur, I am not sure what level of interest rates will be associated with it. This depends on a number of developments, including the evolution of financial markets and investor appetite for risk. Conclusion Obviously the stance of monetary policy will play an important role in shaping the eventual outcome. In recent weeks the Committeeï¿½s outlook changed rapidly as a result of incoming data and anecdotal reports, demonstrating the importance of our constant and intense scrutiny of the economy. The Federal Reserve will continue to analyze the incoming information carefully and will act prudently and forcefully to provide the monetary and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Office of the Comptroller of the Currency Agencies To Accept Comments on Basel Proposal To Amend Capital Adequacy Framework The federal bank regulatory agencies will accept public comments on a major proposal by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision to amend the 1988 international capital adequacy framework. The full document is available on the Web site of the Bank for International Settlements at . Comments are requested on the proposal by May 31, 2001, and may be sent to the United States banking agencies and to the Basel Committee. While the 1988 Capital Accord was applied to all banks in the United States, it has not been determined how broadly the new approach will be applied, particularly given the many complex elements that may not be needed for smaller, less complex institutions. The United States banking agencies recently issued an advance notice of proposed rule making for non-complex institutions ("Simplified Capital Framework for Non-Complex Institutions," published November 3, 2000). Comments received on that proposal (due by February 1, 2001) will be considered in determining whether to apply the new approach to all banks. The U.S. banking agencies plan to issue a paper summarizing the Basel Committee's proposal as well as a list of specific questions that banks may find useful as they prepare their comments. The summary and questions, which will be issued in a few days, will be sent to all insured banking institutions and also will be available on the Web sites of the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency ( ), the Federal Reserve Board of Governors ( ) and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ( ). Media Contacts: Federal Reserve: Dave Skidmore (202) 452-2955 FDIC: David Barr (202) 898-6993 OCC: Bob Garsson (202) 874-5770 Federal Reserve: Dave Skidmore (202) 452-2955 FDIC: David Barr (202) 898-6993 OCC: Bob Garsson (202) 874-5770
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Office of the Comptroller of the Currency Office of the Thrift Supervision Agencies Adopt Guidelines for Customer Information Security The federal bank and thrift regulatory agencies have sent to the Federal Register joint guidelines for safeguarding confidential customer information. The guidelines implement section 501(b) of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLBA), and will be effective on July 1, 2001. The GLBA requires the agencies to establish standards for financial institutions relating to administrative, technical and physical safeguards for customer records and information. These safeguards are to ensure the security and confidentiality of customer records and information, protect against any anticipated threats or hazards to the security or integrity of these records, and protect against unauthorized access to or use of these records or information that would result in substantial harm or inconvenience to a customer. The guidelines require financial institutions to establish an information security program to: (1) identify and assess the risks that may threaten customer information; (2) develop a written plan containing policies and procedures to manage and control these risks; (3) implement and test the plan; and (4) adjust the plan on a continuing basis to account for changes in technology, the sensitivity of customer information, and internal or external threats to information security. Each institution may implement a security program appropriate to its size and complexity and the nature and scope of its operations. The guidelines outline specific security measures that institutions should consider in implementing a security program. A financial institution must adopt those security measures determined to be appropriate. The guidelines also outline responsibilities of directors of financial institutions in overseeing the protection of customer information. The board of directors should oversee an institution's efforts to develop, implement, and maintain an effective information security program and approve written information security policies and programs. The guidelines require financial institutions to oversee their service provider arrangements in order to protect the security of customer information maintained or processed by service providers. Each institution must exercise due diligence in selecting its service providers, and require its service providers by contract to implement security measures that safeguard customer information. Where indicated by an institution's risk assessment, the institution must also monitor its service providers by reviewing audits, summaries of test results, or other equivalent evaluation of its service providers, to confirm that they have satisfied their contractual obligations. Media Contacts: Federal Reserve: Dave Skidmore (202) 452-2955 FDIC David Barr (202) 898-6992 OCC Bob Garsson (202) 874-5770 OTS Paul Lockwood (202) 906-6913 Federal Reserve: Dave Skidmore (202) 452-2955 FDIC David Barr (202) 898-6992 OCC Bob Garsson (202) 874-5770 OTS Paul Lockwood (202) 906-6913
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Office of the Comptroller of the Currency AGENCIES RELEASE REVISED CAPITAL PROPOSAL FOR NONFINANCIAL EQUITY INVESTMENTS The Federal Reserve Board and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency today announced proposed new rules governing the regulatory capital treatment for equity investments in nonfinancial companies held by banks, bank holding companies and financial holding companies. The new proposed capital treatment, revised in response to public comment and in consultation with the Treasury Department and other federal banking agencies, represents a significant modification of a proposal made by the Federal Reserve Board in March 2000. The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation has announced it will consider the new proposal Friday. The new proposal would apply symmetrically to banks and their holding companies and would apply to equity investments made under the new merchant banking authority granted by the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act and to equity investments in nonfinancial companies made under other specifically identified legal authorities. The new proposal generally would impose a capital charge that would increase in steps as the banking organizationï¿½s level of concentration in equity investments increased. An 8 percent Tier 1 capital deduction would apply on covered investments that in the aggregate represent up to 15 percent of an organizationï¿½s Tier 1 capital. A top marginal charge of 25 percent would be set for covered investments that aggregate more than 25 percent of the organizationï¿½s Tier 1 capital. Equity investments through small business investment companies would be exempt from these new capital deduction requirements and would continue to be subject to the same capital requirements that presently apply, unless the value of those investments exceeds 15 percent of the bankï¿½s Tier 1 capital. Grandfathered investments under section 24(f) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act also would be exempt under the new proposal. Under the new proposal, the agencies also would heighten their monitoring of banking organizations as the level of concentration in equity investment increases. The agencies intend to request public comment within 60 days after publication in the Federal Register. A description of the proposal is attached. Media Contacts: Federal Reserve: Dave Skidmore (202) 452-2955 OCC Bob Garsson (202) 874-5770 Federal Reserve: Dave Skidmore (202) 452-2955 OCC Bob Garsson (202) 874-5770
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Department of the Treasury FEDERAL RESERVE AND TREASURY DEPARTMENT ANNOUNCE FINAL RULE ON ALTERNATIVE TO RATED DEBT REQUIREMENT FOR FINANCIAL SUBSIDIARIES The Federal Reserve Board and the Secretary of the Treasury today announced their approval of a final rule establishing the alternative criteria that certain large banks may satisfy in order to control a financial subsidiary under the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act. Under the act, a national or state member bank ranked among the largest 50 insured banks may control a financial subsidiary only if the bank meets certain criteria, including having an issue of highly rated debt outstanding. The next 50 largest insured banks may control a financial subsidiary if they satisfy this debt rating requirement or an alternative comparable requirement jointly established by the Treasury and the Federal Reserve Board. Under the final rule, a bank meets the alternative requirement if it has a current long-term issuer credit rating from a nationally recognized statistical rating organization that is within the three highest investment-grade categories used by the rating organization. The final rule will become effective 30 days after publication in the Federal Register. It is substantively identical to an interim rule issued March 14, 2000. A joint notice is attached. Media Contacts: Federal Reserve: Dave Skidmore (202) 452-2955 Treasury: Bill Buck (202) 622-2960 Federal Reserve: Dave Skidmore (202) 452-2955 Treasury: Bill Buck (202) 622-2960
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today released an interagency summary of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision’s consultative proposal issued to the public on . Attached to the summary is a set of discussion issues. Respondents to the Basel Committee proposal are encouraged to review and provide comments on the entire range of topics covered in the proposal and to take particular notice of the issues highlighted in the U.S. agencies’ release. The interagency release is attached.
Remarks by Vice Chairman Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. At the Task Force on Financial Sector Consolidation press briefing, London, U.K. January 25, 2001 G-10 Study of Financial Sector Consolidation Good morning. My thanks to each of you for attending todayï¿½s briefing, and I especially thank our host, Sir Edward George, for sponsoring this event. Consolidation of all types of business activities has been a prominent feature of the economic landscape for at least the past decade. The financial sector has been an active participant in this development. Indeed, the last few years have witnessed an acceleration of consolidation among financial institutions. In recognition of the importance of this ongoing evolution, in September 1999 the Ministers and Governors of the Group of Ten asked their Deputies to conduct a study of the potential effects of consolidation in the financial sector. We were asked to attempt to isolate the effects of consolidation from those of the other powerful forces transforming our financial systems, and to identify key areas in which financial consolidation motivates the need for new or continued and, in some cases, accelerated policy development. The challenging nature and complexity of the topic, and the wide range of expertise and experience within the G-10 led us to establish six task forces for studying key aspects of financial consolidation. These task forces were comprised of staff from the central banks and finance ministries of the G-10 countries plus Australia and Spain, and representatives from the BIS, the ECB, the EU, the IMF, and the OECD. The task forces analyzed the patterns and causes of financial consolidation in the eleven G-10 countries plus Australia and Spain, and the potential effects of consolidation for financial risk, for monetary policy, for efficiency, competition and credit flows, and for payment and settlement systems. For the study, task force members reviewed existing research, undertook original research, and collected massive amounts of data, including conducting carefully structured interviews with private-market participants, central bank staff, and other relevant parties. It is my great pleasure to be here today to announce the publication of our study. And before going any further, I would like to thank, on behalf of the G-10 Ministers and Deputies and especially myself, the many people from many nations who produced this work. I cannot name all the dozens of people involved, but please allow me to thank them indirectly by publicly acknowledging a few key participants, each of whom performed in an extraordinary manner and without whom the studyï¿½s quality would have suffered greatly. Gavin Bingham of the BIS provided extensive secretariat services and frequently demonstrated his diplomatic skills. Myron Kwast of the Federal Reserve Board was my staff director, chaired a committee that drafted the Summary Report, and chaired the task force on financial risk. Age Bakker of the Netherlands Bank chaired the task force on the causes of consolidation; Alex Bowen from the Bank of England chaired the task force on monetary policy; Jean-Michel Godeffroy of the European Central Bank chaired the task force dealing with payment and settlement systems; Takatoshi Ito from the Japanese Ministry of Finance chaired the task force that documented the patterns of consolidation; and Fabio Panetta from the Bank of Italy chaired the task force on efficiency, competition and credit flows. I believe that the study we are releasing today will be of considerable benefit to those of us who conducted it and to many others. It is an important demonstration that the thinking of policymakers and the public policies they determine and administer are evolving along with the financial system. The evolution of public-sector perspectives is critical to the economic health of all our nations. I also believe that it is an excellent example of one way the G-10 and other governments can work together to address change. The study has reinforced the importance of a number of ongoing domestic and international efforts, helped us refocus our efforts in some areas, and made us feel more comfortable with existing policies in some others. In addition, the study greatly improved our understanding of how consolidation is affecting and may in the future affect areas of policy concern, helped us to identify and think about the relevant issues more clearly, and should help us to better anticipate problems that may arise in the future. For all of these reasons and more, I think the study has been a huge success. Key Findings and Policy Implications When considering a study of this depth and breadth (and length), it is always potentially dangerous and even possibly misleading to try to summarize the key points in a few words. For this reason, I urge you to read at least parts 1 and 2 of the Summary Report. Despite the risks, however, in my remaining minutes I would like to highlight what are, in my judgment, the studyï¿½s key findings and policy implications. First, the study documents the fact that a high level of merger and acquisition activity occurred in the 1990s among financial firms in the thirteen nations studied, including a noticeable acceleration in the last three years of the decade. Most of the consolidation has been within countries and within segments of the financial sector. Cross-border and cross-sector consolidations have been less frequent. In addition, our research shows that financial consolidation has substantially decreased the number of banking firms during the 1990s in almost every nation studied, and measures of the national concentration of the banking industry have tended to rise The study concludes that financial consolidation has helped to create a significant number of large, and in some cases increasingly complex, financial institutions. These firms increasingly operate across national borders and are subject to a wide range of regulatory regimes. Our work finds that the most important forces encouraging financial consolidation are improvements in information technology, financial deregulation, globalization of financial and real markets, and increased shareholder pressure for financial performance. It also concludes that financial consolidation is likely to continue, but the likelihood of specific future scenarios is impossible to assess with confidence. The study finds that financial consolidation has not significantly affected either the conduct or the effectiveness of monetary policy. However, our work suggests that central banks should remain alert to the implications of any future consolidation-induced reductions in the competitiveness of the markets most important for monetary policy implementation. Similarly, central banks ought to monitor potential future changes in the transmission mechanisms for monetary policy. Importantly, we also conclude that existing policies appear adequate to contain individual firm and systemic risks now and in the intermediate-term. However, going forward, the study identifies a number of topics that deserve careful attention by policymakers. For example, it seems likely that if a large and complex financial institution becomes seriously distressed, consolidation and any attendant complexity may have increased the chances that the winding down of such an organization would be difficult and could be disorderly. The resulting risks to individual firms and the financial system could be reduced by stepped-up efforts in contingency planning for working out a large and complex financial institution. I would note that such efforts are, as a result of this study, already under way. We suggest that both crisis prevention and crisis management could be improved by additional communication and cooperation among central banks, finance ministries, and other financial supervisors, both domestically and internationally. Indeed, the study strongly supports existing efforts in these areas. The most important ongoing sets of initiatives include proposals to improve the risk sensitivity of the international Basel Capital Accord and bank supervision, and efforts aimed at improving market discipline. The study concludes that financial consolidation has led to a greater concentration of payment and settlement flows among fewer parties. At the current time, our analysis indicates that the greater concentration of payment flows does not appear to have resulted in decreased competition in markets for payment and settlement services. However, our work indicates that the risk implications of consolidation in payment and settlement systems deserve close monitoring. Moreover, because of consolidation, central bank oversight of interbank payment systems is becoming more closely linked with traditional supervision of bank safety and soundness. As a result, increasing cooperation and communication between banking supervisors and payment system supervisors may be necessary both domestically and internationally. With respect to the impact of consolidation on the operating efficiency of the combined financial institutions, the study concludes that although consolidation has some potential to improve operating efficiency, and has done so in some cases, the overall evidence in favor of efficiency gains is weak. Thus, we suggest that policymakers should carefully examine claims of substantial efficiency gains in proposed consolidations, especially in cases where a merger could raise significant issues of market power. Last, but certainly not least, the study finds that the effects of consolidation on competition and credit flows are very case-specific and depend on the nature of markets for individual products and services. Some markets, such as those for wholesale financial services, generally evidence few problems. Others, such as those for retail products and services, sometimes experience problems from consolidation. Thus, as with a number of other issues addressed by our study, a case-by-case evaluation is required. Conclusion In conclusion, I again thank you for attending todayï¿½s briefing. I hope that my remarks have helped you to understand our studyï¿½s analysis and implications. Once again, I emphasize that it was truly an international effort. My colleagues and I would be happy to respond to any questions.
Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan Outlook for the federal budget and implications for fiscal policy Before the Committee on the Budget, U.S. Senate January 25, 2001 I am pleased to appear here today to discuss some of the important issues surrounding the outlook for the federal budget and the attendant implications for the formulation of fiscal policy. In doing so, I want to emphasize that I speak for myself and not necessarily for the Federal Reserve. The challenges you face both in shaping a budget for the coming year and in designing a longer-run strategy for fiscal policy were brought into sharp focus by the release last week of the Clinton Administration's final budget projections, which showed further upward revisions of on-budget surpluses for the next decade. The Congressional Budget Office also is expected to again raise its projections when it issues its report next week. The key factor driving the cumulative upward revisions in the budget picture in recent years has been the extraordinary pickup in the growth of labor productivity experienced in this country since the mid-1990s. Between the early 1970s and 1995, output per hour in the nonfarm business sector rose about 1-1/2 percent per year, on average. Since 1995, however, productivity growth has accelerated markedly, about doubling the earlier pace, even after taking account of the impetus from cyclical forces. Though hardly definitive, the apparent sustained strength in measured productivity in the face of a pronounced slowing in the growth of aggregate demand during the second half of last year was an important test of the extent of the improvement in structural productivity. These most recent indications have added to the accumulating evidence that the apparent increases in the growth of output per hour are more than transitory. It is these observations that appear to be causing economists, including those who contributed to the OMB and the CBO budget projections, to raise their forecasts of the economy's long-term growth rates and budget surpluses. This increased optimism receives support from the forward-looking indicators of technical innovation and structural productivity growth, which have shown few signs of weakening despite the marked curtailment in recent months of capital investment plans for equipment and software. To be sure, these impressive upward revisions to the growth of structural productivity and economic potential are based on inferences drawn from economic relationships that are different from anything we have considered in recent decades. The resulting budget projections, therefore, are necessarily subject to a relatively wide range of error. Reflecting the uncertainties of forecasting well into the future, neither the OMB nor the CBO projects productivity to continue to improve at the stepped-up pace of the past few years. Both expect productivity growth rates through the next decade to average roughly 2-1/4 to 2-1/2 percent per year--far above the average pace from the early 1970s to the mid-1990s, but still below that of the past five years. Had the innovations of recent decades, especially in information technologies, not come to fruition, productivity growth during the past five to seven years, arguably, would have continued to languish at the rate of the preceding twenty years. The sharp increase in prospective long-term rates of return on high-tech investments would not have emerged as it did in the early 1990s, and the associated surge in stock prices would surely have been largely absent. The accompanying wealth effect, so evidently critical to the growth of economic activity since the mid 1990s, would never have materialized. In contrast, the experience of the past five to seven years has been truly without recent precedent. The doubling of the growth rate of output per hour has caused individuals' real taxable income to grow nearly 2-1/2 times as fast as it did over the preceding ten years and resulted in the substantial surplus of receipts over outlays that we are now experiencing. Not only did taxable income rise with the faster growth of GDP, but the associated large increase in asset prices and capital gains created additional tax liabilities not directly related to income from current production. The most recent projections from the OMB indicate that, if current policies remain in place, the total unified surplus will reach $800 billion in fiscal year 2011, including an on-budget surplus of $500 billion. The CBO reportedly will be showing even larger surpluses. Moreover, the admittedly quite uncertain long-term budget exercises released by the CBO last October maintain an implicit on-budget surplus under baseline assumptions well past 2030 despite the budgetary pressures from the aging of the baby-boom generation, especially on the major health programs. The most recent projections, granted their tentativeness, nonetheless make clear that the highly desirable goal of paying off the federal debt is in reach before the end of the decade. This is in marked contrast to the perspective of a year ago when the elimination of the debt did not appear likely until the next decade. But continuing to run surpluses beyond the point at which we reach zero or near-zero federal debt brings to center stage the critical longer-term fiscal policy issue of whether the federal government should accumulate large quantities of private (more technically nonfederal) assets. At zero debt, the continuing unified budget surpluses currently projected imply a major accumulation of private assets by the federal government. This development should factor materially into the policies you and the Administration choose to pursue. I believe, as I have noted in the past, that the federal government should eschew private asset accumulation because it would be exceptionally difficult to insulate the government's investment decisions from political pressures. Thus, over time, having the federal government hold significant amounts of private assets would risk sub-optimal performance by our capital markets, diminished economic efficiency, and lower overall standards of living than would be achieved otherwise. Short of an extraordinarily rapid and highly undesirable short-term dissipation of unified surpluses or a transferring of assets to individual privatized accounts, it appears difficult to avoid at least some accumulation of private assets by the government. Private asset accumulation may be forced upon us well short of reaching zero debt. Obviously, savings bonds and state and local government series bonds are not readily redeemable before maturity. But the more important issue is the potentially rising cost of retiring marketable Treasury debt. While shorter-term marketable securities could be allowed to run off as they mature, longer-term issues would have to be retired before maturity through debt buybacks. The magnitudes are large: As of January 1, for example, there was in excess of three quarters of a trillion dollars in outstanding nonmarketable securities, such as savings bonds and state and local series issues, and marketable securities (excluding those held by the Federal Reserve) that do not mature and could not be called before 2011. Some holders of long-term Treasury securities may be reluctant to give them up, especially those who highly value the risk-free status of those issues. Inducing such holders, including foreign holders, to willingly offer to sell their securities prior to maturity could require paying premiums that far exceed any realistic value of retiring the debt before maturity. Decisions about what type of private assets to acquire and to which federal accounts they should be directed must be made well before the policy is actually implemented, which could occur in as little as five to seven years from now. These choices have important implications for the balance of saving and, hence, investment in our economy. For example, transferring government saving to individual private accounts as a means of avoiding the accumulation of private assets in the government accounts could significantly affect how social security will be funded in the future. Short of some privatization, it would be preferable in my judgment to allocate the required private assets to the social security trust funds, rather than to on-budget accounts. To be sure, such trust fund investments are subject to the same concerns about political pressures as on-budget investments would be. The expectation that the retirement of the baby-boom generation will eventually require a drawdown of these fund balances does, however, provide some mitigation of these concerns. Returning to the broader picture, I continue to believe, as I have testified previously, that all else being equal, a declining level of federal debt is desirable because it holds down long-term real interest rates, thereby lowering the cost of capital and elevating private investment. The rapid capital deepening that has occurred in the U.S. economy in recent years is a testament to these benefits. But the sequence of upward revisions to the budget surplus projections for several years now has reshaped the choices and opportunities before us. Indeed, in almost any credible baseline scenario, short of a major and prolonged economic contraction, the full benefits of debt reduction are now achieved before the end of this decade--a prospect that did not seem likely only a year or even six months ago. The most recent data significantly raise the probability that sufficient resources will be available to undertake both debt reduction and surplus-lowering policy initiatives. Accordingly, the tradeoff faced earlier appears no longer an issue. The emerging key fiscal policy need is to address the implications of maintaining surpluses beyond the point at which publicly held debt is effectively eliminated. The time has come, in my judgement, to consider a budgetary strategy that is consistent with a preemptive smoothing of the glide path to zero federal debt or, more realistically, to the level of federal debt that is an effective irreducible minimum. Certainly, we should make sure that social security surpluses are large enough to meet our long-term needs and seriously consider explicit mechanisms that will help ensure that outcome. Special care must be taken not to conclude that wraps on fiscal discipline are no longer necessary. At the same time, we must avoid a situation in which we come upon the level of irreducible debt so abruptly that the only alternative to the accumulation of private assets would be a sharp reduction in taxes and/or an increase in expenditures, because these actions might occur at a time when sizable economic stimulus would be inappropriate. In other words, budget policy should strive to limit potential disruptions by making the on-budget surplus economically inconsequential when the debt is effectively paid off. In general, as I have testified previously, if long-term fiscal stability is the criterion, it is far better, in my judgment, that the surpluses be lowered by tax reductions than by spending increases. The flurry of increases in outlays that occurred near the conclusion of last fall's budget deliberations is troubling because it makes the previous year's lack of discipline less likely to have been an aberration. To be sure, with the burgeoning federal surpluses, fiscal policy has not yet been unduly compromised by such actions. But history illustrates the difficulty of keeping spending in check, especially in programs that are open-ended commitments, which too often have led to much larger outlays than initially envisioned. It is important to recognize that government expenditures are claims against real resources and that, while those claims may be unlimited, our capacity to meet them is ultimately constrained by the growth in productivity. Moreover, the greater the drain of resources from the private sector, arguably, the lower the growth potential of the economy. In contrast to most spending programs, tax reductions have downside limits. They cannot be open-ended. Lately there has been much discussion of cutting taxes to confront the evident pronounced weakening in recent economic performance. Such tax initiatives, however, historically have proved difficult to implement in the time frame in which recessions have developed and ended. For example, although President Ford proposed in January of 1975 that withholding rates be reduced, this easiest of tax changes was not implemented until May, when the recession was officially over and the recovery was gathering force. Of course, had that recession lingered through the rest of 1975 and beyond, the tax cuts would certainly have been helpful. In today's context, where tax reduction appears required in any event over the next several years to assist in forestalling the accumulation of private assets, starting that process sooner rather than later likely would help smooth the transition to longer-term fiscal balance. And should current economic weakness spread beyond what now appears likely, having a tax cut in place may, in fact, do noticeable good. As for tax policy over the longer run, most economists believe that it should be directed at setting rates at the levels required to meet spending commitments, while doing so in a manner that minimizes distortions, increases efficiency, and enhances incentives for saving, investment, and work. In recognition of the uncertainties in the economic and budget outlook, it is important that any long-term tax plan, or spending initiative for that matter, be phased in. Conceivably, it could include provisions that, in some way, would limit surplus-reducing actions if specified targets for the budget surplus and federal debt were not satisfied. Only if the probability was very low that prospective tax cuts or new outlay initiatives would send the on-budget accounts into deficit, would unconditional initiatives appear prudent. The reason for caution, of course, rests on the tentativeness of our projections. What if, for example, the forces driving the surge in tax revenues in recent years begin to dissipate or reverse in ways that we do not now foresee? Indeed, we still do not have a full understanding of the exceptional strength in individual income tax receipts during the latter 1990s. To the extent that some of the surprise has been indirectly associated with the surge in asset values in the 1990s, the softness in equity prices over the past year has highlighted some of the risks going forward. Indeed, the current economic weakness may reveal a less favorable relationship between tax receipts, income, and asset prices than has been assumed in recent projections. Until we receive full detail on the distribution by income of individual tax liabilities for 1999, 2000, and perhaps 2001, we are making little more than informed guesses of certain key relationships between income and tax receipts. To be sure, unless later sources do reveal major changes in tax liability determination, receipts should be reasonably well-maintained in the near term, as the effects of earlier gains in asset values continue to feed through with a lag into tax liabilities. But the longer-run effects of movements in asset values are much more difficult to assess, and those uncertainties would intensify should equity prices remain significantly off their peaks. Of course, the uncertainties in the receipts outlook do seem less troubling in view of the cushion provided by the recent sizable upward revisions to the ten-year surplus projections. But the risk of adverse movements in receipts is still real, and the probability of dropping back into deficit as a consequence of imprudent fiscal policies is not negligible. In the end, the outlook for federal budget surpluses rests fundamentally on expectations of longer-term trends in productivity, fashioned by judgments about the technologies that underlie these trends. Economists have long noted that the diffusion of technology starts slowly, accelerates, and then slows with maturity. But knowing where we now stand in that sequence is difficult--if not impossible--in real time. As the CBO and the OMB acknowledge, they have been cautious in their interpretation of recent productivity developments and in their assumptions going forward. That seems appropriate given the uncertainties that surround even these relatively moderate estimates for productivity growth. Faced with these uncertainties, it is crucial that we develop budgetary strategies that deal with any disappointments that could occur. That said, as I have argued for some time, there is a distinct possibility that much of the development and diffusion of new technologies in the current wave of innovation still lies ahead, and we cannot rule out productivity growth rates greater than is assumed in the official budget projections. Obviously, if that turns out to be the case, the existing level of tax rates would have to be reduced to remain consistent with currently projected budget outlays. The changes in the budget outlook over the past several years are truly remarkable. Little more than a decade ago, the Congress established budget controls that were considered successful because they were instrumental in squeezing the burgeoning budget deficit to tolerable dimensions. Nevertheless, despite the sharp curtailment of defense expenditures under way during those years, few believed that a surplus was anywhere on the horizon. And the notion that the rapidly mounting federal debt could be paid off would not have been taken seriously. But let me end on a cautionary note. With today's euphoria surrounding the surpluses, it is not difficult to imagine the hard-earned fiscal restraint developed in recent years rapidly dissipating. We need to resist those policies that could readily resurrect the deficits of the past and the fiscal imbalances that followed in their wake.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among the New Century Bank, Southfield, Michigan, the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, and the Office of Financial and Insurance Services, Lansing, Michigan. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.