For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today published a final rule amending Regulation E (Electronic Fund Transfers) to implement provisions of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLBA) requiring disclosure of automated teller machine (ATM) fees. The GLBA amended the Electronic Fund Transfer Act by requiring disclosure of fees imposed by ATM operators (sometimes referred to as "surcharges"). Many ATM operators that impose such fees already disclose information about the fee to satisfy existing Regulation E and ATM interchange network requirements. Under the GLBA amendments, an ATM operator that imposes a fee on a consumer for an electronic fund transfer (EFT) service is required to provide notice of that fact in a prominent and conspicuous location on or at the ATM where the EFT is initiated. The ATM operator must also disclose that a fee will be imposed together with the amount of the fee, either on the screen of the ATM or on a paper notice, before the consumer is committed to completing the transaction. No fee may be imposed unless proper notice is provided and the consumer elects to complete the transaction. In addition, when the consumer contracts for an EFT service, the financial institution holding the consumer's account must provide initial disclosures, including a notice that a fee may be imposed by an ATM operator not holding the consumer's account, or by any national, regional, or local network used to complete the transaction. The revisions are effective immediately; compliance is mandatory as of October 1, 2001. The Boardï¿½s notice is attached.
Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan Current fiscal issues Before the Committee on the Budget, U.S. House of Representatives March 2, 2001 I am pleased to appear here today to discuss some of the important issues surrounding the outlook for the federal budget and the attendant implications for the formulation of fiscal policy. In doing so, I want to emphasize that I speak for myself and not necessarily for the Federal Reserve. The challenges you face both in shaping a budget for the coming year and in designing a longer-run strategy for fiscal policy have been brought into sharp focus by the budget projections that have been released in the past month and a half. Both the Bush Administration and the Congressional Budget Office project growing on-budget surpluses under current policy over the next decade. Indeed, growing on-budget surpluses were projected even under the more conservative assumptions of the Clinton Administration's final budget projections. The key factor driving the cumulative upward revisions in the budget picture in recent years has been the extraordinary pickup in the growth of labor productivity experienced in this country since the mid-1990s. Between the early 1970s and 1995, output per hour in the nonfarm business sector rose about 1-1/2 percent per year, on average. Since 1995, however, productivity growth has accelerated markedly, about doubling the earlier pace, even after one takes account of the impetus from cyclical forces. Though hardly definitive, the apparent sustained strength in measured productivity in the face of a pronounced slowing in the growth of aggregate demand during the second half of last year was an important test of the extent of the improvement in structural productivity. These most recent indications have added to the accumulating evidence that the apparent increases in the growth of output per hour are more than transitory. It is these observations that appear to be causing economists to raise their forecasts of the economy's long-term growth rates and budget surpluses. This increased optimism receives support from the forward-looking indicators of technical innovation and structural productivity growth, which have shown few signs of weakening despite the marked curtailment in recent months of capital investment plans for equipment and software. To be sure, these impressive upward revisions to the growth of structural productivity and economic potential are based on inferences drawn from economic relationships that are different from anything we have considered in recent decades. The resulting budget projections, therefore, are necessarily subject to a relatively wide range of uncertainty. CBO, for example, expects productivity growth rates through the next decade to average roughly 2-1/2 percent per year--far above the average pace from the early 1970s to the mid-1990s, but still below that of the past five years. Had the innovations of recent decades, especially in information technologies, not come to fruition, productivity growth during the past five to seven years, arguably, would have continued to languish at the rate of the preceding twenty years. The sharp increase in prospective long-term rates of return on high-tech investments would not have emerged as it did in the early 1990s, and the associated surge in stock prices would surely have been largely absent. The accompanying wealth effect, so evidently critical to the growth of economic activity since the mid-1990s, would never have materialized. In contrast, the experience of the past five to seven years has been truly without recent precedent. The doubling of the growth rate of output per hour has caused individuals' real taxable income to grow nearly 2-1/2 times as fast as it did over the preceding ten years and has resulted in the substantial surplus of receipts over outlays that we are now experiencing. Not only has taxable income risen with the faster growth of GDP, but the associated large increase in asset prices and capital gains has created additional tax liabilities not directly related to income from current production. The most recent projections from OMB and CBO indicate that, if current policies remain in place, the total unified surplus will reach about $800 billion in fiscal year 2010, including an on-budget surplus of almost $500 billion. Moreover, the admittedly quite uncertain long-term budget exercises released by the CBO last October maintain an implicit on-budget surplus under baseline assumptions well past 2030 despite the budgetary pressures from the aging of the baby-boom generation, especially on the major health programs. These most recent projections, granted their tentativeness, nonetheless make clear that the highly desirable goal of paying off the federal debt is in reach and, indeed, would occur well before the end of the decade under baseline assumptions. This is in marked contrast to the perception of a year ago, when the elimination of the debt did not appear likely until the next decade. But continuing to run surpluses beyond the point at which we reach zero or near-zero federal debt brings to center stage the critical longer-term fiscal policy issue of whether the federal government should accumulate large quantities of private (more technically, nonfederal) assets. At zero debt, the continuing unified budget surpluses now projected under current law imply a major accumulation of private assets by the federal government. Such an accumulation would make the federal government a significant factor in our nation's capital markets and would risk significant distortion in the allocation of capital to its most productive uses. Such a distortion could be quite costly, as it is our extraordinarily effective allocation process that has enabled such impressive increases in productivity and standards of living despite a relatively low domestic saving rate. I doubt that it is possible to secure and sustain institutional arrangements that would insulate federal investment decisions, over the long run, from political pressures. To be sure, the roughly $100 billion of assets in the federal government's defined-contribution Thrift Savings Plan have been well insulated from political pressures. But the defined-contribution nature of this plan means that it is effectively self-policed by individual contributors, who would surely object were their retirement assets to be diverted to investments that offered less-than-market returns. But such countervailing forces may be greatly attenuated for federal government defined- benefit plans such as social security. To the extent that benefits are perceived to be guaranteed by the government, beneficiaries may be much less vigilant about the stewardship of trust fund assets. Requiring the federal government to invest in indexed funds arguably would largely insulate the investment decision from political tampering. But such assets, by definition, can cover only publicly traded securities, perhaps three-fifths of total private capital assets. With large allocations of public funds invested in larger enterprises, our innovative, smaller, non-publicly traded businesses might find themselves competitively disadvantaged in obtaining financing. To be sure, there is not universal agreement among economists on this point, but it is a consideration that should be kept in mind. More generally, the problematic experiences of some other countries with large government accumulation of private assets should give us pause about moving in that direction. To repeat, over time, having the federal government hold significant amounts of private assets would risk sub-optimal performance by our capital markets, diminished economic efficiency, and lower overall standards of living than would be achieved otherwise. Private asset accumulation may be forced upon us well short of reaching zero debt. Obviously, savings bonds and state and local government series bonds are not readily redeemable before maturity. But the more important issue is the potentially rising cost of retiring long-maturity marketable Treasury debt. While shorter-term marketable securities could be allowed to run off as they mature, longer-term issues could only be retired before maturity through debt buybacks. The magnitudes are large: As of January 1, for example, there was in excess of three quarters of a trillion dollars in outstanding nonmarketable securities, such as savings bonds and state and local series issues, and marketable securities (excluding those held by the Federal Reserve) that do not mature and could not be called before 2011. Some holders of long-term Treasury securities may be reluctant to give them up, especially those who highly value the risk-free status of those issues. Inducing such holders, including foreign holders, to willingly offer to sell their securities prior to maturity could require paying premiums that far exceed any realistic value of retiring the debt before maturity. Both CBO and OMB project an inability of current services unified budget surpluses to be applied wholly to repay debt by the middle of this decade. Without policy changes, private asset accumulation is likely to begin in just a few short years. In summary, the Congress needs to make a policy judgment regarding whether and how private assets should be accumulated in federal government accounts. This judgment will have important implications for the level of saving and, hence, investment in our economy, as well as for the nature of government programs. If, for example, the accumulation of assets is avoided by eliminating unified budget surpluses through tax and spending changes, public and presumably national saving may well fall from already low levels. If so, over time, capital accumulation and the productive capacity of the economy presumably would be reduced through this channel. Eliminating unified surpluses by transforming social security into a defined-contribution system with accounts held in the private sector would likely better maintain national saving levels. But the nature of social security would at the same time be fundamentally changed. Alternatively, unified surpluses could be used to establish mandated individual retirement accounts outside the social security system, also mitigating the erosion in national saving. The task before the Administration and the Congress in the years ahead is likely to prove truly testing. But, of course, the choices confronting you are far more benign than having to deal with deficits "as far as the eye can see." Returning to the broader fiscal picture, I continue to believe, as I have testified previously, that all else being equal, a declining level of federal debt is desirable because it holds down long-term real interest rates, thereby lowering the cost of capital and elevating private investment. The rapid capital deepening that has occurred in the U.S. economy in recent years is a testament to these benefits. But the sequence of upward revisions to the budget surplus projections for several years now has reshaped the choices and opportunities before us. Indeed, in almost any credible baseline scenario, short of a major and prolonged economic contraction, the full benefits of debt reduction are now achieved well before the end of this decade--a prospect that did not seem reasonable only a year or even six months ago. Thus, the emerging key fiscal policy need is now to address the implications of maintaining surpluses beyond the point at which publicly held debt is effectively eliminated. But, though special care must be taken not to conclude that wraps on fiscal discipline are no longer necessary, at the same time we must avoid a situation in which we come upon the level of irreducible debt so abruptly that the only alternative to the accumulation of private assets would be a sharp reduction in taxes or an increase in expenditures. These actions might occur at a time when sizable economic stimulus would be inappropriate. Should this Congress conclude that this is a sufficiently high probability, it is none to soon to adjust policy to fend off such potential imbalances. In general, for reasons I have testified to previously, if long-term fiscal stability is the criterion, it is far better, in my judgment, that the surpluses be lowered by tax reductions than by spending increases. The flurry of increases in outlays that occurred near the conclusion of last fall's budget deliberations is troubling because it makes the previous year's lack of discipline less likely to have been an aberration. As for tax policy over the longer run, most economists believe that it should be directed at setting rates at the levels required to meet spending commitments, while doing so in a manner that minimizes distortions, increases efficiency, and enhances incentives for saving, investment, and work. In recognition of the uncertainties in the economic and budget outlook, it is important that any long-term tax plan, or spending initiative for that matter, be phased in. Conceivably, it could include provisions that, in some way, would limit surplus-reducing actions if specified targets for the budget surplus or federal debt levels were not satisfied. Only if the probability were very low that prospective tax cuts or new outlay initiatives would send the on-budget accounts into deficit, would unconditional initiatives appear prudent. The reason for caution, of course, rests on the tentativeness of our projections. What if, for example, the forces driving the surge in tax revenues in recent years begin to dissipate or reverse in ways that we do not now foresee? Indeed, we still do not have a full understanding of the exceptional strength in individual income tax receipts during the latter years of the 1990s. To the extent that some of the surprise has been indirectly associated with the surge in asset values in the 1990s, the softness in equity prices over the past year has highlighted some of the risks going forward. To be sure, unless the current economic weakness reveals a less favorable relationship between tax receipts, income, and asset prices than has been assumed in recent projections, receipts should be reasonably well maintained in the near term, as the effects of earlier gains in asset values continue to feed through with a lag into tax liabilities. But the longer-run effects of movements in asset values are much more difficult to assess, and those uncertainties would intensify should equity prices remain significantly off their peaks. Of course, the uncertainties in the receipts outlook do seem less troubling in view of the cushion provided by the recent sizable upward revisions to the ten-year surplus projections. But the risk of adverse movements in receipts is still real, and the probability of dropping back into deficit as a consequence of imprudent fiscal policies is not negligible. In the end, the outlook for federal budget surpluses rests fundamentally on expectations of longer-term trends in productivity, fashioned by judgments about the technologies that underlie these trends. Economists have long noted that the diffusion of technology starts slowly, accelerates, and then slows with maturity. But knowing where we now stand in that sequence is difficult--if not impossible--in real time. Faced with these uncertainties, it is crucial that we develop budgetary strategies that deal with any disappointments that could occur. That said, the changes in the budget outlook over the past several years are truly remarkable. Little more than a decade ago, the Congress established budget controls that were considered successful because they were instrumental in squeezing the burgeoning budget deficit to tolerable dimensions. Nevertheless, despite the sharp curtailment of defense expenditures under way during those years, few believed that a surplus was anywhere on the horizon. And the notion that the rapidly mounting federal debt could be paid off would not have been taken seriously. But let me end on a cautionary note. With today's euphoria surrounding the surpluses, it is not difficult to imagine the hard-earned fiscal restraint developed in recent years rapidly dissipating. We need to resist those policies that could readily resurrect the deficits of the past and the fiscal imbalances that followed in their wake.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today its approval of the application of Société Générale, Paris, France, to establish an agency in Greenwich, Connecticut. Attached is the Board’s Order relating to this action.
Remarks by Governor Laurence H. Meyer At the Annual Washington Conference of the Institute of International Bankers, Washington, D.C. March 5, 2001 The New Basel Capital Proposal I am pleased to be here today to speak with you about the proposed new Basel Capital Accord, which was issued for public comment on January 16th. Developing and implementing a revised capital accord--and the associated other changes in supervisory practices--is a watershed in banking supervision. It will clearly affect banks' plans and practices in the years ahead--particularly the large, internationally active banks represented here. Thus, it is important to both the bankers and the regulators that you carefully review and comment on this proposal. In my remarks today, I will raise some issues that I believe should particularly be called to your attention. I urge you to think carefully about them and let the regulators around the world know your views. More than a decade ago, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision adopted the current accord for several reasons: (1) to make the capital requirements more sensitive to risk profiles among banks; (2) to factor off-balance-sheet exposures into the assessment of capital adequacy; (3) to minimize disincentives to holding liquid, low-risk assets; and (4) to achieve greater consistency in supervisory assessments of bank capital adequacy throughout the world. These same objectives underlie the new proposal. Let me be clear: The 1988 accord, the current rule, has served us well. At its inception, it was a significant step forward, reflecting the state of risk-management technology at the time; it also clearly reflected compromises necessary for international agreement. But technology and business practice have moved on, and for the larger institutions this decade-old rule has developed critical shortcomings. Risk-measurement practices have improved, and capital markets have become more tightly intertwined. Assumptions and shortcuts taken in the current accord are far too crude, given practices today. To take one example, large, complex banking organizations now routinely structure their portfolios in ways that arbitrage around the current capital standard. These banks can often lower their capital requirements with little, if any, reduction in their actual risk-taking. As a result, reported capital ratios may--and too often do--overstate a bank's true financial strength. Thus we need a capital framework that is more risk-sensitive and compatible with current market practice. Absolute levels of capital must be consistent with risk in order not to shift risk-taking either away from or to banks, but we also need a standard that better reflects relative levels of risk. Identifying and correctly measuring relative risk is critical for avoiding capital arbitrage. Because the current standard largely ignores the relative risks of different assets, it encourages banks to shed over-capitalized, low-risk assets and to retain high-risk assets for which capital requirements are too weak. In short, the increasing sophistication of markets demands that, to be effective, regulatory capital charges need to be reasonably attuned to underlying economic risks. Key Innovations in the New Proposal The proposed new capital accord is both far reaching and ground breaking. It redefines the regulatory approach to bank supervision and provides new incentives for banks to improve their risk-measurement procedures. It is a recognition that technology and market practices have changed and that our oversight function needs to change, too. Let me call your attention to some of the most important innovations in the new proposal. Three Pillars As many of you know from an earlier 1999 proposal, the Basel Committee's approach rests on three so-called pillars: (1) the new capital standard itself; (2) an increased supervisory review of a bank's internal assessment of its own capital adequacy; and (3) additional public disclosure of bank risk profiles. The original Basel Accord, in contrast, rested on a single pillar, the setting of a regulatory minimum for capital. The first two pillars of the proposed accord distinguish two concepts of capital adequacy: the regulatory minimum in the first and economic capital needs of the institution in the second. The regulatory minimum provides a threshold for early intervention by supervisors. Economic capital--determined by the bank but overseen by supervisors as part of the second pillar--is the amount of capital that the bank allocates both for internal management reasons and to achieve desired credit ratings and risk premiums on its debt. The new proposal, in effect, increases the emphasis on the supervisors' oversight of the institution's economic capital needs, as it refines the calculation of the regulatory minimum. And, of course, it seeks to obtain the assistance of market discipline as a supplement to supervisory oversight. These three pillars, I think, reflect important realities. As I noted earlier, changing technology and market practices are undermining the current accord at the largest institutions. They have also added to the complexity of modern banking organizations, a complexity already in progress from the increasing scale and globalization as well as from a widening range of banking activities. These factors and the associated moral hazards from bank supervision and the increased systemic risk from scale have left supervisors with a choice between more extensive and burdensome supervisory oversight, on the one hand, and increased reliance on market discipline coupled with a more incentive-compatible regulatory and supervisory framework on the other. That is what the three pillars are all about. To be sure, the proposed capital standard--at least for larger banks--is more complex than the current accord. But I emphasize that the proposal is based on evolving current best risk-management practices, which, in turn, represent the judgments of bank managers--not supervisors--of how best to measure and manage their risks given the available technologies. The proposed accord requires banks to establish comprehensive risk-management policies and then follow them. Supervisory oversight is designed broadly to test that this is occurring. Public disclosure is intended to harness market discipline so that supervisors can, in fact, be less intrusive as the market becomes more so. As I will discuss further below, the proposals also encompass elements intended to make the regulatory capital framework more responsive to improvements over time in banks' risk-measurement and -management capabilities. Clearly, the proposed capital framework will challenge both regulators and banking organizations. Although the Committee amended the accord, fully effective in 1998, to recognize internal measures of "value-at-risk" for trading activities, the effect of that amendment was quite small compared with what we are now proposing. In the United States, the trading amendment affected roughly a dozen institutions and applied, of course, only to their trading activities and market risk. Now we are dealing with a more complex topic that goes to the core business of banking--credit risk. And we're trying to tackle operational risk as well. Within the United States, both the Federal Reserve and the Comptroller of the Currency have, for several years now, focused their examinations on the adequacy of internal processes and controls, particularly at large, complex institutions. That approach is particularly consistent with the goal of pillar 2. Supervisors here and abroad will be looking more than they did before at an institution's own methods for evaluating capital adequacy and at how well those methods serve the bank. The process will be evolutionary, but it will continue along the path already begun. At the Federal Reserve, we began that process more than a year ago, with the adoption of our supervisory policy statement, SR 99-18. In that letter, which is available on our web site, examiners are directed to ensure that each institution has a comprehensive and rigorous internal process for evaluating its own capital adequacy. On our part, we are developing consistent approaches for the review of bank economic capital methodologies through dedicated staff specialists. These specialists are expected to be able to engage bank management on the assumptions and analytical underpinnings of the methodologies used by the bank to establish its capital requirements. Our intention is that this evaluation will be made against an evolving sound-practice standard. The art and the science of risk management and economic capital determination are changing so rapidly that neither the banking community nor the supervisors have the luxury of determining an acceptable or best practice and adhering to it very long. However, for some--and perhaps for many--supervisors abroad, implementing pillar 2 will be an even greater challenge and a more significant event, potentially introducing a material change in their role. For all of us, though, it is the right approach--relying more than before on the internal measures and management practices of banks, giving them more incentives to invest in better information systems and controls, and, I must emphasize, looking closely to see that their processes work. Pillar 3 could be characterized in much the same way: another step along the path for U.S. institutions and supervisors, but a more dramatic change from many practices abroad. In this country, we have long had the benefits, discipline, and disclosure practices associated with large, deep, and widely analyzed capital markets. Yet, even in this country, financial disclosures do not always provide the market with sufficient information to fully assess a bank's risk position and overall capital adequacy. At the same time, we recognize there are limits to how much informed and timely discipline our markets can assert, because of the inherent difficulty of measuring and understanding banking risks. Despite all of their insights and detailed knowledge, even a bank's own managers and supervisors can be wrong and surprised. Market judgments will never be perfect, but as banks develop and disclose better information, market feedback can play a larger role. For their part, bank supervisors can certainly use the market's help as they deal with ever-more-complex rules and banking practices. Indeed, we believe additional disclosure and more informed market oversight are essential elements of the proposed new accord. Just as pillar 2 represents a higher priority on supervision, pillar 3 represents an increased emphasis on market discipline. Multilayered Approach In addition to the three pillars, the proposed capital standard is itself multilayered, offering a variety of approaches to accommodate banks with varied resources, expertise, and risk profiles. The most basic approach is the so-called standardized method. It is conceptually the same as the current capital accord, but somewhat more risk-sensitive. A bank, as now, assigns risk weights to its assets and off-balance-sheet positions and then sums the risk-weighted asset values. The total capital requirement per dollar of risk-weighted assets remains at 8 percent. The primary difference from the current accord is that risk weights would be based on borrowers' external credit ratings, when available. The proposal would also give more recognition to a bank's efforts to mitigate risk through guarantees, collateral, credit derivatives, and netting agreements. The centerpiece of the proposal is clearly the internal ratings based (or "IRB") approach, under which the regulatory capital requirement would be based on a bank's own internal assessment of each borrower's credit quality. The use of the proposed IRB approach, in turn, is keyed to the bank's ability to meet minimum supervisory requirements that demonstrate the rigor of its assessment. Reliance on banks' internal credit risk-measurement and -management methodologies is perhaps the single most far-reaching innovation in the new proposal. Under the IRB approach, a bank would need to have several core inputs for each credit facility: the probability of default (PD) for borrowers assigned to each internal borrower grade; the expected loss rate, given a default (LGD), appropriate to each type of exposure; the expected amount of exposure at default (EAD) for each type of exposure, reflecting any undrawn credit lines; and the maturity of the exposure. Those parameters that banks provide will need to be well founded and empirically linked to the financial strength and condition of borrowers, the realizable value of collateral or other risk-mitigating provisions of the credit agreements, and many other factors. The Basel Committee has designed two versions of the IRB approach: a less sophisticated "foundation" method and a more flexible, but also more demanding, "advanced" approach. The foundation IRB offers those banks able to meet rigorous standards associated with assessments of borrower risk, but with more limited ability to measure transaction-specific risk, the opportunity to base their capital requirements on their internal credit ratings. This option is designed for those banks able to estimate default probabilities, but not yet able to determine losses given default or exposures at default. In such cases, estimates of loss given default and the effective amount of exposure would be determined using formulas set by the regulator , and most transactions would have an assumed maturity of three years. If a bank finds these regulatory parameters too restrictive--and they will be conservative--it may develop its own evidence, use it, and convince the supervisor of its accuracy, after which the bank could move to the advanced approach. Banks using the advanced approach will have more freedom, but their methodologies for deriving loss given default statistics and effective exposures will be closely reviewed. In all cases, supervisors will require a rigorous analysis supporting their estimates, whether they are based on internal or vendor data. Banks need to understand the basis for their calculations, and credit grades must reflect the banks' own views. Of course, banks will not be permitted to use internal estimates for some types of exposures and regulatory parameters for others; this will be an all-or-nothing proposition. Regardless of the alternative selected, the regulatory risk-weighted capital ratio is computed, as is the case today, as the ratio of total capital to risk-weighted assets. The definition of total capital is unchanged. The minimum regulatory risk-weighted capital ratio, 8 percent, is also unchanged. The only changes are in the risk weights used to compute risk-weighted assets and in the comprehensiveness of the risks included. In the new proposal, the denominator is the sum of credit risk, market risk, and operational risk. The risk weights for credit risk are significantly modified, increasingly so as one moves from standardized to advanced IRB. The treatment of market risk is unchanged. Operational risk is a completely new category. If measured credit risk declines because of the new risk weights--especially for the more advanced approaches--the addition of operational risk will partially offset that decline. Not surprisingly, that will focus a lot of attention on operational risk. And, of course, if capital arbitrage has, in fact, shifted lower-risk assets to the market, the required capital on the remaining bank-held risk-weighted assets may increase rather than decrease under the new proposal. The effects may also differ, perhaps significantly, among banks in different countries, depending on the extent to which low-risk assets have left the banking system. Remember that the new risk-weighted charges are designed to be more risk sensitive: to reduce capital charges for less risky assets, relative to current charges, but increase them for riskier assets. The expectation--which depends importantly on the extent of capital arbitrage already accomplished--is that, for a given asset, the effective risk weights would decline with the more sophisticated approaches, resulting in lower total regulatory capital charges and, consequently, in a higher reported risk-weighted capital ratio. At the same time, given different risk profiles, capital requirements almost certainly would vary more widely under the new risk-based capital ratios than under today's measure. However, banks would then presumably respond to changes in their risk-based capital ratios. For example, a bank with a relatively low risk portfolio would find that its risk-weighted capital ratio rose because its risk-weighted assets had declined. It would, as a result, presumably either reduce its capital or increase its leverage, or even its risk exposure. A bank with lowered capital ratios would presumably do the opposite: raise more capital, reduce its leverage, and/or reduce its risk exposures. At the end of this adjustment process, we might again--for either competitive reasons or because of the incentives from the prompt corrective action structure--have a relatively tight configuration of risk-weighted capital ratios , especially at the LCBOs, but riskier banks would be holding more absolute capital to support those risks. Indeed, it is the whole purpose of the exercise. Comprehensive Treatment of Risk Although the current accord emphasizes credit risk, it was intended to cover virtually all banking risks. That is, although the current capital charge was initially articulated in terms of credit risk alone, its level was set higher than would have been warranted for credit risk alone, in effect allowing a buffer that could be used to cover other risks. Three years ago, we carved out and dealt separately with trading activities and most market risk. That process worked well because it led to a better risk measure and also spurred risk-measurement efforts within the industry. It worked within the current capital framework largely because trading activities and capital requirements associated with them were relatively small for almost all banks. Taking a "one-off" approach for trading activities did not materially disrupt the underlying assumptions or integrity of the current rule. We don't have that luxury now. As we get more precise in measuring credit risk, we lose some of the buffers previously built into the standard to cover operational and other risks. Explicitly or implicitly, we now need to make judgments regarding the respective correlations of different risks. Are they additive or independent and to what degree? Can the same capital cover all of them, or do banks need capital for each one? Similar issues arise with risk mitigation and the proper treatment of collateral, guarantees, and other risk-reducing steps. Though these practices are important in measuring a bank's effective risk, their value, in principle, is reflected implicitly in the 8 percent charge, as part of the "on average" nature of the current accord. Again, in principle, without such traditional cautionary efforts by banks to reduce risks, in 1988 the current regulatory capital minimum would have been set higher than 8 percent. The difficulty, of course, is quantifying precisely the importance of each risk and of each risk-mitigating effort, and how they all fit together. Taking Industry's Lead When developing new regulatory standards, bank supervisors traditionally look first to common or "best" business practices within the industry to serve as a guide. For credit risk, however, we have found that though many banks are beginning to adopt more formal quantitative approaches and the systems of some banks are quite advanced, virtually no bank follows best practices in all areas of credit risk measurement and management. This is so even though, I hasten to add, the proposed IRB framework draws heavily from concepts and systems developed by leading-edge institutions. For once, supervisors seem to be ahead of--or at least even with--the curve rather than behind it. The lag in application reflects, I think, the reality that measuring credit and operating risk is more difficult than measuring market risk. In trading activities transactions are marked to market daily, and long series of data are readily available for measuring rate and price volatility. Once developed, value-at-risk and various stress-measurement techniques also spread throughout the industry, at least among the relevant institutions. With credit risk, we find a greater range of practices and of risk-measurement skills. As noted, the economic capital models used by some banks have been of great help in structuring the proposed framework and showing the way. Nonetheless, the work done to develop this proposal makes clear that there is room for much improvement in certain business practices and in the internal use of model output in evaluating capital adequacy. Given the difficulty of developing, maintaining, and validating measures of credit risk, supervisors will need the reassurance that would come from knowing that banks actually use their credit risk measures for other than regulatory reasons . Before supervisors can seriously consider using the results of bank measures of portfoliowide credit risks--as opposed to measures of borrower- or transaction-specific risks--banks themselves need to have enough confidence in the statistics and demonstrate that confidence by integrating the risk measures into important parts of the banks' business and management decisions. Critical Issues The Basel Committee and commenters will need to focus on several critical issues as we work together to refine and complete the capital proposal. I urge you to address them in your comments. To whom does the proposal apply, and how will banks choose among the options in the proposal? The original 1988 Basel Accord was designed for large, internationally active banks. However, in the United States and many other countries, the current accord is applied to all domestic banks, both large and small. With the new proposal, national regulators will once again have to decide how widely to apply the Basel capital framework. In my view, the greater complexity of the new accord, at least with respect to the IRB options, suggests that it should cover a narrower range of banks: those that have been active pursuers of capital arbitrage, those that have made--or can make--the greatest advances in risk measurement and management, and those for whom the adequacy of the current standard is most in question. The need and desirability of limited application is especially true in the United States, where we have such a large number of relatively small and less complex community banks. Indeed, it is not at all obvious that the proposed standardized approach fits the needs of smaller banking organizations engaged primarily in traditional banking activities. Recall that the current standardized approach originally was designed with larger banks in mind. The new standardized approach is more complex than its predecessor, but I question whether the added implementation burdens are cost-effective for traditional banking organizations, especially since neither the current nor the proposed capital frameworks yet address what is perhaps the most critical risk factor for smaller banks--geographic and sectoral concentrations of credit risk. In another talk later this month I will discuss in more detail whether and how the capital standards should be changed for community banks. So let me focus here on how larger banks may choose among the three options in the new proposal. The largest and most sophisticated U.S. and foreign banks will undoubtedly strive immediately to move to the IRB approaches. Indeed, to the extent that the operational demands of the foundation and advanced IRB approaches are viewed as comparable--particularly in light of input from consulting and third-party vendors--many institutions may desire to migrate directly to the advanced approach so as to achieve the largest possible reductions in regulatory capital. This possibility raises a very important practical issue: How many banks will believe that they must operate under an IRB approach to remain competitive? It will take considerable supervisory resources to validate banks' internal methodologies and to monitor their compliance with sound practices under the IRB approach on an ongoing basis. There is, therefore, a practical limit to the number of institutions that we--and, I would argue, other countries--can effectively supervise under the IRB approaches. Under the proposal, we have attempted to provide incentives for banks to migrate over time from the standardized to the foundation and, then, advanced IRB approaches. If competitive forces encourage too many banks to choose for the IRB approaches, then more careful attention would have to be paid to the risk weights under the standardized approach and to the associated incentives built into the IRB approaches. In any event, and I cannot emphasize this enough, U.S. regulators intend to establish very high standards both for those banks permitted to participate in the IRB approaches and for ourselves, as overseers of the credibility and integrity of the IRB process. Does the new proposal strike the right balance between rules and discretion? As I noted earlier, the current proposal rebalances the regulatory and supervisory approach to capital more toward oversight of economic capital and away from a disproportionate focus on compliance with the regulatory minimum. This is sensible, given that banks today uniformly hold capital above the regulatory minimum. But the key question is how well capital at individual banking organizations reflects the risk profiles and risk-management capabilities of the individual entities. Unfortunately, oversight of a bank's economic capital needs and measures requires much greater supervisory resources, authority, and expertise than enforcement of regulatory minimums. Countries without the requisite resources, authority, and expertise may need to tilt more toward rule-based approaches, at least during a transitional period while their supervisory methodologies are modified and their resources supplemented. Does that mean that during the transition the regulatory minimums should be higher in these cases, as the pillar 1 is required to shoulder more of the burden relative to pillar 2? Or will market discipline (pillar 3) be enough to ensure that banks' economic capital decisions are appropriately disciplined? Does the current set of options provide sufficient flexibility to meet the needs of countries with varying supervisory capabilities? Will the new accord be implemented consistently within a country and across countries? This is an issue precisely because the new proposal offers greater discretion to banks, and implicitly to supervisors, and therefore could lead to greater variation in capital among banks and countries. The issue is also important in the United States, since two agencies supervise large, internationally active banks: the Federal Reserve and the OCC. These agencies must uniformly implement the new proposal to preserve competitive equity among U.S. banks. Fortunately, the Fed and the OCC have worked closely during the development of the new proposal. And, even more to the point, we have already begun to work closely to develop jointly procedures to validate banks' internal risk-measurement methodologies. The question remains, however, how uniform will implementation be around the world? The proposal relies heavily on supervisory oversight and market discipline to promote consistency. Supervisors will be responsible for validating banks' internal methodologies, ensuring ongoing compliance with sound practices, and providing oversight of the economic capital process. The importance of these qualification standards is precisely why the new proposal makes them a requirement for any bank permitted to operate under an IRB option. These requirements are therefore an integral part of pillar 1. Even countries without supervisory authority can impose these qualifications as a requirement for the preferential capital treatment offered under pillar 1. Carrying out this validation and overseeing compliance on an ongoing basis will be a considerable challenge everywhere, including the United States. As I noted, this challenge will be particularly pronounced in countries where the supervisory tradition has not emphasized the types of on-site review needed to validate a bank's IRB implementation. I have been impressed that those members of the Committee with such a tradition have been very explicit about the need to obtain the resources to carry out the necessary supervisory review. There is also general agreement that ongoing structured exchanges of our experiences will occur among Committee members as part of the process of assessing the degree of uniformity in implementation. Nonetheless, your comments about expected or evolving problems with consistency issues would be quite helpful. Even if supervisory resources are adequate, market discipline must also play an important role in ensuring uniformity in implementing the proposed Basel standard among banks. Of course, banks don't all have to make the same choice with respect to capital levels, but they should pay the appropriate price in the market for lower levels of capital relative to risk. At any rate, it is important that an appropriate level of disclosure requirements be included in pillar 1 to facilitate such market discipline. The pillar 3 disclosure recommendations themselves are very far reaching. But at this point many of them are recommendations, not requirements. In addition, we recognize that we still have more work to do in fashioning a more disciplined and prioritized set of disclosure requirements, one that balances the cost of compliance against the benefits of disclosure. This, too, is an area in which bank comments would be particularly helpful. Does the new proposal maintain competitive equity around the world or provide competitive advantage to some countries relative to others? Obviously, this is a sensitive issue. All parties to the negotiations want a standard that promotes safety and soundness and deters systemic risk. Within these boundaries, though, we also view the world from our own perspective. As countries negotiate, supervisors appropriately seek to avoid rules that would disadvantage their own banks. Hopefully, we hope that we will ultimately reach an agreement that is acceptable to us all. But, it is crucial that banks, in their own self-interest, review the proposals carefully, identify potential problem areas, and alert supervisors of material concerns. Did we set relative and absolute required capital levels about right, and did we properly balance the incentives to move to more sophisticated options? I would be surprised if anyone could, at this point, provide a definitive answer to these questions, although they are central to the success of the proposal. Part of the problem, of course, is that many gaps remain in the current proposal, making it impossible for banks to compute the amount of capital they would have to hold under the IRB approaches. There is, as a result, an interactive process at work. We need comments on what we have already proposed, including feedback on the implications for banks' capital levels. We will continue to work to fill in the gaps and, when this work is completed, will need further feedback about the effects of the overall proposal on required capital levels. I hope the banking industry can provide detailed and constructive feedback on the proposed structure of risk weights, especially for those portfolios that have been explicitly addressed under the proposed framework--primarily corporates, banks, sovereigns, and retail under the IRB. Are the proposed relationships reasonable between a loan's risk weight and its default probabilities, loss given default, exposure, and other inputs to the IRB approach? As I suggested earlier, if we do not get relative risk weights about right, it will be difficult to achieve the broad goals established by the Basel Committee--such as encouraging effective risk-management practices and discouraging capital arbitrage. Obviously, setting the right absolute level of capital requirements is important as well, both to avoid excessive systemic risk and to provide a fair playing field vis-ï¿½-vis nonbank financial institutions. When we started out to determine an appropriate absolute level of capital requirements for banks, we hoped to take a "bottom-up" perspective. The IRB approach begins with a careful assessment of relative risks across different credit instruments. But it ultimately has to be grounded in some absolute capital standard. A bottom-up approach would start with the maximum insolvency probability that regulators are willing to accept. This would be used, in principle, to calibrate the absolute capital level for the regulatory minimum. The problem is that to implement such an approach requires supervisory judgments in areas where the right decision is not obvious. Consequently, for the most part, the structure of risk weights in the January proposal have been guided, instead, by a top-down approach, which seems more comfortable to many Committee members, even if more ad hoc. The natural point of departure for this top-down approach is the current level of capital. In an attempt to maintain about the current overall amount of capital in the system, the new standardized approach--which is intended to be conservative--is calibrated to the current 8 percent capital standard. Under the IRB approach, enhanced risk sensitivity will result in lower capital charges on some assets, but the precise amount of the overall benefit is difficult to determine at this point. Within the Basel Committee is some concern that the IRB approach to credit risk could result in a significant decline in capital requirements relative to current levels, especially under the advanced approach. There could, therefore, be a temptation to offset any expected decline in credit risk capital with the imposition of a non-risk-sensitive capital charge against "other risks." Operational risk is an obvious candidate for such a "plug," especially given the absence of much progress in developing methodologies to estimate the amount of capital appropriate for this risk. The danger is that an arbitrary or ad hoc approach to capital for operating risk could deny banks the full benefits that would otherwise be available under the advanced approach. Such an approach could easily subvert any improvement in the new accord's overall risk sensitivity that might otherwise flow from its more refined treatment of credit risk. It is also likely to discourage banks from investing the resources necessary to better measure operating risk. At a minimum, it provides them no incentive to do so. This issue, especially on methods for determining operational risk, is one about which your comments are eagerly anticipated. Are even the largest banks ready to take advantage of the IRB approach? The fact that both banks and supervisors need to make much more progress explains the relatively long (three-year) transition period proposed before the new accord would be implemented. As bankers, you should ask yourselves whether you are truly ready. The quick answer, "we're there," is probably wrong. Based on our examinations of U.S. banks' internal risk-rating processes, I suspect that few banks would or should get a clean sign-off from their supervisor today. Despite the importance of evaluating a borrower's probability of default, banks have been surprisingly slow, it seems, to distinguish among acceptable credit risk levels in their pricing and in their own assessments of capital adequacy. In recent years, some leading institutions have clearly expanded their risk gradations, with some using twenty categories or more and paralleling the practices of large external rating firms. Typically, though, banks have used half a dozen "pass" grades or less. Moreover, the distribution of credits among these grades often has been insufficient, with large portions of portfolios falling into only one or two grades. Most significantly, the rigor and internal consistency of internal risk-rating processes is often handicapped by insufficient or unclear rating criteria or by limited resources dedicated to independent reviews of risk-rating assignments. Last fall, the Basel Committee conducted an initial survey of large internationally active banks in order to estimate the quantitative effects of the proposal on their capital requirements. The Committee was disappointed in the modest number of banks worldwide that could provide meaningful distributions of credit quality, even for their corporate portfolios. I hope that experience says more about the time and attention banks devoted to the exercise or about the lack of guidance they received than it does about the state of their risk-management systems. If it is the latter, the industry clearly needs to increase the pace. Process The new rule is, of course, still a proposal, although one in which much time and effort has been invested. It can certainly be changed and needs to be developed further, but the overall structure seems set. The industry needs to take the current proposal seriously and to comment on it in substantive and helpful ways. Tell us what you like and dislike, but be constructive, offering alternative solutions when you can. Your constructive proposals that pay due regard of the objective of the reform will, I assure you, play a significant role in shaping the final proposals of the Basel Committee. Once adopted by the Basel Committee, the proposal will be submitted to the G-10 central banks for their endorsement and then to national jurisdictions for necessary domestic rulemaking. In the United States and in many other countries, the rulemaking process requires further public comment periods that must be respected. In this country, they most definitely will be. By that point, though, the international process will be at a much-advanced stage. Consequently, now is the time to comment and to influence the results. Don't miss the chance. Once fully adopted by the countries on the Basel Committee, the standard is likely to have broad application worldwide and to replace the current accord, particularly for internationally active banks. Every bank here should expect to be affected. Conclusion The proposal may be complex and at times confusing, but I believe we are on the right track. We need regulatory capital standards that are far more risk sensitive than the one we have now and that provide the industry greater incentives to measure and manage risk. The IRB framework seems compatible with the efforts of best-practice banks and with the direction in which risk management seems to be heading. The advanced IRB approach, in particular, provides banks with substantial flexibility in their risk-measurement techniques and should eliminate much of the pure capital arbitrage, provided that we calibrate the various methods reasonably well. Such flexibility means the standard, itself, will evolve as banking practices improve. With experience and better data, the risk parameters will change, and the models will get stronger. Banks will no longer have the shelter of a static and uniform regulatory standard but will be required to defend their own assessments and procedures to their supervisors and the market. They can start the process slowly, moving from the standardized approach to the foundation and advanced IRB methods only as they feel ready and as their supervisor agrees. Better risk management should lead to lower capital requirements. The proposal is still very much a work in progress, with important issues still unresolved. Your comments will be important in helping us refine and complete the proposal. Let's do all we can together to get it right.
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan Banking supervision Before the Independent Community Bankers of America, Las Vegas, Nevada (via videoconference) March 7, 2001 It is a pleasure to be here for the ICBA's national convention. From the largest, most complex institutions to smaller banks serving the needs of their local communities, our nation's banking system has thrived amid intense competition and has adjusted to a rapidly changing financial and technological environment. Clearly, changes in financial markets have prompted supervisors and bankers to re-evaluate past assumptions in this period of economic slowing and to initiate adjustments that ensure banking promptly adapts to conditions that are less certain and less robust than the extraordinary performance of recent years. In this context, I would like to review the lessons of the past year and some of the issues and opportunities now facing banking institutions and supervisors. After a near decade of unprecedented prosperity, the banking industry has come to recognize, not for the first time, the embedded costs of lax credit standards and the overly optimistic assumptions about borrower prospects that seem the inevitable consequence of ever-lower perceived risk premiums. Today's problems generally relate to syndicated credits, especially those to leveraged borrowers. As problems materialized, earnings fell significantly for some of the larger banks, which in turn caused aggregate commercial bank industry earnings to fall slightly during 2000, thus bringing to an end the industry's string of ten consecutive years of higher earnings. Nevertheless, though the effects of these excesses are likely to continue for much of this year in the form of moderately deteriorating asset quality and earnings at some of the larger banks, these problems, one hopes, will prove modest both by historical standards and relative to the resources of these institutions. Fortunately, we move into a period of uncertain times with the level of the industry's overall profitability well above the average of recent decades. Moreover, the source of banking revenues is better diversified than in the past, and most institutions hold strong capital and reserve positions. Not surprisingly, in response to past laxity, a weakening economy, and general economic uncertainty, banks have tightened their lending terms and conditions. On commercial and industrial loans, our Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey indicates that tightening started in late 1999 and has persisted through early 2001. The survey also indicated continued firming of the terms and conditions on corporate loans by nearly 60 percent of domestic respondents, up from 45 percent in November. In addition, more than 40 percent of respondents adopted more-restrictive terms on commercial real estate loans, compared with 26 percent in November. Yield spreads on corporate loans, consistent with risk premiums observed in the corporate bond market, have also widened. Adjustments in standards and pricing are clearly a necessary and important part of the transition that banks must make in moving from overly optimistic assumptions to more-realistic assessments of borrower prospects. As I have said previously, however, lenders and their supervisors, should be mindful that in their zeal to make up for past excesses they do not overcompensate and inhibit or cut off the flow of credit to borrowers with credible prospects. There is doubtless an unfortunate tendency among some, I hesitate to say most, bankers to lend aggressively at the peak of a cycle and that is when the vast majority of bad loans are made. A more disciplined, less pro-cyclical, long-term approach to lending that provides higher average risk-adjusted returns to shareholders is obviously in the self-interest of banks. It is interesting to note that the length of the current expansion, coupled with the absence of problem commercial loans until recently, has led to some depreciation in both bankers' and supervisors' skill in handling weakened or troubled credits. Such problems either are a faded memory or are outside the experience of some lenders and examiners, despite the serious credit work-out problems of the late 1980s and early 1990s. As a consequence, institutions have had to brushup and re-institutionalize their policies and practices for managing weakened and problem credits, and supervisors have had to similarly bolster their training programs. Recent problems have also helped vividly illustrate the longstanding virtues of sound lending practices. For example, losses related to leveraged finance loans have reminded institutions that these credits present unique challenges for an institution's risk-management systems and that proper safeguards are necessary to conduct this business prudently and profitably. Leveraged borrowers, by virtue of their high interest costs and dependence on third-party funding, have a diminished ability to adjust to unexpected economic events and changes in business conditions. As a consequence, leveraged credits require more-intensive tracking and monitoring than typical commercial credits to ensure that their unique risk characteristics are adequately understood and controlled by the banking organization. Institutions with sound practices translate the results of their monitoring into appropriate internal ratings, classifications, and loss recognition to develop a timely and accurate picture of their institution's credit quality and risk exposure. Though much attention has been focused on problems in corporate loans, other segments have remained fairly resilient. For example, commercial real estate loans are experiencing below-average delinquencies and net charge-offs, as are residential mortgage loans. Furthermore, credit card net charge-offs, which had escalated in recent years, have fallen to more moderate levels. Still, prudent bankers will need to weigh the potential for less-agreeable credit conditions. In recent years, buoyant economic conditions raised expectations for continued growth in income and employment for consumers, which in turn have led to growth in household debt that has outstripped gains in disposable personal income over the past five years. That growth in debt has pushed consumer debt service burdens to levels close to the peak experienced in the late 1980s. Neither borrowers nor lenders would enter into these obligations were they not optimistic about the prospects for repayment. Not surprisingly, lenders have recently tempered their outlook, tightening their standards somewhat for credit cards and installment loans. Concurrently, demand by borrowers has weakened moderately. If loans have been extended assuming little or no possibility for less-than-optimal conditions, then problems are likely to emerge. Indeed, loans made using credit-scoring models that are estimated only on data from the last five or so years may be too optimistic for more normal conditions. History provides excellent lessons for banking institutions with regard to appropriate pricing, underwriting, and diversification. One of the most memorable, of course, was the real estate crisis of the late 1980s and early 1990s. However, it is clear that such memories and their lessons can dim over time. The exceptional demand for office and other commercial real estate in recent years has led to a rebound in the volumes of loans secured by these properties. This time, however, as demand has grown, larger organizations have managed to keep their holdings modest relative to their asset bases either through securitizations or sales or by avoiding originations altogether. In contrast, many smaller commercial banks have raised their commercial real estate concentrations relative to assets and capital. Though underwriting practices appear to be much healthier today than they were in the 1980s and standards have tightened somewhat recently, supervisors are paying particular attention to community banks with concentrations that make them materially vulnerable to a downturn in this market. Although asset quality problems at a few of the largest banks may have received the most headlines, a more lingering and widespread source of concern has been shrinking net interest margins. As liability costs rose rapidly last year, nearly all of the largest bank holding companies experienced margin declines, with about one-fourth experiencing a narrowing of 25 basis points or more since a year ago. However, the aggregate net interest margin of community banks was essentially unchanged last year. The more-favorable margin trends at community banks are probably linked to their proportionally higher funding of assets with core deposits, which are less sensitive to rising rates. Moreover, in 2000 the average rate paid on both large and small time deposits by small banks declined relative to that paid by larger banks. Despite pressures on funding, community banks have been relatively successful at maintaining their core deposit bases. For example, a decade ago banks with less than $50 million in assets funded around 80 percent of their assets with core deposits. Over the course of the past decade, that figure declined 7 percentage points, but core deposits remain a fairly high, 73 percent of assets. For banks with more than $10 billion in assets, core deposit holdings are only 39 percent. Community banks have experienced only moderate diminishment in the share of core deposits funding assets, but when that trend is coupled with rapid loan growth, pressures on bank liquidity appear to have intensified. Community banks have funded the gap between loan and deposit growth largely by liquidating investments. For example, from 1990 to the end of last year, smaller community banks increased the share of loans on their balance sheet 8 percentage points, to 59 percent. Over the same period, liquid funds and investments fell 8 percentage points, to 38 percent of assets. The combined deposit and loan trends have pushed liquidity benchmark ratios, such as loans to deposits, to historic peaks. However, there are some signs of relief for bank liquidity. For one, the demand for loans by businesses and consumers appears to be moderating, and there are some early indications that consumers are returning to bank retail deposits in the wake of disappointing stock and mutual fund results. Still, many of these liquidity pressures are likely to remain in one form or another, and banks will almost certainly continue to explore nondeposit liabilities to fund asset expansion. While this is not new to community banks, the growing volume, variety, and complexity of non-deposit funds creates new issues. To meet this challenge, community banks must strive to fully comprehend the implication of relying on these types of funds from both liquidity and earnings perspectives. It is, of course, perfectly appropriate for institutions to consider alternative funding strategies to meet customer demand. On the one hand, choosing to meet loan growth through wholesale funding rather than attempting to attract new money market accounts, for example, may avoid a costly rate hike on existing deposits. On the other hand, institutions should consider the costs of choosing wholesale funds in lieu of building the institution's retail funding base. Significantly, the accumulated effect of these decisions on an institution's risk and liquidity profile may not be noticed until difficult times place pressure on the institution's ongoing funding. Management should keep in mind that the value of the federal subsidy provided by lower-cost insured deposits is rarely appreciated until periods of crisis, when a stable funding base cannot be maintained at any price. Management should ensure that complex funding products are well understood, especially those with embedded options that cause cash flows to change dramatically depending on market conditions. The funding products should also be consistent with the portfolio objectives of the bank and the sophistication of the bank's risk-management system. In addition, management should seek to identify liquidity pressures and other risks through stress tests so that appropriate contingency funding and hedging programs can be formulated. It is important in this market to place the liquidity and core deposit erosion at both small and large banks, as well as the resultant increased reliance on managed liabilities, in a proper historical context. An unpleasant fact is that the wider range of choices for near-deposit substitutes, and broader understanding by consumers of what those choices are, may have decreased, perhaps permanently, the share of core deposits funding assets. This change may be as significant in the current banking landscape as the tax on state bank notes was in the nineteenth century. To be sure, the imposition of the tax was sudden, while the erosion of the share of funding from core deposits has been, and presumably will continue to be, gradual. But just as state banks responded to the tax by innovating deposit banking to flourish once again, community banks will, I am sure, adjust to the changing realities of the deposit market. Moreover, it is also important to recognize that the reduction in portfolio liquidity is more a product of good business--high loan demand--than of the relatively slow growth in core deposits. Some liquidity pressures will be alleviated as demand for loans declines. Though core deposits may be more difficult to attract, they have in fact continued to grow, just not as rapidly as the loan portfolio. In fact, bank credit over the past decade has grown faster at community banks than at larger ones, and so have their deposits, both insured and uninsured. But both the changes in financial markets and your success in credit markets suggest another important area of risk management that requires increasing attention from community bankers: maintaining enough capital and reserves so that your organization can absorb the losses that inevitably occur as part of risk-taking in a strong economy. As you know, supervisors are proposing to update the current Basel minimum requirements with a flexible system that is more finely calibrated to a bank's underlying risk-taking. However, such an approach does not come without cost, either to banks or their supervisors. Recognizing that much of the new Basel Accord is tailored to the greater complexity and diversity and the substantial risk-management infrastructure of the largest internationally active organizations, supervisors issued an advance notice of proposed rulemaking on the potential use of simpler approaches. That notice was predicated on the assumption that community banks might prefer something even less complicated than the current standard. The responses we received are a lesson in the importance of seeking comment on proposals that are largely guided by general impressions and conventional wisdom. The responses to date indicate that community banks in general do not believe that the current accord is burdensome, mainly because the costs of adapting systems and reporting for such an approach have already been incurred. Indeed, some commenters indicated that a change to an even simpler system would in itself be more burdensome than sticking with the current regime. The notice also asked whether the industry would be in favor of a blunt, stand-alone leverage ratio with much less complexity and reporting. The catch to that proposal was that in exchange for less risk reporting, supervisors would set the minimum ratio higher than is required by the current leverage standard, which is used in tandem with the current risk-based system. Many of the responses indicated that was not a favorable tradeoff, even though most community banks have exceptionally strong leverage ratios. I should emphasize that we are still analyzing your many excellent comments to determine what kind of response we should give. In closing, then, the need for banking organizations to be flexible and adapt to the changes around them has continued to intensify. As the extraordinary economic performance of recent years has moderated, weaknesses that were once hidden have surfaced and have separated strong managers of risk from weaker ones. Those that use their recent difficulties as a catalyst for improving their risk-management practices are likely to flourish. In the coming years, institutions both large and small that focus on risk-management fundamentals can expect to both support a growing economy and provide strong returns to shareholders.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Department of Housing and Urban Development Department of Justice Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Federal Housing Finance Board Federal Trade Commission National Credit Union Administration Office of the Comptroller of the Currency Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight Office of Thrift Supervision Interagency Task Force Publishes Spanish-Language Consumer Brochure about Shopping for and Negotiating the Best Mortgage The federal Interagency Task Force on Fair Lending has published a Spanish-language version of its popular brochure for consumers, Looking for the Best Mortgage: Shop, Compare, Negotiate. The brochure, describes how comparing and negotiating interest rates, fees and other payment terms may help consumers get the best financing and possibly save thousands of dollars, whether it's a home purchase, a refinancing, or a home equity loan. The brochure notes that lenders and brokers may offer different prices for the same loan to different consumers, even if consumers have the same credit qualifications. These different prices may result when loan officers and brokers are allowed to keep some or all of the difference between the lowest available price and any higher price that the consumer agrees to pay. The effect of this type of compensation arrangement on the price of the loan is just one reason why it is important for consumers to ask questions about costs and negotiate for the best deal. The brochure also contains a worksheet consumers can use to compare costs while shopping. The worksheet lists commonly charged fees and closing costs and includes a useful list of questions consumers may ask lenders when they shop for a loan. The publication outlines common sources for home loans and explains the difference between rates, points, and fees. The brochure highlights some of the laws that protect consumers from unfair lending practices. It also emphasizes that even consumers with past credit problems should shop around and negotiate for the best deal. Finally, the brochure includes a mortgage loan shopping form that consumers can use to record loan quotes from two or more lenders or brokers and then compare those data to help identify or negotiate the best deal. The members of the Interagency Task Force include the Department of Housing and Urban Development, Department of Justice, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Federal Housing Finance Board, Federal Reserve Board, Federal Trade Commission, National Credit Union Administration, Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and Office of Thrift Supervision. Single printed copies of the brochure are available free of charge upon request from the member agencies. The brochure also can be printed from and from the following agency web sites: Department of Housing and Urban Development: The Department's web site at or call 800-767-7468. Media contact: Office of Public Affairs, 202-708-0685. Department of Justice: The Department's web site at or contact Jane Dyer, U.S. Department of Justice, Civil Rights Division, Housing and Civil Enforcement Section, P.O. Box 65998, Washington, DC 20035, 202-514-4744. Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation: The FDIC's web site at or the FDIC's Public Information Center, 801 17th Street, NW, Room 100, Washington, DC 20434, 800-276-6003 or 202-416-6940. Media contact: Jay Rosenstein, 202-898-7303. Federal Housing Finance Board: The Board's web site at and from the Federal Housing Finance Board, 1777 F Street, Washington, DC 20006, or contact Roberta Youmans, 202-408-2581. Federal Reserve Board: The Board's web site at and from Publications, Stop 127, Federal Reserve Board, 20th & C Streets, NW, Washington, DC 20551, 202-452-3245. Federal Trade Commission: The FTC's web site: and from the FTC's Consumer Response Center, Room 130, 600 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW, Washington, DC 20580, 877-FTC-HELP (877-382-4357, toll-free); TDD for the hearing impaired 202-326-2502. Media contact: Howard Shapiro, Office of Public Affairs, 202-326-2176. National Credit Union Administration: NCUA's web site at or contact Bob Loftus, Director of Public Affairs, National Credit Union Administration, 1775 Duke Street, Alexandria, VA 22314, 703-518-6330. Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight: The Office's web site is at , under Public Documents or contact Stefanie Mullin, Deputy Associate Director for Public Affairs, 1700 G St., N.W., Washington, DC 20552, 202-414-6922. Office of the Comptroller of the Currency: The OCC's web site at and from Communications, Mail Stop 3-2, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, 250 E Street, SW, Washington, DC 20219; 202-874-4700. Office of Thrift Supervision: The OTS's web site at and from Publications, Office of Thrift Supervision, 1700 G Street, NW, Washington, DC 20552, 202-906-6410 (OTS Publications Hotline). Printed copies of the brochure also are available at 50 cents per copy from the Federal Consumer Information Center, Pueblo, CO 81009, or from the center's web site at .
Remarks by Vice Chairman Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. At the International Banking and Financial Systems Conference, Bank of Italy, Rome, Italy March 9, 2001 Understanding Financial Consolidation Good afternoon. It is my pleasure to speak to you today, and I thank Governor Antonio Fazio of Bank of Italy for inviting me to participate in this conference. Consolidation of all types of business activities has been a prominent feature of the economic landscape for at least the past decade. The financial sector has participated actively in this development. Indeed, the last few years have witnessed an acceleration of consolidation among financial institutions. Thus, your choice of topics for this afternoon's session is a timely one. In recognition of the importance of this marketplace evolution, and especially its potential effects on a wide range of public policies, the finance ministers and central bank governors of the Group of Ten nations in September 1999 commissioned a major study of the possible effects of financial consolidation on matters of policy concern to central banks and finance ministries in the G-10. This study, which I was privileged to direct, was released to the public late last month. Today I would like to discuss the study's major findings and their implications. The G-10 Study of Financial Consolidation The G-10 study had two primary objectives. It attempted to isolate the effects of consolidation from those of other powerful forces transforming our financial systems and to identify key areas in which financial consolidation requires new or accelerated policy development. The diversity of the economies involved--even among the G-10, Australia, and Spain--and the interdependent nature of many of the forces affecting our financial systems made achieving these objectives difficult, to say the least. However, I believe the study was a success. Patterns and Causes With a study of the depth, breadth, and quite frankly, the length of this one, it is always potentially dangerous and even possibly misleading to summarize the key points in a few words. However, I believe that policymakers should communicate to a wide audience their thinking on important policy concerns, and thereby stimulate and contribute to dialogues in the public and private sectors. Thus, despite the risks, I would like to highlight what are, in my judgment, the study's key findings and policy implications. The report documents that, in the nations studied, a high level of merger and acquisition activity occurred during the 1990s among financial firms, defined to include depository institutions, securities firms, and insurance companies. During the decade, approximately 7,500 transactions, valued at roughly $1.6 trillion, were consummated. Moreover, the pace of consolidation increased over time, including a noticeable acceleration in the last three years of the decade. For example, the annual number of deals increased threefold during the 1990s, and the total value of deals increased almost tenfold. In Europe, roughly two-thirds of merger and acquisition activity, as measured by the value of the European firm acquired, occurred during the decade's last three years. Using a variety of measures, the United States accounted for about 55 percent of M&A activity, partly because of our historically large number of relatively small financial firms. However, it is also true that many very large U.S. banking institutions expanded their geographic footprint by acquiring other very large banks, especially later in the decade. Most of the last decade's merger and acquisition activity in the financial sector involved banking organizations. Acquisitions of banking firms accounted for 60 percent of all financial mergers and 70 percent of the value of those mergers in the nations studied. In addition, most M&A transactions involved firms competing in the same segment of the financial services industry within the same country, while domestic mergers involving firms in different segments of the overall financial services industry were the second most common type of transaction. Cross-border mergers and acquisitions were less frequent, especially those involving firms in different industry segments. Still, all types of mergers and acquisitions, whether within one country or cross-border and whether within one industry segment or across segments, increased in frequency and value during the 1990s. Joint ventures and strategic alliances provide an interesting contrast with some of the patterns in outright mergers and acquisitions. As with M&A activity, the number of joint ventures and strategic alliances increased during the 1990s, with especially large increases in the last two years. In the United States, which accounted for nearly half of all joint ventures and strategic alliances, the arrangements were overwhelmingly domestic. However, in the other twelve countries studied, cross-border joint ventures and strategic alliances overall exceeded domestic deals. Our research shows that financial consolidation substantially decreased the number of banking firms during the 1990s in almost every nation studied, and measures of the national concentration of the banking industry have tended to rise. Still, at the national level, the structure of the banking industry continues to differ greatly, ranging from very unconcentrated in a few nations--the United States and Germany--to highly concentrated in about half of the nations in our study. In contrast to banking, there are no consistent patterns across countries in changes in the number of insurance firms or concentration in the insurance industry during the 1990s. Within the securities industry, several specific activities, such as certain types of underwriting, are dominated by a small number of leading institutions. It is unclear, however, whether this pattern changed much over the 1990s. One of the most important conclusions of our study is that financial consolidation has helped to create a significant number of large, and in some cases increasingly complex, financial institutions. In addition, these firms increasingly operate across national borders and are subject to a wide range of regulatory regimes. These observations have several important implications that I shall return to in a moment. Our work finds that the most important forces encouraging financial consolidation are improvements in information technology, financial deregulation, globalization of financial and nonfinancial markets, and increased shareholder pressure for financial performance. Because we expect these forces to continue, we expect financial consolidation to continue as well, even though the pace may be interrupted by swings in the macroeconomic cycle and other factors. The study considers few possible future scenarios but concludes that the likelihood of specific future developments is impossible to assess with confidence. My own guess is that various patterns will emerge. Globally active universal financial service providers will continue to emerge. We should also see the further development of firms specialized in the production of particular components of financial services or in the distribution to end-users of products obtained from specialized providers--providers that may exist within or outside the traditional financial services industry. I fully expect a large number of efficient and profitable small and medium-sized financial institutions to remain important players in the United States. I would guess this will also be the case in many other nations. In addition, the uncertainties of successful post-merger integration may well favor more use of looser forms of consolidation, such as joint ventures and strategic alliances. Monetary Policy One of our more important policy concerns in designing the study was the potential effect of financial consolidation on the conduct and effectiveness of monetary policy. The study finds, however, that financial consolidation has not significantly affected the ability of central banks to achieve the objectives of monetary policy. Why is this? Although the answer is somewhat complex, let me try to explain briefly. As part of our research, we asked central banks in all the study nations about their experiences with consolidation and monetary policy. Virtually all reported that they had experienced at most minor effects, and those that had experienced somewhat stronger effects had been able to adjust with little difficulty. A key reason for this finding is that even with the substantial consolidation we have observed, the financial markets important for monetary policy have generally remained highly competitive. Even in those nations where consolidation has been considerable, competitive behavior has generally been sustained by the possibility that new firms could enter the markets at relatively low cost. It is also well worth noting that our work suggests that the development of the euro has been particularly helpful in maintaining competition in Europe. The euro has encouraged development of European money and capital markets, thus making the number of participants in a particular nation's markets less relevant. Consolidation could, at least in theory, affect the way changes in monetary policy are transmitted to the real economy. For example, consolidation could potentially alter the way banks adjust the availability and pricing of credit to their customers as the central bank changes the stance of monetary policy. However, central banks generally indicated that such effects had not been observed. Moreover, frequent reviews of the data should allow central banks to take account of any future changes when setting policy. On balance, and despite these quite positive results, our study recommends that central banks should remain alert to the implications of any future reductions in the competitiveness of the markets most important for monetary policy implementation. Similarly, we suggest that central banks ought to monitor potential future effects on the transmission mechanisms for monetary policy. Monetary policy is simply too important to the health of all our economies to do otherwise. Financial Risk Financial consolidation can affect the risks to both individual financial institutions and the financial system as a whole. Importantly, our study concludes that existing policies appear adequate to contain individual firm and systemic risks now and in the intermediate term. However, looking further ahead, the study identifies several topics that deserve careful attention by policymakers. For example, we conclude that the potential effects of financial consolidation on the risk of individual financial institutions are mixed and that the net result is impossible to generalize. Thus, we must evaluate individual firm risk on a case-by-case basis. Consolidation seems most likely to reduce risk through diversification gains, although even here the possibilities are complex. On the one hand, diversification gains seem likely from consolidation across regions of a given nation and across national borders. On the other hand, after consolidation some firms shift toward riskier asset portfolios, and consolidation may increase operating risks and managerial complexities for those firms. Diversification gains may also result from consolidation across financial products and services, although research suggests that the potential benefits may be fairly limited. In part because the net impact of consolidation on individual firm risk is unclear, the net impact of consolidation on systemic risk is also uncertain. However, as I noted consolidation clearly has encouraged the creation of a number of large and increasingly complex financial institutions. Our study suggests that if such an institution became seriously distressed, consolidation and any attendant complexity might increase the chance that winding down the organization would be difficult or disorderly. We recommend that the risks to individual firms and to the financial system could be reduced by stepped-up efforts to understand the implications of working out a large and complex financial institution. Because no institution is too big to fail, I believe that regulators should develop a clearer understanding of, for example, the administration of bankruptcy laws and conventions across borders; the coordination of supervisory policies within and across borders; the treatment of over-the-counter derivatives, foreign exchange, and other "market" activities in distress situations; the roles and responsibilities of managers and boards of directors; and the administration of the lender-of-last-resort function. I say stepped-up discussions are needed in some of these areas because considering adverse developments is or should be a normal activity in all countries. Our study helped to clarify the need for international attention to this topic. Consolidation, and especially any resulting increased complexity of financial institutions, appears to have increased both the demand by market participants for and the supply by institutions of information regarding a firm's financial condition. The resulting rise in disclosures has probably improved firm transparency and encouraged market discipline and has thus lowered individual firm risk and perhaps increased financial stability. However, the increased complexity of firms has also made them more opaque, and their increased size has the potential to augment moral hazard. Thus, the net effect of consolidation on firm transparency and market discipline is unclear. Indeed, we conclude that there appears to be considerable room for improvement in disclosures by financial institutions. Our study suggests that both crisis prevention and crisis management could be improved by additional communication and cooperation among central banks, finance ministries, and other financial supervisors, domestically and internationally. Indeed, the study strongly supports existing efforts in these areas. In our view, the most important initiatives include proposals to improve the risk sensitivity of the international Basel Capital Accord and bank supervision and efforts aimed at improving market discipline. A critical element of improved risk-based supervision is risk-based capital standards that are tied more closely to economic risk. Capital standards provide an anchor for virtually all other supervisory and regulatory actions and can support and improve both supervisory and market discipline. For example, early intervention policies triggered by more accurate capital standards could prove to be important in crisis prevention. Payment and Settlement Systems Financial consolidation is affecting the market structures for payment and securities settlement as well as banks' internal systems and procedures for payment and back-office activities. Our study concludes that, on balance, financial consolidation has led to a greater concentration of payment and settlement flows among fewer parties. Fortunately, our analysis indicates that the greater concentration of payment flows does not appear to have decreased competition in markets for payment and settlement services. However, we suggest that it would be advisable for government authorities to continue to monitor competition in the payment system. In contrast, our work indicates we should closely monitor the risk implications of consolidation in payment and settlement systems. On the one hand, consolidation may help to improve the effectiveness of institutions' credit and liquidity risk controls. For example, increased concentration of payment flows may allow institutions to get a more comprehensive picture of settlement exposures or create a greater ability to net internal payment flows. In addition, central banks have made major efforts over recent decades to contain and reduce systemic risk by operating and promoting real-time gross settlement systems and by insisting on the implementation of risk control measures in net settlement systems. On the other hand, consolidation may lead to a significant shift of risk from interbank settlement systems, where risk management may be more robust and transparent, to customer banks and third-party service providers, where risk management practices may be harder for users to discern. In addition, to the extent that consolidation results in a greater concentration of payment flows, the potential effects of an operational problem may increase. These and other developments imply that central bank oversight of the risks in interbank payment systems is becoming more closely linked with traditional supervision of individual institution safety and soundness. As a result, we conclude that increasing cooperation and communication between banking supervisors and payment system overseers may be necessary both domestically and internationally. Efficiency, Competition, and Credit Flows Our study concludes with an extensive evaluation of the potential effects of financial consolidation on the efficiency of financial institutions, competition among such firms, and credit flows to households and small businesses. The study determines that although consolidation has some potential to improve operating efficiency, and has done so in some cases, the overall evidence in favor of efficiency gains is weak. Thus, we suggest that policymakers should carefully examine claims of substantial efficiency gains in proposed consolidations, especially in cases where a merger could raise significant issues of market power. Our work also attempts to shed some light on why academic researchers are less optimistic than business practitioners regarding the potential for consolidation to lead to efficiency gains. We suggest four possible reasons, which are not mutually exclusive. First, practitioners may consider cost reductions or revenue increases per se to be a success, without also taking into account independent industry trends as a benchmark. Second, managers may focus on absolute cost savings rather than on efficiency measures that compare costs to some other variable such as assets or revenues. Third, research finds little or no efficiency improvements on average, but this also means that some institutions may improve efficiency while some suffer from lower efficiency. Managers with inside knowledge of their firm may be justified in believing that their institution might be among those improving efficiency through a merger or acquisition. Lastly, past M&As may have suffered from regulations that reduced the benefits, and such regulations may not exist in the future. The effects of consolidation on competition and credit flows are case-specific and depend on the nature of markets for individual products and services. Some markets, such as those for wholesale financial services, generally show few problems. Others, such as those for retail products and services, sometimes experience problems from consolidation. Thus, as with other issues addressed by our study, a case-by-case evaluation of the relevant facts is required. Conclusion In conclusion, financial consolidation clearly is a powerful force that is deeply affecting the evolution of the financial system of the United States and many other nations. A thorough understanding of this force and its potential effects is critical for prudent decision-making in both the public and the private sectors. I believe the study that I have just summarized takes some major steps toward that understanding, and I hope that my remarks have helped you to comprehend our study's findings and implications. Still, all of us have much to learn, and much of what we know today will almost surely change in the future. I commend the organizers of this conference for seeking to advance our knowledge, and I again thank you for inviting me to contribute.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the applications and notices of Fifth Third Bancorp, ("Fifth Third") and Fifth Third Financial Corporation ("FTFC"), both in Cincinnati, Ohio, to acquire Old Kent Financial Corporation, Grand Rapids ("Old Kent"), and thereby acquire Old Kent's subsidiary banks, including Old Kent Bank, Grand Rapids, and Old Kent Bank, N.A., Jonesville, and its nonbanking subsidiaries, all in Michigan. The Board also announced that FTFC's election to become a financial holding company would become effective upon the consummation of Fifth Third's acquisition of Old Kent. Attached is the Boardï¿½s Order relating to this action.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the applications of Friedman, Billings, Ramsey Group, Inc.; FBR Bancorp, Inc.; Money Management Associates, Inc.; and Money Management Associates (LP), Inc., all of Arlington, Virginia, and Money Management Associates, L.P., Bethesda, Maryland, to become bank holding companies by acquiring FBR National Bank, Bethesda, Maryland. Attached is the Board’s Order relating to this action.
Testimony of Governor Laurence H. Meyer Payment of interest on reserves Before the Financial Services Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit, U.S. House of Representatives March 13, 2001 I welcome the opportunity to testify on behalf of the Federal Reserve Board on issues related to interest on demand deposits and interest on balances held at Reserve Banks. The Board continues to strongly support legislative proposals to authorize the payment of interest on demand deposits and interest on balances held by depository institutions at Reserve Banks. It also supports obtaining increased flexibility in setting reserve requirements--a proposal included in legislation that passed the House last year. As we have previously testified, unnecessary restrictions on the payment of interest on demand deposits and balances held at Reserve Banks distort market prices and lead to economically wasteful efforts to circumvent these restrictions. Authorization of interest on balances at Reserve Banks could also be helpful in ensuring that the Federal Reserve will continue to be able to implement monetary policy with its existing procedures, while increased flexibility in setting reserve requirements would allow the Federal Reserve to reduce a regulatory burden on the financial sector to the extent that is consistent with the effective implementation of monetary policy. As background, let me begin by discussing the role of balances held at Reserve Banks in the implementation of monetary policy. The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) formulates monetary policy by setting a target for the overnight federal funds rate--the interest rate on loans between depository institutions of balances held in their accounts at Reserve Banks. While the federal funds rate is a market interest rate, the Federal Reserve can strongly influence its level by adjusting the aggregate supply of deposit balances held at Reserve Banks through open market operations--the purchase or sale of securities that causes increases or decreases in such balances. However, in deciding on the appropriate level of balances to supply to achieve the targeted funds rate, the Open Market Desk must estimate the aggregate demand for such balances. In estimating that demand, the Desk must take account of the demand for the three types of balances held by depository institutions at the Federal Reserve--required reserve balances, contractual clearing balances, and excess reserve balances. Required reserve balances are the balances that a depository institution must hold to meet reserve requirements. At present, the Federal Reserve requires depository institutions to maintain reserves equal to 10 percent of their transaction deposits above certain minimum levels. Reserve requirements may be satisfied either with vault cash or with required reserve balances, neither of which earn interest. Depository institutions may also commit themselves in advance to holding additional balances called required or contractual clearing balances. They are called clearing balances because institutions tend to hold them when they need a higher level of balances than their required reserve balances in order to clear checks or wire transfers without running into overdrafts. These clearing balances are similar to the compensating balances offered by depository institutions to their business customers. The clearing balances earn no explicit interest, but earn implicit interest for depository institutions in the form of credits that may offset the cost of using Federal Reserve services, such as check-clearing. Finally, excess reserve balances are funds held by depository institutions in their accounts at Reserve Banks in excess of their required reserve and contractual clearing balances. Depository institutions must maintain their specified levels of both required reserve and contractual clearing balances, not day-by-day, but on an average basis over a maintenance period that is typically two weeks long. This averaging feature allows these two types of balances to be helpful for the implementation of monetary policy. The required amounts of both types of balances are known prior to the beginning of the maintenance period, so the Open Market Desk knows the balances it needs to supply on average over the period to satisfy these needs. Moreover, the two-week averaging creates incentives for depository institutions to arbitrage the funds rate from one day to the next in a manner that helps keep that rate close to the FOMC's target. For instance, if the funds rate were higher than usual on a particular day, some depository institutions could choose to hold lower balances on that day, and their reduced demand would help to damp the upward pressure on the funds rate. Later in the two-week period, when the funds rate might be lower, those institutions could choose to hold extra balances to make up the shortfall in their average holdings of reserve balances. These actions are desirable in that they help smooth out the funds rate over the two-week maintenance period. The averaging feature is only effective in stabilizing markets, however, if the sum of required reserve and contractual clearing balances is sufficiently high. If their sum dropped to a very low level, depositories would be at increased risk of overdrafting their accounts at Reserve Banks because of unpredictable payments out of the accounts of depository institutions late in the day. Depositories would need to hold higher levels of excess reserves at Federal Reserve Banks as a precaution against such overdrafts, and demand for these excesses would vary from day to day and be difficult to predict. For example, on days when payment flows are particularly heavy and uncertain, or when the distribution of reserves around the banking system is substantially different from normal, depositories need a higher than usual level of precautionary balances to reduce the risk of overdrafts. The uncertainties about how many balances depositories wish to hold in a given day would make it harder for the Federal Reserve to determine the appropriate daily quantity of balances to supply to the market to keep the federal funds rate near the target level set by the FOMC. Moreover, if the marginal demand for balances were for daily precautionary purposes, there would be less arbitrage of the funds rate by depositories across the days of a maintenance period. Thus, if the demand for balances were determined largely by daily precautionary demands for excess reserves, the funds rate could become more volatile and could diverge markedly at times from its targeted level. Moderate levels of volatility are not a concern for monetary policy, in part because the Federal Reserve now announces the target federal funds rate, eliminating the possibility that fluctuations in the actual funds rate in the market would give misleading signals about monetary policy. A significant increase in volatility in the federal funds rate, however, would be of concern because it would affect other overnight interest rates, raising funding risks for most large banks, securities dealers, and other money market participants. Suppliers of funds to the overnight markets, including many small banks and thrifts, would face greater uncertainty about the returns they would earn and market participants would incur additional costs in managing their funding to limit their exposure to the heightened risks. As we have previously testified, the issue of potential volatility in the funds rate has arisen in recent years because of substantial declines in required reserve balances owing to the reserve-avoidance activities of depository institutions. Depositories have always attempted to reduce required reserve balances to a minimum, in large part because those balances earn no interest. For more than two decades, some commercial banks have done so by sweeping the reservable transaction deposits of businesses into instruments that are not subject to reserve requirements. These wholesale business sweeps not only have avoided reserve requirements, but also have allowed businesses to earn interest on instruments that are effectively equivalent to demand deposits. In recent years, developments in information systems have allowed depository institutions to sweep transaction deposits of retail customers into nonreservable accounts. These retail sweep programs use computerized systems to transfer consumer and some small business transaction deposits, which are subject to reserve requirements, into savings accounts, which are not. Largely because of such programs, required reserve balances have dropped from about $28 billion in late 1993 to around $5 billion or $6 billion today, and the spread of such programs probably has not yet fully run its course. Despite the unusually low level of required reserve balances, no trend increase in the volatility of the funds rate has been observed to date. In part, this stability reflects the increasingly important role of contractual clearing balances, which have risen over the last decade to the point where they now exceed the level of required reserve balances. In addition, improvements in information technology have evidently allowed depository institutions to become much more adept at managing their reserve positions, and as a result, their needs for day-to-day precautionary balances have declined considerably. A number of measures taken by the Federal Reserve also have helped to foster stability in the funds market. These include improvements in the timeliness of account information provided to depository institutions; more frequent open market operations geared increasingly to daily payment needs rather than two-week-average requirements; a shift to lagged reserve requirements, which gives depositories and the Federal Reserve advance information on the demand for reserves; and improved procedures for estimating reserve demand. To prevent the sum of required reserve and contractual clearing balances from falling even lower and to diminish the incentives for depositories to engage in wasteful reserve-avoidance activities, the Federal Reserve has sought authorization to pay interest on required reserve balances and to pay explicit interest on contractual clearing balances. With interest on required reserve balances, some of the retail sweep programs that have been implemented in recent years might be unwound, and new programs would be less likely to be implemented, thereby helping to boost the level of such balances. Eliminating such wasteful reserve-avoidance activities would also tend to improve the efficiency of the financial sector. Payment of explicit interest on contractual clearing balances could result in an increase in the level of these balances; some depositories are currently constrained in the amount of such credit-earning balances they can hold because of their limited use of Federal Reserve services. Moreover, payment of explicit interest would help to maintain the level of clearing balances at a time of rising interest rates. At present, some depositories pay for all their Federal Reserve services with credits earned on clearing balances; these institutions would not be able to use their additional credits if interest rates were to rise. If enough institutions were in this position, contractual clearing balances might drop below levels needed to be helpful for the implementation of monetary policy. With explicit interest, the level of balances on which interest could be effectively earned would not be limited to the level of charges incurred for the use of Federal Reserve services. Therefore, these depositories would not be impelled to reduce their balances when interest rates rise. The substantial decline in balances held at Reserve Banks has not produced any trend increase in the volatility of the funds rate in recent years. Thus, the question arises as to the continued need for reserve requirements at current levels. Some other industrialized countries have eliminated reserve requirements altogether, thereby avoiding completely the waste of resources associated with reserve-avoidance activities. These countries do not have contractual clearing balance programs, but have employed alternative procedures for implementing monetary policy, such as central bank lending at an interest rate that acts like a ceiling on overnight market interest rates. Some central banks also establish a floor for overnight rates by paying interest on the non-reserve deposits they hold. The Federal Reserve could establish such a floor for overnight rates if it were authorized to pay interest on excess reserves; a depository would not likely lend balances to another depository at a lower interest rate than it could earn by keeping the excess funds in its account at the Federal Reserve. Hence, the authorization to pay interest on excess reserve balances would be a potentially useful addition to the monetary toolkit of the Federal Reserve, although such interest payments are not needed for monetary policy purposes at the present time. At present, the Federal Reserve is constrained in its flexibility to adjust reserve requirements. By law, the ratio of required reserves on transaction deposits above a certain level must be set between 8 and 14 percent. Authorization of increased flexibility in setting reserve requirements would allow the Federal Reserve to consider exploring at some point the possibility of reducing reserve requirements below the minimum levels currently allowed by law, provided we are also granted the authority to pay interest on contractual clearing balances to ensure a stable and predictable demand for the remaining deposit balances at the Federal Reserve, an essential pillar for the effective implementation of monetary policy. If the Federal Reserve were granted these additional authorities, before making modifications in our procedures, we would carefully study the new range of possible strategies for implementing monetary policy in the most efficient possible way. The payment of interest on required reserve balances would reduce the revenues received by the Treasury from the Federal Reserve. The extent of the revenue loss, however, has fallen in recent years as banks have increasingly implemented reserve-avoidance techniques. Paying interest on contractual clearing balances would primarily involve a switch to explicit interest from the implicit interest currently paid in the form of credits, and therefore would have essentially no net cost to the Treasury. In the past, bills approved by the Committee, such as H.R. 4209 from the last Congress, have provided for a general authorization for the payment of interest on any balances held by depository institutions at Reserve Banks. This would be a desirable outcome. However, if budgetary issues continue to inhibit the passage of legislation to authorize payment of interest on required reserve balances, the Federal Reserve would support a separate authorization of the payment of interest on contractual clearing balances, which would have essentially no budgetary cost. The payment of interest on excess reserves could also be authorized without immediate effect on the budget because the Federal Reserve would use that authority only in circumstances that do not seem likely to arise in the years immediately ahead. Another legislative proposal that would improve the long-run efficiency of our financial sector is elimination of the prohibition of interest on demand deposits. This prohibition was enacted during the Great Depression, a time when Congress was concerned that large money center banks might have earlier bid deposits away from country banks to make loans to stock market speculators, depriving rural areas of financing. It is unclear whether the rationale for this prohibition was ever valid, and it is certainly no longer applicable today. Funds flow freely around the country, and among banks of all sizes, to find the most profitable lending opportunities, using a wide variety of market mechanisms, including the federal funds market. Moreover, Congress authorized interest payments on household checking accounts with the approval of nationwide NOW accounts in the early 1980s. The absence of interest on demand deposits, which are held predominantly by businesses, is no bar to the movement of funds from depositories with surpluses--whatever their size or location--to the markets where the funding can be profitably employed. In fact, small firms in rural areas are able to bypass their local banks and invest in money market mutual funds with transaction capabilities. Indeed, smaller banks complain that they are unable to compete for the deposits of businesses precisely because of their inability to offer interest on demand deposits. The prohibition of interest on demand deposits distorts the pricing of transaction deposits and associated bank services. In order to compete for the liquid assets of businesses, banks set up complicated procedures to pay implicit interest on compensating balance accounts. Banks also spend resources--and charge fees--for sweeping the excess demand deposits of businesses into money market investments on a nightly basis. To be sure, the progress of computer technology has reduced the cost of such systems over time. However, the expenses are not trivial, particularly when substantial efforts are needed to upgrade such automation systems or to integrate the diverse systems of merging banks. Such expenses waste the economy's resources, and would be unnecessary if interest were allowed to be paid on both demand deposits and the reserve balances that must be held against them. The prohibition of interest on demand deposits also distorts the pricing of other bank products. Because banks cannot attract demand deposits through the payment of explicit interest, they often try to attract these deposits, aside from compensating balances, through the provision of services at little or no cost. When services are offered below cost, they tend to be overused to the extent that the benefits of consuming them are less than the costs to society of producing them. Previous legislative proposals have included a transition period before the direct payment of interest on demand deposits would be effective. During the transition, a reservable 24-transaction money market deposit account (MMDA) would be authorized. Banks would be able to sweep balances from demand deposits into these 24-transaction MMDAs each night, pay interest on them, and then sweep them back into demand deposits the next day. This type of account in effect would permit banks to pay interest on demand deposits, but perhaps more selectively than with direct interest payments. The 24-transaction MMDA, which would be useful only during the transition period before direct interest payments were allowed, could be implemented at lower cost by banks already having sweep programs. Because other banks would face a competitive disadvantage, while some businesses would not benefit from this MMDA, and extra costs would be incurred in operating new sweep programs, a long delay before interest could be paid directly on demand deposits would be very undesirable. A short transition period of a year or so would not be as objectionable, given that many banks may take some time in any case to develop competitive interest-bearing demand deposit products. Small businesses that currently earn no interest on their checking accounts would see important benefits from interest on demand deposits. For banks, interest on demand deposits would increase costs, at least in the short run. Interest on required reserve balances, or possibly a lower burden associated with reduced reserve requirements, would help to offset the rise in costs, however. And over time, these measures should help the banking sector attract liquid funds in competition with nonbank institutions and direct market investments by businesses. Small banks in particular should be able to bid for business demand deposits on a more level playing field vis-a-vis both nonbank competition and large banks using sweep programs for such deposits. Moreover, large and small banks will be strengthened by the elimination of unnecessary costs associated with sweep programs and other reserve-avoidance procedures. In summary, the Federal Reserve Board strongly supports legislative proposals to authorize the payment of interest on demand deposits and on balances held by depository institutions at Reserve Banks, as well as increased flexibility in the setting of reserve requirements. We believe these steps would improve the efficiency of our financial sector, make a wider variety of interest-bearing accounts available to more bank customers, and better ensure the efficient conduct of monetary policy in the future.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the proposal of Mitsubishi Tokyo Financial Group, Inc., Tokyo, Japan ("MTFG"), to become a bank holding company by acquiring indirectly Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi Trust Company, New York, New York, UnionBanCal Corporation, and Union Bank of California, N.A., both of San Francisco, California, the U.S. bank and bank holding company subsidiaries of The Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi, Ltd., Tokyo, Japan ("Tokyo Bank"); and Mitsubishi Trust & Banking Corporation (U.S.A.), New York, New York, the U.S. banking subsidiary of The Mitsubishi Trust and Banking Corporation, Tokyo, Japan ("Mitsubishi Trust"). The Board also has approved MTFG's proposal to acquire the U.S. nonbanking subsidiaries of Tokyo Bank and Mitsubishi Trust, and thereby engage in certain permissible nonbanking activities. Attached is the Boardï¿½s Order relating to this action.
Remarks by Governor Laurence H. Meyer At the Ohio Bankers’ Day Conference, Columbus, Ohio March 15, 2001 Capital Standards and Community Banks I am pleased to be here today to discuss capital standards at community banks. This topic does not reflect any apparent problem with the current capital standard for such organizations. The system has worked well for both supervisors and community banks. With some minor exceptions, it continues to work well. Nonetheless, the issue calls out for discussion because of the new Basel Capital Accord proposed in mid-January as well as the banking agencies' advance notice of proposed rule-making last October on possible revisions to community bank capital rules. By way of background, you may recall that the original Basel Accord, reached in 1988, was designed for large, internationally active banks. Nonetheless, regulators in the United States applied it universally to all domestic commercial banks and bank holding companies. Other countries took a similar approach. Technology and banking practices have advanced since 1988, and especially for the large, complex banking organizations, the rule has developed serious shortcomings. Risk-measurement techniques have improved; the costs of generating, maintaining, and analyzing data have declined; and capital markets have become more tightly intertwined. As a result, the current accord that worked well before these developments has proven to be far too crude for practices today, particularly practices at large, complex banking organizations. Supervisors in industrial nations have concluded that they need a capital measure for these large banks that is both more risk-sensitive and more compatible with current market practice than the current accord. My focus today is on what all of this means for the overwhelming majority of U.S. banks, specifically community banks. The new Basel proposal clearly applies to all of the institutions we supervise under our program dealing with large, complex banking organizations. But that program covers only about twenty domestic entities of the nearly 9,000 U.S. banks, almost all of which have assets exceeding $40 billion. The vast majority of banks in this country are neither large nor complex and seem to be unlikely candidates for a high-maintenance capital standard that requires costly and extensive risk-management systems. More than 98 percent of U.S. commercial and savings banks, for example, have assets of less than $5 billion, and 95 percent have assets of less than $1 billion. Last fall, in anticipation of the Basel proposal, the U.S. banking agencies asked for public comment on possible alternative standards for noncomplex banks, simpler than anything in the Basel proposal. I will be discussing the various "simpler" options--both from our advance proposal last fall and from the new Basel framework proposed in January. One outcome after considering these options may be to retain the current system, or tweak it only modestly, for most noncomplex, non-internationally active banks. Innovations in the New Proposal The Basel proposal represents a watershed in supervisory policy, redefining the regulatory approach to bank supervision for some banks and providing others with new incentives to improve their risk-measurement procedures. Let me call your attention to some of the most important innovations in the new proposal and, at the same time, explore whether these innovations would be appropriate for community banks. Three pillars . The Basel Committee's approach rests on three so-called pillars: (1) the new capital standard itself; (2) increased supervisory review of banks' internal assessments of their own capital adequacy; and (3) additional public disclosure of bank risk profiles. In contrast, the original Basel Accord rested on a single pillar, a regulatory minimum for capital. Pillars 1 and 2 in effect distinguish two concepts of capital adequacy: regulatory minimum capital set by pillar 1 and the supervisor's evaluation of banks' internal calculations of their economic capital under pillar 2. By "economic" capital I mean the amount of capital that management has determined is required to reflect the risks, strategy, and objectives of its individual bank, regardless of the regulatory structure. The regulatory minimum, in effect, provides a threshold for early intervention by supervisors. The procedures and assumptions embedded in the internal measure of economic capital drive business decisions of the bank by permitting management to gauge the capital costs of, and better establish the price for, credits of varying degrees of risk. Using pillar 2, supervisors would plan to evaluate the internal capital- allocation process for integrity and economic sense, and to ensure that the underlying processes and assumptions used to measure economic capital are reasonable and consistent with the principles in pillar 1. Finally, pillar 3 looks to market discipline to supplement and reinforce the effectiveness of pillars 1 and 2 in disciplining the risk-taking of banking organizations. In principle, the three-pillar approach applies to community banks as well as to LCBOs. In practice, however, the relative importance and detailed application of the three pillars would clearly be quite different at LCBOs and at community banks. It would be difficult and expensive to develop and maintain the risk-management infrastructure necessary to evaluate a customer's creditworthiness with the precision and internal quality controls necessary to use the more-advanced capital approaches in the Basel proposal. More to the point, virtually all of these techniques and procedures seem currently unnecessary for most U.S. banks, and they will remain so unless the economics and the nature of community banking substantially change. The scale and operations of community banks neither separate the management from credit decisions nor involve the complexity that characterizes the process at larger entities. As a result, a simpler approach for defining the regulatory minimum capital is likely to continue to work well for community banks, even as we need to move to a more complex and more risk-sensitive approach for LCBOs. In the United States, supervisory oversight--pillar 2 under the new proposal--has long been an integral part of our regulatory framework, both for LCBOs and community banks. For both sets of institutions, supervision has evolved to a more formal, risk-focused approach, with our exams increasingly emphasizing the adequacy of internal processes and controls. Since long before the risk-focused approach was formalized, however, examiners have been rating a bank's capital based on their assessment of the risk of the institution. For example, a bank with stated capital ratios well in excess of minimum requirements--or in excess of the "well capitalized" threshold under today's standard--may still be assigned a less-than-satisfactory rating for the capital component of the CAMELS rating if, in the opinion of the supervisor, the risk at that institution warrants such a rating. In 1991, with the passage of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act, the Congress formally recognized the role of supervisory oversight in assessing capital adequacy of banks in relation to risk, permitting federal bank regulators to reclassify a bank's capital category under certain conditions. Thus, for example, a federal bank regulator may reclassify a "well capitalized" bank to the "adequately capitalized" category if the bank is in unsafe and unsound condition or if it fails to correct unsafe and unsound practices. The supervisory oversight of capital adequacy, to be sure, is more intense and continuous in the case of large, complex institutions, but what is now being called pillar 2 has long been, and will continue to be, an integral part of the framework for community banks. Market discipline (pillar 3), however, may be particularly problematic for community banks, since such institutions are often closely held and not rigorously and continuously evaluated by market analysts and investors. Even if they are traded on a regional basis, the depth of the trading is likely to be inadequate to provide timely signals to supervisors and discipline to management. So, though pillar 3 is not irrelevant for community banks, it is unlikely to be as effective as it is for large, complex banks. Multilayered approach . As I have noted, the proposed Basel capital standard is highly complex, but for good reason. The proposal contains overlapping options that offer several approaches to accommodate banks with varied resources, expertise, and risk profiles. The question is whether the differentiation goes far enough for the U.S. banking structure. The most basic approach under the proposed accord is the so-called standardized method. The standardized approach is conceptually the same as the current capital accord, but more risk-sensitive in some respects. Under all the Basel approaches, a bank, as now, would allocate a risk-weight to each of its assets and off-balance-sheet positions and calculate a sum of the risk-weighted asset values. The capital requirement remains 8 percent of the institution's risk-weighted assets. The primary change, under the standardized approach, would be to base the asset risk-weights for exposures to sovereigns, other banks, and corporations on the borrower's external credit ratings, when possible. The proposal would also give more recognition to a bank's efforts to mitigate risk through guarantees, collateral, credit derivatives, and netting agreements. Those changes may be attractive to many institutions; however, the clear focus of the new Basel proposal is the basing of regulatory capital requirements on a bank's own internal credit ratings, the so-called internal rating based or IRB approach. There are two variants of the IRB approach: the "foundation" and "advanced" options. Both were designed for banks with the resources and expertise to build and maintain sophisticated risk-management systems and for which the current capital standard more seriously mismeasures risk. The difference between the two IRB methods is that the foundation approach is designed for banks with systems that do not permit full reliance on internal risk estimates for calculating capital requirements. Under the foundation approach, missing risk parameters would be supplied by the supervisor and would be set conservatively. If banks believe these conservative estimates are inappropriate or too large, they can invest in the research and systems to prove the point and pursue the advanced IRB approach. Banks using the advanced approach would have more freedom, but their methodologies would first be closely reviewed and approved by the supervisor. This multilayered structure offers a flexible approach that could apply to a wider group of banks, not just to large, internationally active banks. The key question for U.S. community banks and their regulators is whether any of the options in the new Basel proposal--especially the standardized approach--is a good match for community banks. Another question is whether competitive pressures would provide incentives--perhaps overwhelming incentives--for community banks to pursue an IRB approach. Would such an allocation of resources by community banks and supervisors be desirable and efficient? Finally, if not one of the Basel alternatives, what capital standard would be most appropriate for community banks in the United States? Comprehensive treatment of risk . Although originally portrayed as dealing only with credit risk, the standard covers, in effect, virtually all banking risks through the experience-based, but unscientific, capital charge of 8 percent. That is, although the current standard was structured on the basis of credit risk alone, its level was set higher than warranted for just credit risk, in effect incorporating a "buffer" that could be used to cover "other risks." As we get more precise in measuring credit risk, we lose some of the buffers previously built into the standard to cover operational and other risks. Explicitly or implicitly, we now need to make judgments regarding the respective correlations of different risks. Are they additive or independent, and to what degree are they one or the other? Can the same capital cover all of them, or do banks need capital for each one? But again the question is whether the current approach, with its less precise measurement of credit risk and its buffers for other risks, is working well enough for community banks and should be left as it is. The Bifurcation Alternative: The Interagency Advanced Notice of Proposed Rulemaking As I have mentioned, community banks in the United States have, besides the new Basel proposal, another capital proposal to consider. I am referring to the advance notice of proposed rulemaking issued last October by the U.S. banking and thrift agencies that explores alternatives for simplifying the capital standard for noncomplex, non-internationally active U.S. depository institutions. This is the so-called bifurcated approach. The advance proposal suggested three possible ways to structure a capital standard for non-complex banking organizations. The first option would combine a risk-based ratio with a leverage ratio. This option would retain much of the current approach while tailoring capital charges to the size, structure, and risk profile of less- complex banking organizations. The second option would use only a leverage ratio. Taking an approach not unlike the primary capital standard we used throughout the 1980s, it would drop any semblance of a risk-weighted measure and base a bank's capital requirements only on the ratio of its capital to total assets. The third alternative is simply a modified leverage ratio that would add the exposures arising from loan commitments and other off-balance-sheet transactions to total bank assets. Reflecting its early stage of development, the proposal presents more questions than answers and does not flesh out any of the three alternatives it presents. One important question relates to how noncomplex institutions would be defined. The proposal suggests basing the decision on a bank's asset size, the nature of its activities, and its risk profile--for example, assets less than $5 billion, moderate amounts of off-balance-sheet transactions that are mostly loan commitments, and a focus on traditional banking activities. In effect, the size threshold would be the determining factor for most banks, permitting all but a few hundred of the nearly 9,000 federally insured commercial and savings banks to calculate their capital requirements using a simple approach. Almost all thrifts as well would likely qualify for the simpler approach. This seems to be the proper time to consider a simpler approach for community banks as we undertake major revisions to the Basel Accord. However, to be consistent with the spirit of Basel, the agencies proposed that a simpler system should also be more conservative, requiring at least a slightly higher minimum capital charge. Such a higher minimum would still, however, be below the actual (or economic) capital now maintained by virtually all community banks. The higher capital ratios now maintained at smaller banks reflect certain economic realities. These banks generally carry greater risk than larger banks because of their greater concentrations in exposures and funding sources, byproducts of their limited geographic scope and scale. In addition, because of their more limited access to capital markets, community banks have fewer options for augmenting capital when it is needed. The higher capital ratios at community banks, compensating for these greater risks, result as much from bank managers' tolerance for risk and market expectations for banks' capital as from the influence of bank supervisors. Bank management, the market, and the supervisors all understand that the current capital standard sets minimum capital requirements, not the economic levels that are required for prudent operations. For all these reasons, community banks have consistently maintained higher capital ratios than larger banks since long before a regulatory capital standard was implemented. At the end of 2000, for example, banks with total assets of less than $1 billion had an average tier 1 leverage ratio of almost 10 percent and an average total risk-based capital ratio of almost 15 percent--both about double the minimum standard. In contrast, banks with assets greater than $10 billion had average ratios of about 7 and 11.5 percent, respectively. These and often larger differences extend back as far as data are available. Despite having capital ratios typically well above any minimum that regulators would require, community banks appear to have little interest in the advance proposal for noncomplex banks. In the small number of comment letters we have received, community banks did not express a clear preference for gaining a simpler regulatory capital measure in exchange for potentially higher minimum capital requirements--requirements still well below their economic or maintained capital. The gains in simplicity were apparently not viewed as offsetting the costs of changing from the current set of rules to a purportedly simpler system. The intent of the proposal, by the way, was to reduce regulatory burden on smaller banks while ensuring that their capital remains at prudent levels. Key Questions I hope my comments have clarified that the new Basel and interagency proposals raise some important questions about the appropriate capital standard for U.S. community banks. If community banks want to shape the outcome, they must convey their views on several key questions. Who is under what standard? A crucial question that we should consider is which banks or types of banks will pursue which alternative capital standards. Clearly, all or almost all of the truly global institutions, worldwide, would be expected to use an IRB approach, with most of them moving to the advanced approach, if they are not there at the outset. Most other large banking organizations, such as the large U.S. regional banks, are also likely to pursue that approach, at least eventually. Supervisory and market pressures, alone, would presumably force the global and large regional banks in that direction. Given the systemic risk posed by implications and sheer complexity of many of our largest institutions, supervisors worldwide should at least be urging these firms in that direction. However, if the standard is designed and calibrated properly, the incentives should include both a carrot and stick. Institutions that meet the demanding risk-management and public-disclosure standards required under the IRB approach deserve some consideration in the form of regulatory minimum capital charges more accurately reflecting the underlying risks. The IRB banks' risk-measurement and management processes will be strengthened, and capital markets will have more information with which to judge risks and arguably assert more discipline, if risks appear to rise. The key is to align the incentives--capital charges and costs--just right and to ensure, largely through the supervisory process, that the required operating standards are met. Is the standardized approach a good fit for community banks? Perhaps the larger question relates to which alternative most community and smaller regional banks will choose. Most of them, I suspect, would opt for the standardized approach, or a still-simpler method, as suggested in the bifurcated approach proposals of last fall. Or, as noted, many might just prefer the existing rule in order to avoid transition costs. Of course, transition costs should be balanced against the resultant regulatory burden and capital charges. If, for example, the incentives for banks to move to more-advanced standards are exceptionally attractive, a larger number of community and regional banks may choose to bear these costs. My own judgment is that will not be the case for most community banks. From the supervisors' point of view, any incentives to move to the more-advanced approaches should be commensurate with the identified risks and should not materially disrupt the terms of competition. Although the alternative was not specifically highlighted, is remaining on the current capital standard a reasonable option to consider for community banks? The standardized approach is only a modest change from the current system, and many of the other changes are not relevant to community banks. Community banks, for example, presumably do not have many externally rated credits, nor do they generally lend to foreign governments. Does it make sense then to require them to change their system to be compatible with the standardized approach, resulting in some costs, when the benefits may be minimal? One possible solution may be to think of the current system as one of the simpler regimes for noncomplex banks--that is, simpler than the new Basel options. This would allow community banks to remain under today's system with the same regulatory capital minimum. Would the current system need to be tweaked to minimize competitive pressures? I have heard some community bankers say that competitive pressures would force them to follow larger banks to an IRB standard. That is certainly not our intent, and I am not convinced that result is inevitable. If it is, we need to look more closely at how well the incentives are balanced. The few respondents to the interagency advance proposal for noncomplex banks suggested some revisions to the current standard. Specifically, they suggested reduced requirements on certain assets, such as low loan-to-value mortgages and certain collateralized consumer loans. In such cases, they claimed, much less capital is needed than is required, and most supervisors would probably agree. The difficulty is that the respondents did not also suggest which exposures, in turn, should get higher capital requirements, or how high-risk exposures could be as easily and objectively identified in community banks. Simply cherry-picking a bank's best assets to receive lower requirements is not workable. Indeed, since supervisors do not believe that overall capital requirements are excessive, you should not expect to be offered lower risk-weights for low-risk assets without also accepting higher risk-weights for higher risk activities. At the very least, that might mean a higher risk-weight--possibly far higher on the basis of the historical record--for classified assets. It could also mean a higher risk-weight for subprime and generally riskier loans. Conclusion In closing, I would emphasize that the current standard appears to be working well for community banks. As with any change in regulation, an appropriate cost-benefit analysis must be undertaken. That is, do the benefits from any new standard more than outweigh the added costs of any increase in complexity as well as the one-time cost of adjusting to a new system? The proposed Basel Accord appears to be well designed to remedy the deficiencies of the current standard for large, complex banking organizations. The U.S. banking agencies, however, will have to give careful thought as to whether any of the options in the Basel proposal are a good fit for U.S. community banks. If they are not, we need to consider what simpler standard would be more appropriate. That was the rationale for the advanced notice of proposed rulemaking. Remaining on the current standard (with or without some minor modifications) is an option we will need to consider for community banks. And we need to hear your views.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between USABancShares.com, Inc., Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Open Market Committee at its meeting today decided to lower its target for the federal funds rate by 50 basis points to 5 percent. In a related action, the Board of Governors approved a 50 basis point reduction in the discount rate to 4-1/2 percent. Persistent pressures on profit margins are restraining investment spending and, through declines in equity wealth, consumption. The associated backup in inventories has induced a rapid response in manufacturing output and, with spending having firmed a bit since last year, inventory adjustment appears to be well underway. Although current developments do not appear to have materially diminished the prospects for long-term growth in productivity, excess productive capacity has emerged recently. The possibility that this excess could continue for some time and the potential for weakness in global economic conditions suggest substantial risks that demand and production could remain soft. In these circumstances, when the economic situation could be evolving rapidly, the Federal Reserve will need to monitor developments closely. The Committee continues to believe that against the background of its long-run goals of price stability and sustainable economic growth and of the information currently available, the risks are weighted mainly toward conditions that may generate economic weakness in the foreseeable future. In taking the discount rate action, the Federal Reserve Board approved requests submitted by the Boards of Directors of all twelve Reserve Banks.
For immediate release
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today issued supervisory guidance that encourages large banking organizations to enhance their public disclosures by using the recommendations of the Working Group on Public Disclosure. This private sector working group recommended several specific practices that would enhance disclosure by large banking organizations. These include quarterly disclosure of some market risk information that is now disclosed annually and enhanced quarterly disclosures about credit concentrations and credit quality of portfolios. The Federal Reserve believes that the types of disclosures recommended by the Working Group on Public Disclosure can enhance the transparency of well-managed institutions. The Federal Reserve's supervisory guidance, including the specific disclosure recommendations of the working group, is attached.
Remarks by Governor Edward M. Gramlich At Cleveland State University, Cleveland, Ohio March 23, 2001 Governor Gramlich presented identical remarks at the Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation luncheon, Raleigh, North Carolina, March 26, 2001
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced that a public administrative hearing will commence on April 2, 2001, in connection with an enforcement action against Oren L. Benton, the former sole shareholder and a director of The Professional Bank, a former state member bank, and Edward D. Scott, a former executive vice president and director of the bank. The hearing will be held before an Administrative Law Judge to determine whether Messrs. Benton and Scott should be permanently barred from the banking industry and whether the Board should assess a fine of $1.25 million against Mr. Benton and a fine of $75,000 against Mr. Scott. A copy of the Board's combined Notice of Intent to Prohibit and Notice of Assessment of Civil Money Penalties is attached. The Notice alleges that Messrs. Benton and Scott violated laws and regulations, and engaged in unsafe or unsound banking practices and breached their fiduciary duty to the bank when they caused the bank to violate Section 23A of the Federal Reserve Act and the Board's Regulation O. The administrative hearing will commence at 10:00 a.m. on April 2, 2001, at the following location: U.S. Tax Court 1999 Broadway Street Room 2370 Denver, Colorado
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation National Credit Union Administration Office of the Comptroller of the Currency Office of Thrift Supervision Agencies Clarify Guidance on the Accounting and Reporting for Loans Held for Sale WASHINGTON -- The federal financial institution regulatory agencies today issued guidance to institutions and examiners about the appropriate accounting and reporting treatment for certain loans that are sold directly from the loan portfolio or transferred to a held-for-sale account. The Interagency Guidance applies when: an institution decides to sell loans that were not originated or otherwise acquired with the intent to sell, and the fair value of those loans has declined for any reason other than a change in the general market level of interest or foreign exchange rates. Selling loans has become an increasingly important portfolio risk management tool for institutions seeking to manage concentrations, change risk profiles, improve returns, and generate liquidity. Examiners, however, have noted differences among institutions in the accounting for and reporting of these transactions. Specifically, accounting inconsistencies relate to how and where initial and subsequent fair value adjustments are recorded, and the reporting of past-due and nonaccrual loans that have been designated as held for sale. The Interagency Guidance clarifies existing instructions and promotes accounting transparency consistent with generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). The guidance reminds institutions to appropriately report reductions in the value of loans transferred to held-for-sale through a write-down of the recorded investment to fair value upon transfer. At the same time, there should be a charge to the institution's allowance for loan and lease losses. Institutions are also reminded that loans transferred to a held-for-sale account should continue to be accorded the same past-due and nonaccrual treatment as other loans. The Securities and Exchange Commission said in the attached letter to the agencies that it had reviewed the Interagency Guidance and determined that the guidance will assist in promoting consistent accounting and reporting treatment for the loan sales and transfers of loans to held- for-sale accounts that are within the scope of the agencies' guidance. Media Contacts: FDIC: David Barr (202) 898-6992 Federal Reserve: Dave Skidmore (202) 452-2955 OCC: Dean DeBuck (202) 874-4876 OTS: Sam Eskenazi (202) 906-6677 NCUA: Cheryl Umbel (703) 518-6337 FDIC: David Barr (202) 898-6992 Federal Reserve: Dave Skidmore (202) 452-2955 OCC: Dean DeBuck (202) 874-4876 OTS: Sam Eskenazi (202) 906-6677 NCUA: Cheryl Umbel (703) 518-6337
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan The challenge of measuring and modeling a dynamic economy At the Washington Economic Policy Conference of the National Association for Business Economics, Washington, D.C. March 27, 2001 I am pleased to have this opportunity to address an issue of considerable importance to both business economists and policymakers--that is, the challenge of measuring and modeling our dynamic economy. Moreover, I would like to raise the issue of how much of our finite resources should be directed to measuring and how much to modeling. Business economics endeavors to understand the structure of an economy--how it works and, above all, how to forecast it. It is a bedeviling job because the future, at root, cannot be foretold. The best we can do is to construct probabilistic models that can inform the decisions of business executives and, of course, economic policymakers who--of necessity--will be making their decisions armed with incomplete information. For a while in the 1960s, we were increasingly mesmerized by the possibilities of econometric models as a crystal ball. However, history was not entirely kind to this endeavor. For one thing, especially against the backdrop of the inflation of the following decade, it soon became apparent that our theories of the macroeconomy were woefully inadequate. For another, even leaving aside the shortcomings of our theory, we soon learned that the economic structure did not hold still long enough to capture its key relationships. Its changing structure frustrated efforts to isolate a reasonably fixed set of coefficients. In turn, the absence of fixed coefficients undermined the usefulness of the model as a basis for projecting the future. Econometricians recognized many of these difficulties, and so developed a vast and elegant literature in support of this research program, covering a spectrum of topics ranging from maximum-likelihood-estimation techniques to tests for coefficient stability to diagnostics for detecting undesirable properties of the errors of these equations. The creativity that was applied to this effort is all the more impressive because it took place in the context of a computing environment that was, by modern standards, truly primitive. But in time it became increasingly clear that, for all their theoretical advantages, these sophisticated models did not reliably outperform a number of simple and far less costly reduced-form models, from the money supply models that appeared to work well for a while during the 1970s, to astructural vector autoregression models based on a handful of lagged variables that are still employed today. To be sure, the large econometric models have been refined, incorporating the fruits of later theoretical developments, including perhaps most importantly the insight that monetary policy could not permanently influence the level of the unemployment rate. Moreover, a larger role was given to a range of financial and expectational variables that earlier practitioners steeped in orthodox Keynesian income determination tended to downgrade. Liquidity preference functions, to be sure, were included even in the early versions of these large-scale models as necessary building blocks for determining the equilibrium level of interest rates and income. But, overall, financial sector modeling was primitive. Indeed, only modest progress has been made in this area since the Federal Reserve began to produce our own flow of funds accounts in 1955. A further, and perhaps more profound, challenge to the underlying validity of this style of modeling is the possibility that, whereas standard models of the real economy determine a unique level of income, the financial system appears to be capable of reaching myriad equilibria. In addition, the fundamental forces that determine which of these equilibria will be selected may themselves be inherently unpredictable. We have built large-scale models of the United States and global economies at the Federal Reserve. While recognizing their limitations, we do find them useful in research and analysis. But the experience of the last 40 years underscores a fundamental dilemma of business economics. Should we endeavor to continue to refine our techniques of deriving maximum information from an existing body of data? Or should we find ways to augment our data library to gain better insight into how our economy is functioning? Obviously, we should do both, but I suspect greater payoffs will come from more data than from more technique. Certainly, statistical systems in the United States, both public and private, are world class and, indeed, in many respects set the world standard. But given the rapidly changing economic structure, one could readily argue that more statistical resources need to be applied to understanding the complexities of the newer technologies that confront analysts. These newer technologies and the structure of output they have created have surfaced a set of definitional problems that--although evident in a world of steel, fabrics, and grains--were never on the cutting edge of analysis. I refer, of course, to the age-old problem of defining what we mean by a unit of output and, by extension, what we mean by price. The dollar value of sales or GDP depends, of course, on the specific accounting rules chosen. And while value in that context is uniquely defined, the split between volume change and price change is always approximate. In decades past, we struggled about what we meant by output--and hence price--nonetheless an average price of hot rolled steel sheet and a corresponding total tonnage was precise enough for most analytic needs. By the same token, tons of steel per work hour in a rolling mill yielded rough approximations of underlying productivity for most purposes. Output per hour in an economy dominated by such goods, or even services, for which the definition of a typical unit of output was reasonably unambiguous, was a meaningful and relatively robust statistic. Our data systems in the early post-World War II years were by and large adequate to the task. But over time, and particularly during the last decade or two, an ever-increasing share of GDP has reflected the value of ideas more than material substance or manual labor input. This ongoing development is imposing significant stress on our statistical systems. We know, presumably uniquely, the dollar value of a software application. But when comparing software-application values over time, how much of the change is volume and how much is price? The answer, in principle, requires judgments about very fundamental issues in measurement: What are the underlying determinants of consumer value preference, and how does this good or service contribute to that preference, taking account of all the other goods and services being consumed? Problems that were always latent in defining steel prices and quantities but rarely rose to this level of significance are threatening to seriously challenge our measurement systems in an age of the microprocessor, fiber optics, and the laser. These latent problems have emerged in full view in the pricing of medical services. Perhaps the inherent complexity of this undertaking is most clearly revealed by posing the question, what do we mean by a standardized unit of medical output? Is it the procedure, the treatment, or the outcome? What does the fee charged for the bundle of services associated with cataract or arthroscopic surgery represent? How does one value the benefits to the patient of shorter hospital stays, more comfortable recoveries, and better physical outcomes? Clearly, the unadjusted fee for a single medical procedure does not adequately represent its "price." The price indexes for medical services used to be constructed by pricing a variety of inputs--for example, a night in the hospital, or an hour of a physician's time. A few years ago, the Bureau of Labor Statistics began moving toward pricing the treatment paths of particular diagnoses, the better to capture changes in the mix of inputs used to treat a given disease. For example, many surgical procedures that used to require an overnight stay in a hospital now can be performed on an outpatient basis, and the producer price index and consumer price index are now better able to measure the price decline associated with that change. Interestingly, when such techniques are applied to individual medical procedures they appear almost without exception to indicate falling prices at least since the mid-1980s. This has raised significant questions as to whether our current measures of overall medical service price inflation are capturing the appropriate degree of productivity advance evident in medicine. Indeed, the level of real gross product per hour for medical services embodied in our overall productivity measures declined between 1990 and 1999 (the last year for which data are available). This is implausible and raises obvious questions of the validity of the price deflators currently employed. Thus, while progress is visible, enormous measurement challenges remain in measuring prices of medical services. But there are deeper issues as well, associated with the valuation of a consumer's time. Clearly the shorter stay of a cataract patient is of value to that patient. In other words, today's techniques allow the surgeon to deliver more consumer value per hour of operating time, other things being equal. A full measure of the output of the medical sector would take account of this reduction in recovery time and attribute it to the medical sector. While many issues of measurement arise in the context of services, even the measurement of some goods prices presents considerable challenges. High-technology goods are a case in point. Academic research in this area dates to the mid-1960s, but its application in the measurement of real output gained prominence with the introduction of hedonic price indexes for computers and peripherals by the Bureau of Economic Analysis in 1985. More recently, the efforts undertaken by statistical agencies have intensified, spurred by the accelerated pace of technological innovation, which has yielded an ever-expanding range of new products and product variants, as well as by the rising share of these goods in our economic value added. Thus, much progress has been made by the BEA, Census, and the BLS, with which I am sure you are familiar. This morning, I should like to alert you to some of the research in these areas coming from the Federal Reserve. Much of our work in this regard has been focused on improving our published statistics on industrial production. Our staff's multiyear work in this area began in 1998 with the development of new measures of the domestic output of semiconductors. Next, we revised our procedures for estimating the production of computers, and more recently we have introduced new series for an important component of the output of the communications equipment industry--local area networking (LAN) equipment, which provides the infrastructure critical to expanding the productive uses of information technology. In total, these high-tech goods--semiconductors, computers, and LAN equipment--currently represent less than 8 percent of total manufacturing output. However, their production, as we measure it, rose at an average annual rate of around 50 percent in the second half of the 1990s, and, taken together, they contributed two-thirds of the increase in manufacturing output between 1995 and 2000. Indeed, U.S. production of semiconductors in 1996 eclipsed motor vehicle assemblies as the largest four-digit manufacturing industry in nominal value-added terms. The characteristics of these goods present the range of complexities that one faces in measuring quality-adjusted prices. First, many are wholly new products: For example, switches--the largest single segment of LAN hardware--did not enter the market until 1993. And even "older" high-tech products, such as computers, are now bundled together in ways that offer an enormous variety of combinations of characteristics related to speed, memory, networking capability, and graphics capability, to mention just a few. For all of these goods, product cycles are truncated by rapid innovation. For instance, in 1995, 10 megabit-per-second Ethernet switches dominated that market; last year, the two most popular switches operated at rates of 100 and 1,000 megabits per second. Product lives for semiconductors and computers can be even shorter; some computer models have remained on the market for only a couple of months. In such an environment, the availability of detailed micro-level data describing the attributes of these goods is crucial. One means of defining the unit of output is to unbundle the characteristics of a high-tech product and to price each of them separately. This so-called "hedonic" technique--now applied by the BEA to items that account for 18 percent of GDP--is one approach. In our work at the Federal Reserve, we have developed hedonic price indexes for network routers and switches using, in the case of the former, data from product catalogs and, in the case of the latter, privately produced reports evaluating the performance of the products. However, hedonics are by no means a panacea. Most important, the measured characteristics may be acting only as proxies for the qualities of the services that buyers ultimately value. This, again, raises the difficult issue of the appropriate scope for value measurement and poses the question of whether the correct approach may be to move toward directly pricing the services we obtain from our information processing systems rather than pricing separately the individual hardware components and the software. The Federal Reserve staff has found that, when detailed data are available on prices and on quantities, we can produce results that are comparable to those based on hedonics, using the conceptually simpler "matched model" approach. Indeed, we have taken this approach in constructing quantity and price indexes for several high-tech items. In the case of semiconductors, we relied on data from three private vendors for information on nearly 100 unique microprocessors, more than 200 types of memory chips, and more than 80 other chips. We also acquired nominal sales and unit value data for about 1,100 distinct computer models. Neither hedonic nor matched-model techniques are sufficient to deal with the introduction of wholly new products that differ fundamentally in their characteristics from their predecessors. This will continue to be one of our major ongoing challenges. I am encouraged by the progress that economists and economic statisticians have been making to date in tackling the daunting task of measuring real output and prices in a rapidly changing economy. The challenge that lies ahead is, indeed, large, and to meet it will require the support of the business and academic communities to supply the information and to help develop the tools that our statistical agencies require. The information revolution, itself, will also surely play an important role. For example, high-tech information systems might some day allow statistical agencies to tap into a great many economic transactions on a basis close to real time. More generally, I am certain that the possibilities for creatively harnessing technology for the improvement of economic measurement are much broader in scope--although, as in many other areas of endeavor, the precise directions those advances will take are difficult to predict. If we had the appropriate database, of course, who knows? Footnotes J. Steven Landefeld and Bruce T. Grimm, "A Note on the Impact of Hedonics and Computers on Real GDP," Survey of Current Business (December 2000). Ana Aizcorbe, Carol Corrado, and Mark Doms, "Constructing Price and Quantity Indexes for High Technology Goods," Industrial Output Section, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July 26, 2000.
Footnotes Superneutrality is more controversial than neutrality. Indeed, the fundamental justification for a price stability objective is that inflation undermines the efficiency of the economy and perhaps distorts saving and investment choices. What is essential is that monetary policy cannot raise the level or growth rate of output by increasing the rate of money growth. Many monetarists came to believe that short-run variations in money growth had significant effects on real variables in the short run. The important effects of variations in money growth for short-run economic activity were demonstrated in empirical research conducted at the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, notably by Andersen and Jordan (1968) and by Andersen and Carlson (1970). But skepticism about the ability to harness this effect for use in stabilization policy remained. Still, as Hafer and Wheelock (2001) have noted, there was a temptation, not always resisted, to use the short-run relationship to prescribe a monetarist strategy for stabilization policy. See, for example, Fuhrer and Moore (1995), Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (1999), and McCallum (2000). The effect of supply and demand shocks on the evolution of real economic activity is not clear in this specification. In the simple specification I have used, the effect of supply shocks is hidden in the measure of potential output, part of the output gap variable, and in the shock term in the Phillips curve. The last several years have heightened appreciation that shocks to the level of potential output (arising, for example, from changes in the non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment) or to the growth rate of potential output (arising from shocks to structural productivity growth) play an important role in shaping short-run as well as long-run movements in real economic activity. Large-scale models allow for the well-known real balance effect. Increases in real money balances that raise the real value of net worth operate through the wealth effect in such models. However, open market operations involve an exchange of money for bonds and therefore do not directly alter household wealth. McCallum (2000) and Svensson (2001) discuss conditions under which money could directly affect aggregate demand. Svensson summarizes the conditions as follows: "[A] direct money effect would arise if real balances entered the representative agent's utility function and this utility function was not additively separable in consumption and real balances but had a positive cross derivative." Svensson and McCallum agree that, for reasonable parameter values, this effect is likely to be so small that it can be disregarded. Friedman and Meiselman (1963). Bernanke and Gertler (1995). Clouse et al. (2000). I am assuming a standard expectations theory of the term structure of interest rates and constant risk premiums. Long-term interest rates are, in this case, an average of current and expected future short-term interest rates. See, for example, Krugman (1998). See Fujiki et al. (2001) for an assessment of the potential benefits and risks associated with a monetization strategy in Japan. For a good discussion of the evolution of the role of money in monetary policy, see Meulendyke (1968). The Bank of Canada also assigns the monetary aggregates a more prominent role in the conduct of monetary policy. Freedman (2000) provides a summary of the role of the monetary aggregates at the Bank of Canada. See Angeloni et al. (2000) for a thorough discussion of the role of the money-growth reference value in the overall policy strategy of the ECB. This chart was published in the Federal Reserve Board's February 2000 Monetary Policy Report to the Congress . Interestingly, if we had constructed chart 2 based on M1 rather than M2, it would have been less clear that money growth was inconsistent with maintaining low inflation. In the early 1970s, however, the Federal Reserve had a single money supply measure, corresponding most closely to M1 today. The Federal Reserve discussions of the monetary aggregates at that time sometimes referred to "adjusted" measures of the money supply that included, for example, time deposits and therefore corresponded to what we now call M2. Milton Friedman at this time was focusing on this broader M2-type measure. At any rate, the different signals from narrower and broader measures in the early 1970s highlight the value of monitoring growth rates for a number of different definitions of the money supply, as the FOMC routinely did during the period it was setting benchmarks for the growth of the monetary aggregates. Orphanides and Porter (2001) address precisely this issue. References Andersen, L.C., and K.M. Carlson. "A Monetarist Model for Economic Stabilization," Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Review, vol. 52, no. 4, April 1970, pp. 7-25. Andersen, L.C., and J.L. Jordan. "Monetary and Fiscal Actions: A Test of Their Relative Importance in Economic Stabilization," Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Review, vol. 50, no. 11, November 1968, pp. 11-24. Angeloni, Ignazio, Victor Gaspar, Otmar Issing, and Oreste Trisani. "Monetary Policy in the Euro Area: Strategy and Decision-Making at the European Central Bank," European Central Bank, July 2000. Bernanke, Ben S., and Mark Gertler. "Inside the Black Box: The Credit Channel of Monetary Policy Transmission," Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 9, no. 4, Fall 1995, pp. 27-48. Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali, and Mark Gertler. "The Science of Monetary Policy: A New Keynesian Perspective," Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 37, no. 4, December 1999, pp. 1661-1707. Clouse, James, Dale Henderson, Athanasios Orphanides, David Small, and Peter Tinsley. "Monetary Policy When the Nominal Short-Term Interest Rate is Zero," Finance and Economics Discussion Series, 00-51. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November 2000. Federal Reserve Bank of Boston. Controlling Monetary Aggregates. September 1969. Freedman, Charles. "The Framework for the Conduct of Monetary Policy in Canada: Some Recent Developments." Presented to the Ottawa Economics Association, January 25, 2000. Friedman, Milton. A Program for Monetary Stability. New York: Fordham University Press, 1960. Friedman, Milton, and David Meiselman. "The Relative Stability of Monetary Velocity and the Investment Multiplier in the United States, 1897-1958," in Commission on Money and Credit, Stabilization Policies. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall, 1963, pp. 165-268. Fuhrer, Jeff, and George Moore. "Inflation Persistence," Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 110, no. 1, February 1995, pp. 127-59. Fujiki, Hiroshi, Kunio Okina, and Shigenori Shiratsuka. "Monetary Policy under Zero Interest Rate: Viewpoints of Central Bank Economists." Monetary and Economic Studies, Bank of Japan, February 2001. Hafer, R.W., and David C. Wheelock. "The Rise and Fall of a Policy Rule: Monetarism at the St. Louis Fed, 1968-86," Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Review, vol. 83, no. 1, January/February 2001, pp. 1-24. Krugman, Paul. "Japan's Trap." The Official Paul Krugman Web Page. May 1998. http://web.mit.edu/krugman/www/japtrap.html. McCallum, Bennett T. "Monetary Policy Analysis in Models without Money." Prepared for 25th Annual Economic Policy Conference of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, October 19-20, 2000. Meltzer, Alan. "The Transmission Mechanism." Prepared for The Monetary Transmission Process: Recent Developments and Lessons for Europe, Bundesbank, Frankfurt, Germany, March 25-27, 1999. Meulendyke, Ann-Marie. U.S. Monetary Policy and Financial Markets. New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 1998. Orphanides, Athanasios, and Richard Porter. "Money and Inflation: The Role of Information Regarding the Determinants of M2 Behavior," Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January 2001. Svensson, Lars E. O. "The Zero Bound in an Open Economy: A Foolproof Way of Escaping a Liquidity Trap," Monetary and Economic Studies (Special Edition), vol. 19, no. 1, February 2001, pp. 277-312.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of a consent Order of Assessment of Civil Money Penalty against First Community Bank, Conway, Arkansas, a state member bank. First Community Bank, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order in connection with its alleged violations of the Board's Regulations implementing the National Flood Insurance Act. The Order requires First Community Bank to pay a civil money penalty of $2,000. A copy of the Order is attached.
For immediate release A Joint Central Bank Research Conference on Risk Measurement and Systemic Risk will be held on March 7-8, 2002, at the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) in Basel, Switzerland. The Committee on the Global Financial System (CGFS) will host the conference at the BIS in cooperation with the Bank of Japan, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and the European Central Bank. The conference will focus on risk measurement and systemic risks from a central bank perspective. Conference organizers seek to bring together central bankers, market practitioners and academics. Those interested in presenting research papers should submit completed papers or extended abstracts to the BIS by the end of August. Details can be obtained in the conference announcement and call for papers on the web site of the BIS at . The CGFS is a central bank forum established by the Governors of the G-10 central banks to monitor and examine issues relating to financial markets and systems and to make appropriate policy recommendations.