For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today decided to seek public comment on a proposed new Regulation W comprehensively implementing sections 23A and 23B of the Federal Reserve Act. The sections restrict loans by a bank to an affiliate, asset purchases by a bank from an affiliate and other transactions between a bank and its affiliates. Regulation W would unify in one document various Board and staff interpretations issued over the years as well as several new interpretations of the statute. It also would provide several additional exemptions from the statute. The purpose of sections 23A and 23B and Regulation W is to limit a bank's risk of loss in transactions with affiliates and limit a bank's ability to transfer to its affiliates the benefits arising from its access to the federal safety net. Comment is requested within 90 days of publication in the Federal Register, expected shortly. Until Regulation W is finalized, all previously issued valid Board and staff interpretations regarding sections 23A and 23B remain in effect. Separately, the Board, as required by the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, approved an interim final rule, under sections 23A and 23B, requiring institutions to adopt policies and procedures designed to monitor, manage and control credit exposures arising from derivatives transactions with affiliates and intraday credit extensions to affiliates. The interim rules are effective January 1, 2002. Comments are requested within 90 days of publication in the Federal Register. The Board also approved a final rule granting exemptions from and providing interpretations of section 23A. The Board proposed and sought public comment on the exemptions and interpretations in June 1998. The rule is effective 30 days after publication in the Federal Register. However, the content of the rule is incorporated in the proposed Regulation W, which will allow an additional opportunity to comment. The first exemption and interpretation applies to loans made by an insured depository institution to an unaffiliated borrower that uses the proceeds of the loan to purchase certain third-party securities through a registered broker-dealer affiliate of the institution. The second exemption applies to loans by an insured depository institution to an unaffiliated borrower that uses the proceeds to purchase certain securities underwritten or sold as principal by a registered broker-dealer affiliate of the institution. The remaining interpretation expands the ability of an insured depository institution to purchase from a registered broker-dealer affiliate securities that have a ready market and prices that can be verified from a reliable independent source.
Testimony of Governor Laurence H. Meyer Real estate brokerage activities Before the Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit, Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives May 2, 2001 Mr. Chairman and members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify on behalf of the Federal Reserve Board with respect to the joint proposal by the Board and the Secretary of the Treasury relating to real estate brokerage and management. The proposal is an invitation for public comment on whether the Board and Treasury should find that real estate brokerage and real estate management are activities that are financial in nature or incidental to a financial activity, and hence permissible for financial holding companies and financial subsidiaries of national banks. The agencies published the request for comment on January 3, 2001. Because of the significant public interest in the proposal, we extended the public comment period through May 1, 2001. To help understand why the agencies requested comment on this proposal, I think it would be helpful to outline the legal framework established by the recently enacted Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act ("GLB Act"), and the basis for the proposal. The GLB Act amended the Bank Holding Company Act to allow a bank holding company or foreign bank that qualifies as a financial holding company to engage in, and affiliate with companies engaged in, a broad range of financial activities. The activities specifically authorized by statute include lending; insurance underwriting and agency; providing financial advice; securities brokerage, underwriting, and dealing; and merchant banking activities. In addition, the GLB Act permits financial holding companies to engage in other activities that the Board determines, in consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury, to be "financial in nature or incidental to a financial activity." The GLB Act includes this flexibility because Congress recognized the practical difficulties of comprehensively defining in legislation a complex concept like financial activities for a financial marketplace that is continually evolving. Further, the act allows financial holding companies to engage in other activities that the Board determines are "complementary" to a financial activity and would not pose a substantial risk to the safety and soundness of depository institutions or the financial system generally. Complementary activities are non-financial activities that are related to or complement financial activities. Congress considered, but did not enact, a provision that would have allowed the more general mixing of banking and commerce. The real estate brokerage and management proposal is one of several initial proposals by the Board and Treasury relating to the definition of activities that are financial in nature or incidental or complementary to financial activities under the GLB Act. The first of these proposals (which the Board recently finalized) related to acting as a so-called "finder." Finder activities, which generally are permissible for banks to conduct directly, involve putting buyers and sellers together in transactions negotiated by the buyers and sellers themselves. The second of these proposals involved defining three types of activities that Congress determined as a general matter to be financial, but required the Board to define more specifically -- including safeguarding and transferring financial assets and facilitating financial transactions for third parties. The third proposal requested comment on whether the Board should determine that certain types of expanded data processing activities are complementary to financial activities. With each of these proposals, the Board and, for the financial activity determinations, the Secretary of the Treasury, are exploring a new standard for defining permissible activities. The GLB Act establishes certain factors that the Board and Treasury must consider, but it otherwise leaves the agencies with significant discretion and very little guidance regarding what is and what is not a financial activity. The factors that the agencies must consider are very broad. For example, in determining whether an activity is financial in nature or incidental to a financial activity, the agencies must consider whether the proposed activity is necessary or appropriate to allow a financial holding company to compete effectively with any company seeking to provide financial services in the United States, efficiently deliver financial information and services through the use of technological means, or offer customers any available or emerging technological means for using financial services. In addition, the agencies must consider changes or reasonably expected changes in the marketplace in which financial holding companies compete, as well as changes or reasonably expected changes in the technology for delivering financial services. Finally, the statute requires that the Board consider the unspecified but wide-ranging purposes of the Bank Holding Company Act and the GLB Act, which opens up consideration of other matters beyond those on the statutory list. These statutory factors do not provide the Board with a facile decisionmaking formula for determining whether an activity is financial in nature or incidental to a financial activity. One thing that is clear is that Congress intended the "financial in nature" test to be broader than the previous test for authorizing new activities for bank holding companies under the Bank Holding Company Act. Before passage of the GLB Act, bank holding companies were permitted to engage only in activities that the Board determined were "closely related to banking." The closely related to banking test was tied to the activities of banks. In considering whether an activity was closely related to banking, the courts focused on three factors: (i) whether banks conduct the proposed activity, (ii) whether banks provide services that are operationally or functionally similar to the proposed services, and (iii) whether banks provide services that are so integrally related to the proposed services as to require their provision in a specialized form. The text and legislative history of the GLB Act indicate that Congress intended the new "financial or incidental" standard to represent a significant expansion of the old "closely related to banking" standard. The GLB Act neither specifically authorizes nor specifically forbids financial holding companies or financial subsidiaries of national banks to engage in real estate brokerage and management activities. While the GLB Act and its legislative history do not contain any direct evidence of congressional intent with respect to real estate brokerage and management activities, the statute's prohibition on financial subsidiaries engaging in real estate investment and development is indirect evidence of legislative intent. The existence of this limited real estate provision in the GLB Act suggests that Congress thought about real estate activities in connection with the act and determined to leave unresolved the question of whether financial holding companies or financial subsidiaries should be permitted to act as real estate brokers or managers. Soon after passage of the GLB Act, three trade associations -- the American Bankers Association, the Financial Services Roundtable, and the New York Clearing House Association -- asked the Board and Treasury to determine that real estate brokerage activities are financial in nature. The American Bankers Association also asked the agencies to define real estate management activities as financial in nature. The Board and Treasury responded to these requests by seeking public comment on the proposal. We have found the public comment process to be a useful means of gathering information from experts, practitioners, and analysts with an understanding of the relevant issues and activities. We recognize that, hard as we regulators try to foresee and address potential issues raised by our regulatory actions, we can benefit from the information and thinking of others. Our final rules often include significant modifications as a result of the comments we received on the proposed rules. In this spirit, we sought public comment on the real estate proposal. During the comment period, the public had an opportunity to present views on the merits of determining whether real estate brokerage and management activities should be deemed to be financial in nature or incidental to a financial activity. As I indicated earlier, the comment period on the proposal closed only yesterday. I can, nevertheless, give you a flavor of the arguments made by commenters. Commenters in favor of the proposal, most notably bank and financial services trade associations at this point, have presented a variety of arguments in support of finding that real estate brokerage is a financial activity. First, these commenters argue that real estate brokerage activities are financial in nature because some depository institutions, including thrifts (through service corporations) and some state banks, already engage in real estate brokerage. Second, these commenters argue that banks have expertise in these activities because national and state banks have long been involved in brokering real estate assets that are acquired through the foreclosure process or that are part of trust estates. Third, commenters in support of the proposal argue that bank holding companies and their subsidiaries engage in virtually every other aspect of real estate transactions, including mortgage lending, holding bank premises, making community development real estate investments, performing real estate appraisals, providing real estate settlement and escrow services, providing real estate investment advice, and providing title insurance, private mortgage insurance, and homeowner's insurance. This indicates, in the view of these commenters, that real estate transactions are financial transactions and, consequently, that brokerage of real estate is a financial activity. Moreover, these commenters contend that real estate brokerage is simply a specialized form of another permissible financial activity -- acting as a finder -- and a more general form of a permissible banking activity -- assisting third parties in obtaining commercial real estate equity financing. As I noted earlier, in determining whether an activity is financial in nature or incidental to a financial activity, the GLB Act specifically instructs the Board to consider whether the activity is necessary or appropriate to allow a financial holding company to compete effectively with any other financial services provider operating in the United States. In this regard, commenters have provided evidence that a number of diversified financial firms provide real estate brokerage services in addition to more traditional banking, securities, and insurance services. These commenters also asserted that buyers and sellers of real estate are increasingly looking to a single company to provide all of their real estate-related needs. Some commenters also argue that real estate is a financial asset and that, therefore, brokering real estate is a financial transaction. These commenters assert that real estate brokerage is permissible as part of the statutorily listed financial activities permissible for financial holding companies. The GLB Act authorizes financial holding companies to engage in exchanging, transferring, or safeguarding financial assets and arranging, effecting, or facilitating financial transactions for others. Some of the same considerations that support a finding that real estate brokerage activities are financial in nature also were presented by commenters as support for a similar determination on real estate management. Thrift service corporations are authorized to engage in general real estate management, and banks have acquired some experience in managing real estate in their trust departments and with respect to assets acquired through foreclosure. In addition, many aspects of real estate management are similar in nature to existing banking activities. For example, collecting rental payments; maintaining security deposits; making principal, interest, tax, and insurance payments; and providing periodic accountings are functionally similar to collecting loan or lease payments, disbursing escrow payments, and performing related accountings. Although some of the comments favor the proposal, the vast majority of the comments have been submitted by individual real estate agents opposed to the proposal. Commenters have raised the following principal objections to the proposal. First, some commenters claim that real estate brokerage and management are commercial activities and that authorizing real estate brokerage activities would inevitably lead to authorizing financial holding companies to negotiate and broker the sale of any type of asset. These commenters contend that authorizing financial holding companies to engage in the activities would violate the spirit of the GLB Act, which maintained a separation between banking and commerce. These commenters also argue that real estate brokerage activities are different from the finder activities permitted for banking organizations because an integral part of real estate brokerage activities is the negotiation of a contract between the buyer and seller -- a level of involvement in the transaction that has not been permitted to banking organizations acting as a finder. In addition, some commenters draw attention to various forms of conflicts of interest that may result from allowing banking organizations to engage in real estate brokerage or management. In particular, these commenters express concern that financial holding companies acting as buyers' brokers may pressure or require buyers to use the financial holding company's mortgage product (to the exclusion of loans from other lenders) or may fail to refer buyers to other lenders who might have more competitive mortgage products. A financial holding company acting as a seller's broker also may favor the buyer over the seller because the company also is providing a mortgage loan to the buyer or is attempting to sell another financial product to the buyer. Other commenters question the ability of banking organizations to broker real estate with the same level of competence, alacrity, and personal service as independent real estate agents. Many commenters warn that allowing banking organizations to act as real estate brokers would lead to bank domination of the field, in part because banking organizations providing real estate brokerage services would have an unfair competitive advantage over independent real estate agents due to the ability of banks to raise low-cost FDIC-insured deposits. Under this line of argument, the proposal would result in an increased concentration of power in the financial services industry, a decrease in the competitiveness of the market for real estate brokerage services, and job losses for a large number of independent real estate agents. Finally, commenters argue that allowing banking organizations to enter into the real estate brokerage and management businesses would pose risks to the safety and soundness of the nation's depository institutions. Many of the commenters opposed to the proposal focus on whether real estate brokerage is a financial activity. If one accepts their contention that brokering real estate is really a commercial activity, the question can then be raised whether real estate brokerage should be permitted as an activity that is "complementary to a financial activity." As I noted earlier, this complementary category was included in the GLB Act to allow financial holding companies to engage in activities that are themselves commercial activities but that also are related to or complement financial activities. Many of the points raised by commenters opposed to the proposal certainly would be relevant to an analysis under this "complementary" standard, which requires the Board to find both a connection to a financial activity and that the complementary activity would not pose a substantial risk to depository institutions or the financial system and would result in net public benefits. Because the agencies received requests to define real estate brokerage and management activities as "financial in nature," that is the proposal on which the agencies have sought public comment. These are difficult issues, and both sides feel very strongly about their position. While we do not relish being in the middle, we believe that a debate on these matters is the best way to identify and sort through the issues and to reach an informed decision, and is precisely the type of debate envisioned in the GLB Act.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board is seeking public comment on a proposed new Regulation W to comprehensively implement sections 23A and 23B of the Federal Reserve Act. The Board at its meeting on May 2, 2001. Sections 23A and 23B restrict loans by a bank to an affiliate, asset purchases by a bank from an affiliate and other transactions between a bank and its affiliates. Regulation W would unify in one document various Board and staff interpretations issued over the years as well as several new interpretations of the statute. The proposed rule will be published in the Federal Register. Comment is requested by August 15, 2001 . The Board's notice is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application of Juniper Financial Corporation, Wilmington, Delaware, to become a bank holding company by acquiring First Bank CBC, Maryville, Missouri. Attached is the Board’s Order relating to this action.
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan The financial safety net At the 37th Annual Conference on Bank Structure and Competition of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois May 10, 2001 Mike Moskow and his colleagues have shown truly remarkable judgment in selecting not only interesting, but also timely and important, themes for their conferences. They have done so again this year. The safety net, along with our improved understanding of how to use monetary and fiscal policies, has played a critical role in this country in eliminating bank runs, in assuaging financial crises, and arguably in reducing the number and amplitude of economic contractions in the past sixty years. Deposit insurance, the discount window, and access to Fedwire and daylight overdrafts provide depository institutions and financial market participants with safety, liquidity, and solvency unheard of in previous years. These benefits, however, have come with a cost: distortions in the price signals that are used to allocate resources, induced excessive risk-taking, and, to limit the resultant moral hazard, greater government supervision and regulation. Clearly, the latter carries with it attendant inefficiencies and limits on innovation. It is to these issues that I wish to turn. Since its beginnings, banking has been a business with two salient characteristics: risk-taking (that is, extending credit) and leverage (by which I mean, borrowing significant portions of the funds used to finance credit extensions). These classic intermediation functions provide the bank with reduced risk through loan-portfolio diversification. In addition, they provide savers and other asset holders with expanded asset choices and borrowers with a greater number of funding options. In so doing, intermediation contributes significantly to a more efficient allocation of real resources and, hence, to higher levels of economic activity. But there has always been an Achilles' heel in such intermediation. Bad judgments, bad luck, or changes in regional or other macroeconomic conditions can cause bank borrowers to default. Bank creditors--historically their depositors--either in response to adversity or, for that matter, any reason, might decide to withdraw their funds. In either event, the bank could fail--because of illiquidity or insolvency or both. These crises could, of course, happen to any business. Any firm could have bad assets or inadequate funding and fail as a result. What is different about leveraged financial intermediaries is first, that the claims on banks are such important assets to a wide spectrum of economic agents, and second, the possibility, however remote, of a chain reaction, a cascading sequence of defaults that could culminate in financial implosion. Such events could have a substantial adverse impact on the real economy. Historically, both bank owners and bank depositors have understood this problem. And, acting in their own self-interest, each group has tried to limit its risks--loss of their equity or their deposits. That is, banks were supervised by the market, with government oversight initially limited to chartering and trying to ensure at least minimum specie reserves to meet demand for repayment of banks' circulating note liabilities. Brokers and other arbitrageurs soon emerged, and their evaluation of the quality of individual banks was instrumental in establishing market prices--discounts--on the notes of individual banks. By collecting notes that were issued in excessive amounts and presenting them for payment, regional clearing systems also served as a limit on the banks with perhaps excessive risk appetites. In short, market discipline in one form or another was the major governor of bank risk-taking from the early years of the Republic. Advancing technology--telegraph, railroad, and transatlantic cable--disseminated information, the raw material for market discipline, ever more rapidly. In this environment, banks competed for reputation, and hence deposits, by advertising their high capital ratios. Indeed, high levels of equity capital had generally been necessary to induce the public to deposit its funds or to accept bank notes. Equity also played an important role in protecting bank owners from the short-term vicissitudes of lending. Equity capital ratios declined throughout the nineteenth century as increased real-time information capabilities lowered risk premiums embodied in equity contracts, but also because of bank risk-sharing through correspondent relationships, wider supervision, and state and, later, federal note collateral requirements. Equity capital ratios, which were as high as 50 percent in the 1830s, were still a third in the 1860s and more than 15 percent at the time the Federal Reserve began operations in 1914. But if market discipline was such an attractive governor for managing risk, why were the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries punctuated by those periodic banking collapses known to historians as panics? "Panic" was, in fact, a good description, since participants felt it necessary, during those periodic disruptions, to rush to the bank window to obtain their share of what all understood was the limited stock of liquidity before being beaten in the race by others driven by the same incentive. The reason for these panics, arguably, was the inflexibility of the banking system, more specifically limits on the maximum amount of currency outstanding associated with a specie reserve, whose limited quantity acted as a severe, and often sudden, constraint whenever conditions put a stress on liquidity. The National Bank Act of 1863, an endeavor to assist in the debt financing of the Civil War, made matters worse by requiring that national bank notes be collateralized by federal government securities. In effect, Congress put a limit on the ability of banks to honor currency demands above the amount that could be collateralized by these specific bank assets. The inflexibility of currency to seasonal demands, especially those associated with the harvest, put severe strains on financial centers. Writing in 1910 for the National Monetary Commission, whose report was instrumental in the creation of the Federal Reserve System, Edwin Kemmerer noted, "The evidence ï¿½points to a tendency for panics to occur during the seasons normally characterized by stringent money markets." With the demise of the Second Bank of the United States in 1836, the nation had no central bank that could provide flexibility to our banking system by liquefying perfectly safe assets as required. The Federal Reserve Act of 1913 was specifically designed to address the need for both an "elastic currency" and a source of liquidity to both the banking system and to individual banks. Of course, the mere existence of a central bank is not enough. The monetary authorities must know what to do. Many argue, for example, that the Federal Reserve did not provide sufficient liquidity in the early 1930s to avoid the conversion of a severe, but not unusual, decline into a massive economic contraction. Policymakers at the time, employing the best information and theory available to them, did not provide the needed liquidity, business annals suggest, because they feared possible adverse adjustments under the gold standard, continued distortions from speculation and, especially, inflation. More generally, they believed that excesses developed earlier had to be wrung out of the financial system as the base for future expansion. Scholars, with the benefit of hindsight, have suggested that an easier stance of monetary policy in 1930-32 and an aggressive use of the discount window in 1933 could have made a significant difference. To be sure, there were insolvent banks with poor assets. But, at some stage, depositors, fearful of losing the race to others, rushed to their bank for the liquidity that even the solvent banks could not provide. When that occurred, not only did many banks fail, but the surviving banks husbanded the sought-after liquidity and simply ceased to fulfill their reason for being, to take risk by making loans. The collapsed banking system and the associated Great Depression clearly shaped a bank regulatory structure that only began to change in recent years and still retains most of the safety net that was constructed seventy years ago. Congress responded to the Depression-traumatized banking system and devastated economy by creating a national deposit insurance system. It was designed, of course, to provide depositors with an extra measure of protection from loss, initially quite modest. By deterring liquidity panics, deposit insurance could also shield the aggregate real economy from some of the worst effects of instability in the banking system. In combination with the discount window at a central bank that now clearly understands its responsibility to prevent major financial market disruption, deposit insurance has made an anachronism of the widespread currency drains that dominated banking literature in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. The result has been that the United States has not suffered a financial panic or systemic bank run in more than sixty years, despite a significant increase in bank failures in the late 1980s and early 1990s. This record, I think, largely reflects the safety net, whose existence, as much as its use, has helped to sustain confidence. I do not, of course, want to downplay the importance of other changing economic structures, macroeconomic policies, and plain good luck. But neither should the benefits of the safety net be overlooked. Mere reference to the availability of the discount window during both the savings and loan crisis and the aftermath of the 1987 stock market contraction arguably served to greatly limit real demands for liquidity at a time of potentially significant financial distress, although, in the events, the actual use of the window was modest. Increased macroeconomic stability is a real benefit and should not be taken lightly. But this benefit, as I noted, is not purchased without cost to the real economy. The safety net lowers the risk premium on bank liabilities, encouraging banks to operate with higher-risk portfolios and lower capital--to less than 4 percent equity at our largest banks in 1974, for example. That is, the safety net weakens the connection between portfolio and leverage risks, on the one hand, and depositor and other liability costs on the other. Insured depositors are simply indifferent, and other creditors too often less sensitive than they would be at other entities, to the risk taken by the bank because of both the reality and the perception of their own protection by the government. Part of this sense of assurance comes from the enhanced prudential supervision of banking organizations required both to protect the government's interest as insurer and to replace the market discipline that bank management and depositors themselves used to provide but feel they no longer need, given the perceived guarantees of the safety net and supervision. A kind of vicious circle of government replacement of market oversight has been clearly set in motion. The result is a distortion in real resource allocation in our economy. The safety net enables banks to accumulate larger, riskier asset portfolios than would be possible in an intermediation process driven solely by market forces. In the absence of the safety net, these higher lending risks would have to be reflected in some combination of higher deposit costs, more liquid asset holdings, or a larger capital base. Or, conversely, these adjustments would have constrained the risk-taking by banks. But, with the safety net, lower interest rates and higher credit availability are accorded riskier borrowers, benefiting speculative and riskier ventures at the expense of sounder ones. Indeed, the safety net, other things being equal, as I noted earlier, facilitates the ability of riskier borrowers to translate their potential credit demands to effective control over resources, crowding out projects with higher prospective risk-adjusted returns. To be sure, the regulatory authorities, in an effort both to protect the taxpayer's interest and to avoid financial market disruptions, seek to discourage excessive risk taking. But rules, regulations, and supervision cannot substitute for market signals; they can attempt only to filter out--and not always successfully--the worst cases of uneconomic risk taking. And, enhanced efforts to do so intensify the perception of private parties that their responsibility for self-protecting diligence is reduced. Moreover, they add to misallocation of resources because of the necessary inflexibility and bluntness that accompanies governmental action. What options then are available to society to reduce the downsides of the safety net? To be sure, the safety net as we know it is a product of the Great Depression, and that economic disaster was the result of a combination of events unlikely to recur. In addition, the moral-hazard costs of the safety net are significant. Nonetheless, the safety net, by providing ongoing access to real resources, has become capitalized into a broad spectrum of asset values. It is now an embedded part of our social and economic framework, for good or ill. Viewed in its most favorable light, the safety net does guard against those once-in-a-century or so breakdowns in market forces, however induced. The long absence of a fire, or of an economic and financial conflagration, does not suggest that we should cancel the fire insurance policy or the safety net. But, I do think that as a society we ought to explore what we can do at the margin to retain the economic benefits and lower the economic costs of the safety net. We ought to be careful that we do not, through safety net expansion, increase the marginal costs more than the marginal benefits. A look back to the pre-safety-net era might be helpful as part of that exploration. I have in the past suggested that to lessen the moral hazard of the safety net and to improve supervision and regulation, public policy should attempt to simulate, in so far as possible, what markets alone might do, or at least to create market-type incentives. To do so would, of course, move us closer to the period of pre-safety-net incentives while avoiding, one hopes, the distortions of that regime. For example, solvent banks must remain assured that they will be able to liquefy their sound assets at times of liquidity distress, but ideally, we would otherwise like banks to be managed as if there were no safety net. That is, if we retain the safety net, we ought to price and otherwise manage it so that the banking system is as close as possible to the one the market alone would provide. Clearly one of those steps would be better pricing of safety-net access. The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation has proposed some useful initiatives to move in that direction. The usual suggested premiums for deposit insurance are, of course, far from those that would fully eliminate the subsidy that insurance provides to depository institutions and their borrowers and depositors, especially at times of financial crisis. Indeed, to eliminate the subsidy in deposit insurance, the FDIC insurance premium would have to be set high enough to cover the extreme-loss tail of the distribution of possible outcomes and thus the perceived costs of systemic risk. Since so high a rate appears politically infeasible, the subsidy in deposit insurance cannot be fully eliminated. Moreover, no private insurer will be able to match the actual FDIC premium and cover its risk from the extreme-loss tail. Obviously, if premiums were fully priced, the level of insured deposits would be significantly lower. But even if we have chosen not to go that far, more risk-sensitive pricing is nonetheless helpful, and prudential regulation has already begun to move in the right direction to reduce the safety net subsidy. It has increasingly become risk-focused on processes, policies, and procedures for managing risk--with transaction-testing to ensure these are being used--rather than on-balance-sheet analysis. Supervision and examination policies are on a track to become even more risk-focused with the evolving new Basel Capital Accord. As you know, the first pillar of the proposed new accord contemplates that the larger, more sophisticated banks will use internal risk classifications of their credit portfolios, validated by the supervisor, for pricing, loan-loss reserving, and most important, for determining their minimum capital requirements. This approach moves us further down the road of making capital requirements sensitive to an individual bank's risk profile and exposure. And, it seeks to do so in a way that ensures that there are not, as it were, two sets of books, by requiring that the parameters used to determine regulatory capital are the same parameters that management also uses to run the bank. Far more important for my topic today is that the proposed capital requirement better simulates what an informed market and management would require for bank capital. As a result, minimum regulatory equity capital might fall for some banks but rise for others on the basis of their portfolio risk profiles. What needs underlining is the new factor in determining credit risk policies: Taking on more risk will increase capital costs. In addition, regulatory capital minimums, even when more risk sensitive, remain minimums, and the proposed accord assumes that banks will hold a level of economic capital above those minimums. Economic capital, determined by management, will reflect managers' desired securities ratings and cost of funds, as well as their banks' operational and other noncredit risks. Supervisory oversight, however, will review actual or economic capital in light of examiners' evaluation of banks' internal models and their policies and procedures. Such reviews, the so-called second pillar of the proposed accord, are also risk-based and seek to simulate what bank managers and the market would do if there were no safety net. If they want to emphasize their capital strength or if their systems are falling behind, banks will choose, or be induced, to hold more capital. There is a third pillar to this approach, one that I believe is critical: market discipline. The real pre-safety-net discipline was from the market, and we need to adopt policies that promote private counterparty supervision as the first line of defense for a safe and sound banking system. Uninsured counterparties must price higher or simply not deal with banking organizations that take on excessive risk. For private market discipline to be effective, there are, in my judgment, two prerequisites. The first is disclosure . Counterparties need information on which to make informed decisions about the riskiness of bank claims. Banks in this country already disclose a considerable amount of information, and there is clear evidence that markets already use that information to impose some risk premium on uninsured bank claims. But the quantity and quality of such disclosure is uneven, and all entities could, should, and may soon be required to disclose more and better data. We are doing our part to ensure that banking organizations maintain appropriate information and provide more information to those that are asked to assume more prudential monitoring. Later this morning, Governor Meyer will describe our evolving disclosure policies with more specificity. Expanded disclosure will be critical to enhanced market discipline, but the additional information will be irrelevant unless counterparties believe that they are, in fact, at risk. That is why the second prerequisite to effective market discipline is the belief by uninsured creditors that at least they may be at risk of loss. Uninsured counterparties have little reason to engage in risk analysis, let alone act on such analysis, if they believe that they will always be made whole under a de facto too-big-to-fail policy by government's recourse to the procedure for exception to the least-cost resolution requirements of FDICIA (the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act). Let me remind you that the ten largest U.S. banking organizations fund only about one-fourth of their worldwide banking assets with insured deposits. Let me also remind you that the least-cost resolution exception does not require that all uninsured creditors be made whole, but rather only that they be made no worse off than they would have been if the bank were liquidated. The potential for greater market discipline at large institutions is substantial. As a central banker, I can conceive of rare situations where events may require that the FDIC and other governmental resources be used to temporarily sustain a failing institution pending its managed liquidation. But indefinitely propping up insolvent intermediaries is the road to stagnation and substantial resource misallocation, as recent history attests. Unlike brick-and-mortar enterprises, financial intermediaries can expand and contract very rapidly. As weak intermediaries contract, the markets can, and do, quickly replace the profitable services of the displaced intermediary. Indeed, if the government protects all creditors, or is generally believed to protect all creditors, the other efforts to reduce the costs of the safety net will be of little benefit. The implications are similar if the public does not, or cannot, distinguish a bank from its affiliates. As financial consolidation continues, and as banking organizations take advantage of a wider range of activities, the perception that all creditors of large banks, let alone of their affiliates, are protected by the safety net is a recipe for a vast misallocation of resources and increasingly intrusive supervision. In conclusion, let me state the obvious. The purpose of banking, finance, and intermediation is to facilitate the production and trade of goods and services. Standards of living rise when the cash flows from obsolescent, low-productivity capital are employed to finance newer, cutting-edge, technologies--the process that Joseph Schumpeter many decades ago labeled "creative destruction." Financial markets best serve this process if market forces are given free rein. Yet society's willingness for this process to go wholly unchecked is limited, especially for financial institutions. The perceived value of stability has countered the advantages of raw competitive creative destruction. While valuing the benefits of stability that the safety net confers, we nonetheless need to recognize that the benefits are not without cost. In this context, reform of the safety net must remain on the agenda. I believe this means being very cautious about purposefully or inadvertently extending the scope and reach of the safety net. It also means supervisory reform to create, as best we can, inducements to bank behavior similar to those that would exist with no safety net. And, it means, I think, that there be a presumption that uninsured claimants are at risk. Footnotes "Seasonal Variations in Demands for Currency and Capital", Report of the National Monetary Commission (1910), p.223.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Office of the Comptroller of the Currency Office of Thrift Supervision Agencies Remind Bankers of Risks Associated with Reliance on Brokered and Rate-Sensitive Deposits The federal bank and thrift regulatory agencies today issued an advisory on the risks of brokered and other rate-sensitive deposits. The agencies warn that excessive reliance on these types of funding products without proper risk management safeguards has the potential to weaken an institution’s financial condition. Deposit brokers have traditionally provided intermediary services for financial institutions and investors. Today, however, the Internet and other automated service providers enable investors who focus on yield to easily identify high-yielding deposit sources. Customers who focus exclusively on yield can be a less stable source of funding than typical relationship deposit customers. If market conditions change, these customers may rapidly transfer funds elsewhere in a manner similar to that of wholesale investors. Financial institutions that make use of significant amounts of brokered and rate-sensitive deposits should ensure that proper risk management practices are in place. Among the practices cited in the advisory are control structures to limit concentrations in this type of funding, due diligence in assessing deposit brokers and the risk to earnings and capital, and management information systems that identify non-relationship or higher cost funding sources that can be monitored and managed. The advisory lists potential red flags that may indicate the need for closer supervisory review, including newly chartered institutions with an aggressive growth strategy and few relationship deposits, high on- or off-balance sheet growth rates, and inadequate systems or controls. Media Contacts: Federal Reserve: Dave Skidmore (202) 452-2955 FDIC David Barr (202) 898-6992 OCC Bob Garsson (202) 874-5770 OTS Sam Eskenazi (202) 906-6677 Federal Reserve: Dave Skidmore (202) 452-2955 FDIC David Barr (202) 898-6992 OCC Bob Garsson (202) 874-5770 OTS Sam Eskenazi (202) 906-6677
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the following applications: (1) Old Kent Bank, National Association, Jonesville, Michigan ("OKB-NA"), under Section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act, for membership in the Federal Reserve System on its conversion to an Indiana charter and relocation of its main office to Indianapolis, Indiana; (2) OKB-NA, under section 18(c) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act ("Bank Merger Act"), to merge with Fifth Third Bank, Indiana, St. Joseph, Michigan; (3) OKB-NA, under the Bank Merger Act, to acquire certain branches of Old Kent Bank, Grand Rapids, Michigan ("OKB"), through a purchase and assumption transaction; and (4) OKB, under the Bank Merger Act, to acquire certain branches of OKB-NA through a purchase and assumption transaction. Attached is the Board’s Order relating to this action.
For immediate release The Federal Open Market Committee at its meeting today decided to lower its target for the federal funds rate by 50 basis points to 4 percent. In a related action, the Board of Governors approved a 50 basis point reduction in the discount rate to 3-1/2 percent. A significant reduction in excess inventories seems well advanced. Consumption and housing expenditures have held up reasonably well, though activity in these areas has flattened recently. Investment in capital equipment, however, has continued to decline. The erosion in current and prospective profitability, in combination with considerable uncertainty about the business outlook, seems likely to hold down capital spending going forward. This potential restraint, together with the possible effects of earlier reductions in equity wealth on consumption and the risk of slower growth abroad, continues to weigh on the economy. With pressures on labor and product markets easing, inflation is expected to remain contained. Although measured productivity growth stalled in the first quarter, the impressive underlying rate of increase that developed in recent years appears to be largely intact, supporting longer-term prospects. The Committee continues to believe that against the background of its long-run goals of price stability and sustainable economic growth and of the information currently available, the risks are weighted mainly toward conditions that may generate economic weakness in the foreseeable future. In taking the discount rate action, the Federal Reserve Board approved requests submitted by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of New York, Richmond, Chicago, St. Louis and San Francisco.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today requested public comment on how the Board's regulations may be adapted to online banking and lending. Comments are due by August 20, 2001. Section 729 of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act of 1999 requires federal banking regulators to conduct a study of regulations pertaining to the online delivery of financial services and to submit a report about adapting existing legislative or regulatory requirements to online banking and lending. The Board is currently reviewing pertinent regulations to assess their suitability for transactions that are conducted through the Internet. The Board plans to consult with other federal banking agencies regarding the report. The public comment provided will help the Board assess whether any existing regulations should be amended to facilitate online banking and how particular statutory provisions affect the online delivery of financial products and services. The Board recently requested comment on five interim rules to establish uniform standards for the electronic delivery of notices to consumers, namely: Regulations B (Equal Credit Opportunity); E (Electronic Fund Transfers); M (Consumer Leasing); Z (Truth in Lending); and DD (Truth in Savings). Any comments submitted in connection with the review of these regulations will also be considered for the study and report required by section 729 of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act. The Board's notice is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today approved actions by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Cleveland and Minneapolis, decreasing the discount rate at those banks from 4 percent to 3-1/2 percent, effective immediately.
Remarks by Governor Laurence H. Meyer At the Risk Management Association’s Conference on Capital Management, Washington, D.C. May 17, 2001 The New Basel Accord: Challenges for Banks and Their Supervisors It is a particular pleasure for me to join you this morning. The Risk Management Association has been a significant source of expertise and insight for the banking agencies. The RMA’s comments on regulatory and supervisory proposals have uniformly been well thought out and responsible. Your meetings with staff and your cooperation on special surveys to help flesh out proposals have been exemplary, if not essential, especially on recent efforts to modify the Basel Capital Accord. I should, of course, stop heaping praise on the RMA lest its bank membership begin to believe that the organization shares the blame with us for any regulation or proposal that is not to their liking. Nonetheless, thank you for your help, and I know we can continue to rely on you for both candor and empirical insights, insights along the lines of your conference theme: the enterprise perspective on risk management. I suspect that the recently proposed changes to the Basel accord will affect your working lives rather dramatically. The proposals touch upon many aspects of banking and many different kinds of risk, but much of the focus is on credit risk, and RMA’s roots are firmly in credit risk. Many of you will be key players in your organization’s response to, and comments on, the new accord--Basel II. As background to your efforts, I would like to review how we got where we are today and offer some views of the way forward. Basel II is a response to changes flowing from the increasing sophistication of risk measurement and management, but the shaping of the response has motivations that have become more multifaceted over time. It is fair to say that the supervisory community initially was motivated to move toward Basel II by the erosion of the Basel I rules through capital arbitrage. Simply put, “capital arbitrage” refers to strategies that reduce a bank’s regulatory capital requirements without a commensurate reduction in the bank’s risk exposure. One example of such arbitrage is the sale or other shift off of the balance sheet of assets with economic capital allocations below regulatory capital requirements and the retention of those for which regulatory requirements are less than the economic capital burden. Aggregate regulatory capital thus ends up being lower than the economic risks require; and although regulatory capital ratios rise, they are, in effect, merely meaningless statistical artifacts. The fear of capital arbitrage got us moving, and the new risk measurement technologies offered a way to make capital regulation more risk-sensitive. Thus, a significant aspect of Basel II is mending what has been broken. But, as we began to shape the new accord, we became ever more convinced that encouraging the adoption of advanced risk management is enormously desirable in its own right. Internally, good risk measurement is crucial to the control of risk postures and to choices about capitalization. Until the new technologies came along, and still today at many banks, choices about portfolio risk were the outcome of internal debates and struggles between those wishing to push the boundaries of prudence in search of short-term volume and those who saw the risks clearly. Traditionally, the right balance was not always achieved because it was hard to distinguish the boundary between reasonable and excessive risk. This is unfortunate because a major mistake in just one business line, such as commercial real estate, can be fatal. The new risk-management technologies offer the promise of a common system of risk measurement that will support more rational, efficient, reliable internal control systems and choices about risk. Moreover, under Basel II, the practices that a strong and rigorous bank management would use on its own will be used to guide regulatory minimums. Basel II seeks to eliminate the practice of keeping, as it were, two sets of books, by requiring that the parameters used to determine regulatory capital be the same as those that management uses to run the bank. To be sure, the supervisors will have to be comfortable with the internal ratings systems and other techniques used by banks to measure risk exposures and potential losses. But once verified--and periodically tested--bank managers and regulators will be using the same concepts and the same techniques. And as the measuring techniques improve, many of them may be incorporated in bank management practices--through improved estimates of loss characteristics--without changing the regulatory structure. Change and innovation will improve the process, rather than undermine it. Improved risk measurement also promises better-informed investors and greater discipline. If good risk measurement can improve internal discipline, then disclosing internal risk measures will help the market to understand banks’ risk postures and to react rationally. It is important to understand that improved market discipline does not mean uniformly harsher treatment of banks by the market. Bank stocks tend to trade at lower multiples of earnings than the equities of many other industries, and one conventional explanation for this is that banks are quite opaque. It has become increasingly clear that investors cannot easily know the level of risk they are acquiring with any particular bank equity position. When it comes to assessing share values, uncertainty can often breed doubt: It seems reasonable to expect, as a long-run proposition, that more-accurate market valuations of bank equities will follow better disclosure. The three pillars discussed in the Basel consultative documents flow directly from this multifaceted view, and the rank-ordering of their importance in the long run is not indicated by the number of pages devoted to each in the consultative documents. In the long run, the supervision pillar remains critical, but the supervision must be even more risk-focused and increasingly concerned with validating systems. Line supervisors will evaluate the quality of risk management and examine the adequacy of the risk measures. Without good supervision, the other pillars cannot stand. For example, accurate internal risk-based (IRB) inputs are surely crucial to obtaining reasonably accurate regulatory measures of capital adequacy. And the market will not believe or use risk disclosures unless it believes that the underlying risk measures, like ratings and the probabilities of default, have been validated. Thus, supervisors must validate the risk measures to support both capital regulation and market discipline. Market discipline will become increasingly important. Given informative and comparable disclosures of internal risk measures, the market will react more quickly and appropriately than any regulator to variations in risk postures, and such responses will help banks strike the right balance between risk and reward. Formal capital regulation is the most familiar of the three pillars, and the one to which the most pages are devoted--no doubt because it, by definition, contains more “rules” that must be explained. Capital ratios will serve as a trigger for corrective actions for banks that get into trouble. Projecting ahead many years, better risk management may mean that troubled banks will be far fewer than they have been historically. Ideally, the three pillars will work in an integrated way to strengthen banking systems. Nonetheless, during the transition to a working Basel II, we may have to lean on capital regulation more than we hope to in the long run. In navigating that transition, our overarching goal should be to advance the practice of risk management and encourage its wider adoption. And we all should accept that a lot of work remains both for banks and for supervisors. Let me say that again for emphasis: Our goal should be to advance the practice of risk management and encourage its wider adoption, and we have a lot of work to do. Partly in pursuit of that goal, the qualification standards have been set very high for the Advanced IRB approach and, in truth although perhaps not in public perception, for the Foundation IRB approach as well. The standards are an amalgamation of the best practices of many banks. No one bank follows all of them and, hence, at this moment, no bank meets all the IRB standards, especially for the advanced approach. Let me also say that again: At this moment and with current systems, no bank in the United States likely would qualify to use the Advanced IRB approach. Two considerations led the regulatory community to set standards at the cutting edge. First, the IRB approach gives primacy to internal risk measures in setting regulatory capital requirements. The regulators need to be comfortable that the risk measures are reasonably accurate and consistent, and the draft standards represent our perception of the practices that will make us comfortable. The standards are tough because the demands on the risk measures and the incentive pressures on the underlying systems will be large. Moreover, to the extent we are comfortable that a bank meets the standards, other aspects of supervision can be less intrusive. A comfortable supervisor is a less intrusive supervisor! Second, we believe the standards represent precepts for good risk management, worthy in their own right even in the absence of an IRB approach to regulatory capital. By making them a requirement for the IRB approaches, we hope to encourage their wider adoption. It is our hope and expectation that the large, complex banking organizations (LCBOs) will continue to enhance their risk management practices so that they might be prepared to adopt the advanced IRB approach. Other banks that can meet the standards are also welcome to use the advanced approach. But we do not plan to relax the standards to ensure that all the LCBOs qualify. LCBOs that believe they will get a free pass into Advanced IRB simply by virtue of being large and by promising to someday improve will be, I think, disappointed. Of course, there is a tension between setting high standards and also expecting wide adoption of the advanced approach by LCBOs. Is there a danger that the U.S. banking industry will simply stick with the standardized approach and turn a cold shoulder to IRB? Perhaps, but I believe that the market will help here. If any LCBO adopts the advanced approach--and I believe some intend to--it seems likely the market will pressure all the large banks to adopt it or be judged as having something to hide or having standards not quite up to snuff. There will also be direct economic incentives to adopt IRB approaches. The effective average risk weight for a bank as a whole should decline with the more sophisticated approaches depending on the extent of capital arbitrage already accomplished. If true, such banks would achieve lower total regulatory capital charges and, consequently, a higher reported risk-weighted capital ratio . At the same time, given the different risk profiles at individual banks, capital requirements almost certainly would vary more widely under the new risk-based capital ratios than under today's measure. However, banks would then presumably respond to changes in their risk-based capital ratios. For example, a bank with a relatively low risk portfolio would find that its risk-weighted capital ratio increased because its risk-weighted exposures had declined. It would, as a result, presumably reduce its capital, or increase its leverage, or even increase its risk exposure. A bank with a higher level of risk-weighted exposures resulting in diminished risk-based capital ratios would presumably do the opposite: raise more capital, or reduce its leverage, or reduce its risk exposures. At the end of this adjustment process, we might again--for either competitive reasons or because of the incentives from the prompt-corrective-action structure--have a relatively tight configuration of risk-weighted capital ratios , especially at LCBOs, but riskier banks would be holding more absolute capital to support their risks. Indeed, that is the whole purpose of the exercise. In contemplating your own bank’s effort to prepare for adoption of the IRB approach, I would suggest that a pivotal step is warehousing your own institution’s credit-loss experience. To be candid, the scarcity of data on losses has been a major stumbling block in the development of the IRB approach. Let me urge all of you to follow the example of some of you and move quickly in this direction. Data storage is extraordinarily cheap these days, but we all know that extracting and organizing the right data from existing systems is very expensive and often painful. Nonetheless, the contribution of better data to sound risk management will undoubtedly prove to be extremely valuable. As you develop your own plans, let me emphasize that supervisors will be looking for a committed and integrated response by IRB banks. Focusing IRB efforts in a compliance unit that seeks to meet the letter but not the spirit of the IRB standards will not be welcome. The details of what we will expect are, of course, still being developed. Based on our discussions with banks thus far, areas of special attention may include the breadth and depth of internal audit and loan review and the consistency and timeliness of internal ratings. The overall supervisory review process is likely to be familiar: verification of internal processes and procedures, coupled with some degree of transaction testing. The overarching goal will be to assess the effectiveness of a bank’s processes and systems in achieving sound risk management and adherence to IRB standards rather than to dictate the particular form that internal checks and balances must take. Supervisors will also carefully review the manner in which loss characteristics are estimated and the estimates themselves--such as the probabilities of default, the losses given default, and the exposures at default--that are provided by IRB banks. This is an area where supervisors have not tread very often and with many open issues. The issues include the suitability of internal and external data sources, the appropriate historical period to use in producing estimates, and the manner in which historical data and loss estimates should be linked to the bank’s current exposures. These and other issues will be challenging and will rightly occupy much of our attention over the coming months and years. In this context, the industry and supervisors must work together to develop and use reasonable standards for IRB quantification. Neither we nor banks can afford a “race to the bottom” in this critical area. The expertise of the RMA will be particularly sought and appreciated. Supervisors obviously have a lot of work to do. We are at the very beginning of efforts to train our staff to understand all of the issues raised by Basel II and to make sound judgments about banks’ adherence to the standards. I hope you will be patient with our examiners as they come up to speed, just as we intend to be patient with you. And you should not interpret my earlier remarks as a signal that we intend to be very inflexible. We recognize that many systems, methods, and organizational forms can satisfy the spirit of the IRB standard, and that what is appropriate for one bank may not be appropriate for another. We expect and welcome variety, in part because that is necessary to support further innovation. And innovation is absolutely necessary. Indeed, many technical issues are very unsettled for all of us and must be worked out during the next few years so that standards can be applied with reasonable consistency. I know that many of you are especially concerned about the disclosure requirements because of the danger that the market may be misled by inconsistencies across banks in the basis of the numbers that are disclosed. Partly, it is the supervisor’s job to promote consistency by ensuring that the IRB inputs are comparable across banks. To ensure this, we all must strengthen our current understanding. I hope banks and regulators can work together on these problems, as we have so often in the past. The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the Federal Reserve have begun a series of pilot reviews of a few banks to get a more up-to-date understanding of how practices and standards are changing and how they relate to the proposals in train. Based on those reviews and banker responses, we then must develop examination practices, not to mention retrain and develop staff. And of course the regulators must finish the proposal. We must carefully review your comments, evaluations, and suggestions for improvements to the Bank for International Settlements’ consultative papers, and then make the necessary modifications. The proposals in several areas--such as credit cards and commercial mortgage finance--still require fleshing out. Basel II as a framework and a concept is nearly finished, but its application will be in a constant state of flux--from the inception onward--as both banks and supervisors improve their procedures and the applications of those procedures. Basel II will spread those changes more rapidly, to your benefit, to our benefit, and to the benefit of our economy. But, for present purposes, I would be remiss if I did not underline that some of the details are still being developed.
Testimony of Vice Chairman Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. Small business access to capital Before the Small Business Committee, U.S. House of Representatives May 17, 2001 I am pleased to appear before this Committee to discuss the availability of credit to small businesses. Before turning to the latest information on credit market conditions, however, I think it important to highlight the special characteristics of small businesses that make them such an important part of our economy and at the same time create a heterogeneous set of financial needs and credit demands. Much of the information that we have on small business financing comes from surveys, including the Federal Reserve's Survey of Small Business Finances, the latest of which was completed last year. Importance of Small Businesses No doubt I am preaching to the choir when I tell this group how important small businesses are in our nation's economy. The statistics collected by the Census and Small Business Administration are indeed remarkable. These data reveal that there were more than 24 million nonfarm business tax returns filed in the United States in 1999. More than 99 percent of these returns were for small businesses, that is, firms with fewer than 500 employees. Roughly half of these were self-employed persons and about a third were part-time. Based on SBA estimates, small businesses employ more than half of the private work force and are responsible for around 50 percent of all sales and private gross domestic product, a share of output that has remained fairly stable over time. With half of our nation's private, nonfarm output coming from small businesses, obviously our economic well-being depends greatly on this sector. But small businesses do more for us than can be captured in these statistics. Small businesses are a source of new ideas and products. The list of innovations developed by these enterprises in fields such as software, computer technology, aerospace, and pharmaceuticals is quite impressive. The possibility that an idea or new product will eventually transform a small business into a large corporation is a great motivator of change and risk taking. Beyond that, small enterprises make a huge contribution in the form of the support and synergies they provide operating side by side with large businesses. They provide services and inputs to the production process, train workers, and are a primary means of marketing and distributing retail products and services. An essential feature of a thriving small business sector is the ability of firms to start up, to grow, and to change ownership. Just as essential to the dynamism of our economy is the ability of these firms to downsize when that improves profitability or to exit the markets when their resources are more highly valued elsewhere. There is a tremendous amount of turnover of small firms. In 1999, approximately half a million firms (excluding self-employed for which numbers are not available) closed for one reason or another--perhaps they merged or were acquired by a larger firm, perhaps they failed, or the owner found other reasons to move on. At the same time, more than half a million new businesses were created. The continuous entry and exit of firms is a clear sign that resources are responding to shifting demands of consumers and businesses and to changes in the costs of production. The flow of labor and capital from less productive to more productive uses is the cornerstone of a dynamic and healthy economy. A downside of this churning is the greater uncertainty that attaches to the earnings and risk profile of each individual small business. This has significant implications for the financing of small businesses. Indeed, while a number of factors need to be in place for a small business sector to thrive, including a mobile labor force and a sound infrastructure of laws and regulations, perhaps the most important ingredient is access to capital and credit. The Financing of Small Businesses The financing needs of small businesses are as varied as the population itself. The life cycle of a small business can take many forms, with very different implications for the types of risks and returns that lenders and investors can expect. For new ventures that have high risk profiles and high expected returns--as do many start-up firms in the tech sector--the initial stages require commitments of equity capital, sometimes from family and friends and sometimes in the form of venture or private equity capital. Further injections of equity are required in the early stages of growth and ultimately some form of "take-out" financing is arranged, such as an initial public offering or a buyout by another firm, that allows the venture capitalist to extract his or her investment. The past decade has been impressive for the large amount of equity capital that flowed to venture and high-tech enterprises in this country. The National Venture Capital Association estimates that investments in emerging enterprises totaled $214 billion over the past five years, and exceeded $100 billion last year alone. The number of companies funded last year was a record 5,300. About 270 companies that originally were backed by venture capital were purchased by other companies last year. Another 250 were able to go public through initial public offerings (IPOs) of stock, even as the market for publicly traded equity was in the initial stages of its recent decline. The average age of firms going public was about seven years, but many were older, which is indicative of the potentially long-term commitment that investors in venture enterprises must be prepared to make. It is safe to say that the United States has been a role model for countries in Europe and Asia seeking to develop markets for equity financing for small businesses. But for every new, high-growth firm seeking venture capital, there are hundreds of small businesses in the manufacturing, construction, trade, and service sectors that have quite different financing needs. Some of these firms have established operating histories and marketable assets that make them good candidates for credit from conventional financial institutions. A few are small corporations that have access to bond market financing, though their bonds are likely to be rated below investment grade. The vast majority are small enterprises with few assets to pledge as collateral and with only limited operating experience from which investors can assess operating performance and future earnings streams. Recognizing the importance of small businesses, we endeavor to understand the sources and uses of credit by different sizes of firms. To this end, the Federal Reserve has undertaken three national surveys of small businesses, the first in 1987, the second in 1993, and the third completed last year. A detailed description of the latest survey, along with preliminary results, was published in the April 2001 Federal Reserve Bulletin . This morning I will highlight a few preliminary findings and note that the data have just become available for what promises to be interesting analytic work. The Survey of Small Business Finances The survey sampled 3,600 small businesses that were representative of more than 5 million nonfarm, nonfinancial enterprises that operate for profit. It gathered information on a large number of items, including each firm's use of credit; characteristics such as the number of employees, industry, and age of the firm; and its income and balance sheet data as of year-end 1998. We expect these data to be used by researchers at the Board and elsewhere to address a wide range of issues. The earlier surveys have been used, for example, to shed light on the relationship between a business and its bank or primary lender and to study how financing choice varies with location, age, size, or other characteristics of firms. The latest survey can be used to update these studies and to assess how small businesses may have altered their use of credit and financial services in response to technological and competitive changes in the financial environment. The preliminary survey results we've glimpsed so far are interesting as much for their consistency with previous surveys as for the changes they reveal. For example, despite the large amount of structural change and consolidation in the financial service sector and the improving accessibility of capital markets to many smaller firms, commercial banks continued to be the dominant provider of financial services to small businesses in 1998. Of the 55 percent of small businesses that obtained credit from market sources or institutions, nearly three-fourths had some sort of credit arrangement, such as a line of credit, a loan, or a lease, with a commercial bank. Finance companies served about 13 percent of small business borrowers, and leasing companies served about 7 percent. The survey results also confirmed the growing use of business credit cards by small businesses. About one-third of all small businesses--and more than 50 percent of firms with 20 or more employees--had business credit cards in 1998. We included questions on the survey about the problems small businesses considered to be most pressing. Small businesses in 1998 expressed concern about the quality, cost, and availability of labor and about increased competition from larger, international, and Internet firms. Of note, financing was not high on their list of concerns. It is not surprising that small firms were feeling the pressures of tight labor markets and increased competition: 1998 marked the seventh year of a robust expansion. Bolstered by a technology-led acceleration in productivity, real GDP growth averaged 4-1/4 percent in the latter half of the 1990s, and the unemployment rate had dropped to 4 percent by the end of the decade. Aggregate indicators of credit availability were quite positive in the mid to late 1990s: Banks were generally easing credit terms, and business loans grew robustly at both large and small banks. The surge in equity markets provided a welcome environment for firms going public for the first time, and firms carrying below-investment-grade bond ratings were able to issue bonds at historically narrow spreads over Treasuries. While disruptions in global markets in 1998 raised risk premiums on junk bonds and bank loans and threatened a seizing up in financial markets, ultimately they did not derail the flow of credit, especially to smaller businesses. Recent Trends in Small Business Financing Since the 1998 survey, the economic and financial environment has again changed, and this time in ways that are less conducive to risk-taking and leverage. It became increasingly apparent over the course of last year that the pace of economic growth was slowing. Credit markets firmed, including bank lending, partly in response to concerns that a slowing economy would result in some deterioration in the financial well-being of businesses and their creditors. As corporate profits fell and businesses revised down their outlook for sales and earnings growth, investors became less certain about the returns they should expect on investments. By late last year, equity markets looked considerably less attractive as a source of financing, especially to firms hoping to go public for the first time. The volume of IPOs dropped dramatically in the fourth quarter and remained sparse in the early months of this year, though it has not dried up entirely. As prospects for takeout financing through an IPO became problematic, private equity investors became more cautious about committing capital to earlier stages of financing. While venture capital investments exceeded $100 billion last year, the pace of investment has slowed in recent quarters and there are reports that some young firms are finding it hard to get second- and third-stage financing for venture capital projects. In the capital markets, the default rate on high-yield bonds climbed markedly last year to its highest level since 1991, boosting lender concerns about the ability of weaker firms to service their debt in this environment. Yields on junk bonds rose appreciably relative to those on better-rated debt. In consequence, the issuance of junk bonds dropped sharply in the fourth quarter. Although the capital markets continue this year to exhibit considerable selectivity, the flow of credit through bond markets has been strong over all. Gross bond offerings by nonfinancial firms totaled nearly $160 billion in the first four months of this year. And, although they are paying higher risk premiums, non-investment-grade companies still are able to raise funds: Junk bond offerings have accounted for about 25 percent of the gross issuance this year. As you are aware, the Federal Reserve conducts surveys of senior lending officers at large banks around the country. These surveys ask about banks' credit terms and standards, about loan demand, and other issues that may be topical. During the market turmoil in late 1998, banks began taking a harder look at the loans that they make to large and middle-market businesses. While financial markets settled down subsequent to 1998, banks appear to have maintained a more vigilant posture. Last year, in an environment of rising delinquency rates on loans and indications of declining credit quality, the net percentage of banks who reported some firming in their lending standards for large and medium borrowers rose steadily in each of our surveys. Anecdotal reports suggest that banks were particularly concerned about concentrations of risk in sectors such as telecommunications, where returns have dropped sharply, and in manufacturing and other sectors highly dependent on energy and petroleum-based inputs. Banks also reported firming standards and terms on loans to small businesses, but to a lesser degree than for large firms. Normally, we expect small businesses to bear the first pulse of credit tightening. But the downgradings and unexpected shocks affecting large, investment-grade corporations have led creditors to rethink the relative risks of lending to large and small firms. Banks have continued to tighten standards and terms on loans and credit lines this year. In our May survey, just over one-half of domestic banks reported tightening their standards on C&I loans to large and middle-market firms over the past three months, and 36 percent tightened standards to small firms over the same period. Most of the banks that had tightened continued to cite a more uncertain economic environment, a worsening of industry-specific problems, and a reduced tolerance for risk. In their latest reports, bank loan officers also indicated that the demand for business credit has waned of late, largely owing to reductions in planned investments and diminished financing for mergers. Just as lenders are treading more cautiously as the economy slows, so too are borrowers. Caution is apparent even among small businesses. Importantly, the small business surveys conducted by the National Federation of Independent Business (NFIB) in the first quarter revealed that only 13 percent of their surveyed members thought the current period was a good time to expand, roughly half the percentage of a year earlier. The small businesses who thought it was a bad time to expand cited unfavorable economic prospects and a poor outlook for sales. Of note, very few--only 3 percent in the April NFIB survey--mentioned financing costs as a reason that the current period was not a good time to expand. Indeed, the recent NFIB surveys suggest that most of the respondents have not found financing conditions to be particularly onerous to date, despite the more cautious posture of financial institutions and higher risk spreads. For creditworthy businesses, large and small, the cost of borrowing has declined with the easing in monetary policy and the associated decline in lending rates since the fall. The prime lending rate has fallen 2 percentage points since the end of last year, and the average interest rate paid by respondents on the April NFIB survey was down almost 1 percentage point over the same period, to its lowest level in nearly a year. While we may take comfort from the lack of angst expressed by small borrowers in the NFIB surveys, I expect that many risky small businesses have found credit a bit harder or more expensive to obtain. On the other hand, there are few signs of the types of financial headwinds that prevailed in 1990 and played havoc with the ability of many creditworthy small and medium firms to renew credit lines and roll over loans. In contrast to that period, our financial institutions have had a long stretch of solid earnings growth during which to build capital and liquidity positions. In addition, although loan portfolios have recently begun to deteriorate, delinquency rates of business and real estate loans remain well below those of the earlier period. Commercial real estate markets, in particular, have not gone through the boom-and-bust excesses of the late 1980s and early 1990s. Summary In sum, we have seen greater caution being exercised by both borrowers and lenders in credit markets recently. Such tightening might be expected in an economy that has slowed after several years of rapid expansion and debt growth. Much of the firming to date has been selective and directed toward companies perceived to face an uncertain future in the new economic environment and to leveraged companies that are vulnerable to a period of slowing sales and profits. Overall, however, credit flows have been well maintained, and lending institutions are in much better financial health than a decade or so ago. Importantly, reports from small businesses are relatively upbeat with regard to the availability of credit. Although risky borrowers face close scrutiny, banks apparently have continued to accommodate the needs of their creditworthy business customers, while bank lending rates, on average, have moved lower.
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan At the Conference of State Banking Supervisors, Traverse City, Michigan (via satellite) May 18, 2001 Good afternoon. It is a pleasure, once again, to talk with you about banking supervision and regulation. The decade of the 1990s was one of dramatic change for the U.S. financial services industry, inducing us to rethink much of our approach to supervising and regulating banks. During the 1990s, the Congress adopted historic changes in banking laws that transformed the structure of, and outlook for, the U.S. banking system and laid the groundwork for significantly more change. Those events, in turn, have caused bank supervisors to rely more heavily on banksï¿½ own internal risk management practices and to focus supervisory efforts to ensure that those practices are sound. We entered the past decade dealing with an industry under stress--one that was saddled with high levels of nonperforming assets and that was still experiencing a high number of bank failures, all a result of misjudging risks. On the heels of the thrift industry debacle, these problems led the Congress to enact the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act of 1991, imposing ï¿½prompt corrective actionï¿½ and other requirements on bank supervisors. By the decadeï¿½s end, we saw even more substantial legislation that has led to truly nationwide banking and the possible combination of banking, securities, and insurance underwriting activities under common ownership. In some respects, these legislative events contrast sharply with the action taken at the beginning of the 1990s to address weaknesses in banking and the bank supervisory process and reflect a much higher level of comfort with the industryï¿½s financial condition and risk management techniques. As such, the industryï¿½s new-found freedom speaks, in large part, to the progress it has made throughout the decade in preparing itself for the tests ahead. The different laws also reflect a greater understanding by the Congress of banking risks and how industry practices and financial markets have changed. New technologies have altered business practices around the globe, spurring international trade and producing larger commercial firms with more efficient systems for information and control. This, in turn, has encouraged many banks to increase their own size and financial strength and expand the scope of their product lines. Confining banks to outdated rules was, in the circumstances, perceived as both unfair to them and their shareholders and harmful to the long-term economic interests of the United States. We need a banking system that is not only sound but also able to innovate and respond to customer needs. The question for us is how best to accommodate change while protecting the public interest. In my comments today, I would like to draw upon some of our past experiences and outline a conceptual approach for addressing future issues. Even a casual observer of banking history will recognize that many of the matters we deal with--and perhaps the most important ones, in particular--are largely variations of older and more familiar themes. That may be because the fundamental nature of banking and its role in a modern economy have not changed materially for generations, despite the important operational changes taking place every day. However, the management and supervision of banking--especially bank risk-taking--is in the process of fundamental change. The Role of Bank Supervision and Regulation As we consider the challenges ahead, it seems useful to remind ourselves of bank regulatorsï¿½ underlying directives, which I would describe as: First, to promote and enforce sound practices so that banks do not present unacceptable threats to U.S. or world financial markets or impose unacceptable costs on the insurance funds and, ultimately, the U.S. taxpayers. And second, to maintain a supervisory and regulatory environment that encourages innovation and efficient competition in financial services and that does not require excessive risk-taking by banks in order to generate competitive returns. Reducing the broad objectives of bank supervisors and regulators to two sentences may be difficult, given the many demands placed on them in overseeing a business as dynamic and important as banking. Yet, in some respects, these statements could be simplified still more: To promote safety and soundness while allowing banking institutions to innovate and compete. There are clearly some tensions in these goals. The hard part, of course, is in implementing these concepts on a daily basis. Can we always tell, for example, what is ï¿½unsafe and unsoundï¿½ when we see it, and at what point do we interfere with managementï¿½s judgment when we disagree? What is ï¿½efficient competitionï¿½ when banks have access to a subsidized safety net? And how do we judge the competitiveness of a bankï¿½s returns? Reaching clear agreement on such questions is not easy, even among bank regulators with generally common goals. Resolving them becomes far more contentious when bankers weigh in with materially different views. One approach is for regulators to be permissive, unless it is clear that established public interests are at risk. Banking in this country is, in most areas, highly competitive, and the industry has proven itself to be highly resilient. To survive and be effective, banks must be willing and able to take risk. Revenue, shareholder equity, and if necessary the Bank Insurance Fund are there to deal with mistakes. Put differently, while public policy needs to limit the financial and social costs of bank failures, we should not view every bank failure as a supervisory or regulatory failure. It is not our role to prevent all failures, let alone to guard against every earnings decline. Indeed, to do our jobs well, we should understand that the essential economic function of banks is to take risk, and that means mistakes will sometimes be made. A perfectly safe bank, holding a portfolio of Treasury bills, is not doing the economy or its shareholders any good. The experience of the early 1990s illustrates the process of recovery after a period of excessive risk-taking. A decade ago, many regional and money center banks were reeling from excessive commercial real estate lending and still-substantial holdings of weak foreign country loans. Meanwhile, many agricultural banks were only then recovering from their own bout with problem credits that had proved too heavy for hundreds of other banks to bear. The FDIC was reporting that the Bank Insurance Fund was nearly drained, while the General Accounting Office was saying that, in substance, it already was. Banks nationwide were tightening their credit standards and cutting access to credit for many firms, producing a ï¿½credit crunch.ï¿½ It was clear that change was needed. The industry needed to resolve its problems, improve its risk management practices, and construct new strategies that would provide more stability in lending markets and more competitive, long-term returns to investors. For their part, bank supervisors needed to pay more attention to emerging weaknesses and deal with them more quickly. Solving the immediate problem of weak asset quality and improving the industryï¿½s overall profitability was, of course, the first priority, and fortunately that was accomplished sooner than anyone expected. By the mid-1990s, U.S. banks were enjoying stronger portfolios and higher earnings than they had seen in recent memory, attesting to the underlying strength and resiliency of our banking system. During the past decade, the industryï¿½s profitability has arguably climbed to its highest level ever, as large banks finally joined small ones in achieving annual returns on average assets in excess of 1 percent. To be sure, no one wants to repeat the experience of the early 1990s and, indeed, that period has set a standard for what we should seek to avoid. It is also clear, however, that the industry rebounded quickly when given the incentives to deal with its problems through market and regulatory pressures. The key was addressing asset quality problems and reducing the associated weight of bad loans. Getting there required some banks to reduce or eliminate dividends and raise new capital, often on dilutive terms. That did not always occur easily or without frank discussions between bankers and regulators. At times forceful intervention is required to ensure that banks donï¿½t take risks that, at least in the judgment of their supervisors, they are not prepared to handle. We supervisors also need to resolve insolvent institutions while not trying to minimize every risk. But that does not mean we should avoid addressing the causes of banking crises, no matter how adept we may be at getting out of them. Pro-Cyclicality of Bank Lending and Agency Supervision A typical--one may almost say predictable--bank lending pattern is an easing of lending terms as the economy recovers from a cyclical trough and a tightening as the economy peaks and then contracts. At the same time, one can also observe what appears to be less aggressive supervisory criticism of lending policies during the economic expansion and an apparent get-tough policy at cyclical peaks and during contractions. Both of these phenomena can be explained by rising optimism followed by a pulling back and heightened caution. As such, they may be just an implicit part of the dynamics of the business cycle. But neither are demonstrably in the best interests of the economy or the bankï¿½s shareholders. They lead to an unnecessary degree of volatility in earnings and, as such, to a reduced long-term capitalized value of the bank. This, in turn, lessens the effectiveness of financial intermediation. Fortunately, there is some evidence that desirable changes have already begun, changes that both private and public policymakers should reinforce. Historically, as I have said, loan standards are softened during an expansion, when loan books are growing rapidly. As the economy expands, business and household financing needs increase and projections of future outcomes are optimistic. It is difficult for managers and supervisors to be critical of loan growth in such an environment, particularly one marked by intense competition. In addition, incentives for loan officers and managers traditionally have rewarded loan growth, market share, and nominal profits. In an effort to expand loans in an optimistic environment, potential returns are often not fully adjusted for risk, with the nominally high-yielding credit looking particularly attractive. Moreover, credit specialists at banks--a function often separated from the loan officers-- historically have had difficulty making their case about risk because of their inability to measure and quantify risk. At the same time, with debt service current and market risk premiums cyclically low, and with the same inability to quantify and measure risk, supervisory criticisms of standards are difficult to justify. When the economy begins to slow and the quality of some booked loans deteriorates, loan standards belatedly tighten and supervisorsï¿½ criticism of previous standards is taken more seriously, inducing an even greater tightening of credit. In part, the examinersï¿½ observations have often provided a reality check by which some banks came to recognize a deterioration at first denied. The last few years have had some of the traditional characteristics I have just described: the substantial easing of terms as the economy improves, the rapid expansion of the loan book, the deterioration of loan quality as the economy slows, and a cumulative tightening of loan standards. But this interval has had some interesting characteristics not observed in earlier expansions. First, in the mid-1990s, examiners began to focus on banksï¿½ risk management systems and processes; at the same time, supervisorsï¿½ observations about softening loan standards came both unusually early in the expansion and were taken more seriously than had often been the case. The turmoil in financial markets in 1998 associated with both East Asia and the Russian default also focused bankersï¿½ attention on loan quality during the continued expansion in this country. And there was a further induced tightening of standards last year, months before the aggregate economy weakened, in response to early indications of deteriorating loan quality. All of this might have been the result of idiosyncratic events from which generalizations should not be made. Perhaps. But at the same time another, more profound development of critical importance had begun: the creation at the larger, more sophisticated banks of an operational loan process with a more or less formal procedure for recognizing, pricing, and managing risk. In these emerging systems, loans are classified by risk, internal profit centers are charged for equity allocations by risk category, and risk adjustments are explicitly made. In short, the formal measurement and quantification of risk has begun to occur and to be integrated into the loan-making process. This is a sea change--or at least the beginning of one. Formal risk management systems are designed to reduce the potential for the unintended acceptance of risk and hence should reduce the pro-cyclical behavior that has characterized banking history. But, again, the process has just begun. The federal banking agencies are trying to generalize and institutionalize this process in the current efforts to reform the Basel Capital Accord. The proposed foundation approach, intended mainly for regional banks, and the advanced internal risk-based approach, intended mainly for large, complex banking organizations, would require banks to create and use internal risk classifications for their banking book. These classifications would not only be used to establish minimum regulatory capital, but the associated risk profiles would be disclosed by the bank for the review of its creditors and shareholders. How well this process works will depend on the supervisorsï¿½ skill and, for lack of a better word, toughness in validating the conceptual and empirical basis of the risk classifications and management system. A weak or misused classification system would destroy the process. If applied seriously, and when operational near the middle of this decade, the revised accord, Basel II, promises to promote not only better risk management over a wider group of banks but also less-intrusive supervision once the risk management system is validated. It also promises less variability in loan policies over the cycle. To be sure, banksï¿½ risk appetites can change as they decide to increase or decrease the riskiness of their loan portfolios. In addition, minimum regulatory capital might tend to be pro-cyclical as loans migrate from less- to more-risky classifications as the economy weakens, in the process increasing minimum capital requirements. This tendency must, however, be balanced against what should be the reduction in cyclical reserving and write-offs that traditionally have come with the late recognition of excess risk taken earlier. Moreover, if, as promised, better risk-management reduces the variance of charge-offs and earnings, bank equity values, to repeat, are likely to be rewarded with higher price-earnings ratios. Put somewhat differently, better risk management and supervision may well focus bank management on its real objective: maximizing shareholder wealth. Building on Market Practice In setting boundaries and minimum standards for banks, we typically look at industry practices to identify what works well and what does not. In almost all cases, thatï¿½s the correct approach--to build on industry practice. Indeed, the development of the Basel II capital proposals I have just discussed has been constructed on the principles developed initially by the best-practice banks. We should encourage all banking organizations to continually strengthen their systems and controls as their operations and market practices evolve. But we need not expect--and surely not require--significant numbers of banks to develop risk management systems that are more complex than they need. Simplicity can work well, too, and for most banks that is likely to be the best approach. For the vast majority of U.S. banks, current practices, as I noted, seem fine. It is, of course, our belief that, for the larger banks, improving the measurement and management of risk will provide bank supervisors with more reliable and efficient ways to evaluate a bankï¿½s financial health. That thought underlies the concept of risk-based supervision and our increased focus on internal processes and controls. If we can gain greater confidence in a bankï¿½s operating procedures and in its own evaluation of risk, we should be able to reduce our oversight role--certainly when compared with what would otherwise be required. Innovative Banking System The management principles adopted by U.S. banks, our capital market system, and our oversight regime have worked well, I believe, in providing this country with a healthy and responsive banking system and probably the most efficient allocation of financial resources in the world. Much of that success relies on the effective measurement of risk, on high levels of competition, and on armï¿½s length transactions. Indeed, these elements support one another: competition requires institutions to correct mistakes quickly and assess risks as accurately as they can, while independent decision-making helps ensure that pricing reflects risk. Sound pricing, in turn, produces good returns to investors and spurs further competition. Despite more than a decade of consolidation, the U.S. banking system remains highly competitive on virtually every front. With enhanced technology and deregulation we now have global and national markets for a growing number of banking products, while low barriers to entry encourage competition in more sectors than ever before. The pace of bank creation has actually increased in recent years, despite the contraction in the overall number of insured commercial banks. Interstate banking has also brought new competitors into previously settled markets, and Gramm-Leach-Bliley has the prospect of adding more competition, as nonbank firms seek entry into the banking business. Even when these events simply change the ownership of existing banks, one could still argue that, in most cases, they introduce stronger, more aggressive competitors into a market. The role of bank regulators is, of course, to ensure that all of these activities do not reduce the safety and soundness of banks. In recent years, state bank regulators have worked well together and with their federal counterparts in accommodating interstate banking and minimizing oversight costs to both the supervisors and to state-chartered institutions. Now, Gramm-Leach-Bliley has introduced nonbank activities and functional regulators into the mix. In moving forward into new areas, the Federal Reserve will strive to build on the long tradition of coordination and cooperation with state bank supervisors in ensuring that the broader activities of financial holding companies remain adequately supervised and regulated. On numerous occasions last year, Federal Reserve staff met with staff members of the Securities and Exchange Commission, various state insurance commissions, and other state and federal bank supervisors in a mutual effort to learn more about each otherï¿½s interests and how our role as umbrella supervisor can mesh best with their activities. It is important that we maintain this cooperative process and work to make supervision as efficient as it can be. Conclusion In recent years, we have incorporated innovative ideas and accommodated significant change in banking and supervision. Institutions have more ways than ever to compete in providing financial services. Financial innovation has improved the measurement and management of risk and holds substantial promise for much greater gains ahead. It seems clear that, building on bank practice, we are in the process of developing an improvement in both lending and supervisory policies that will not only foster better risk management but could also reduce the pro-cyclical pattern of easing and tightening of bank lending, and accordingly increase bank shareholder values. It is not an easy road, but it seems that we are well along it.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application by CB&T Bancshares, Inc., Vivian, Louisiana, to become a bank holding company by acquiring all the shares of Citizens Bank & Trust Company, also in Vivian. Attached is the Board’s Order relating to this action.
Remarks by Vice Chairman Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. Before the Independent Community Bankers of America, Washington, D.C. May 21, 2001 A Few Thoughts on Financial Sector and Payments Activities I am pleased to be here with you this morning, and I thank Ken Guenther and the ICBA for inviting me to speak. Ken suggested that I share my thoughts with you about two initiatives that I have been working on recently. The first, published early this year, analyzed global financial sector consolidation in the G-10 countries. Today, I will add a few observations about consolidation in the United States. The second initiative is ongoing and involves the work of the Federal Reserve's Payments System Development Committee with the private sector to improve the U.S. retail payment system. One particularly promising aspect of this latter effort is a potential change in federal law to enhance the market prospects for check truncation and electronic check presentment. Another aspect involves a data collection and research effort we now have under way, for the first time in more than twenty years, to measure accurately the aggregate number of checks paid in the United States. G-10 Study of Financial Sector Consolidation I will turn first to financial consolidation at the international level. Consolidation of many types of business activities has been a prominent feature of the global economic landscape for at least the past decade, and the financial sector has participated in this trend. Indeed, we have witnessed accelerating consolidation among financial institutions over the past few years. In September 1999, the finance ministers and central bank governors of the Group of Ten countries commissioned a major study of the possible effects of financial consolidation. This study, which I was privileged to direct, was released to the public in January 2001. The G-10 study had two primary objectives. First, it attempted to isolate the effects of consolidation from those of other powerful forces transforming financial systems. Second, it sought to identify key areas in which financial consolidation requires new policies. The diversity of the economies involved and the interdependent nature of many of the forces affecting financial systems made achieving these objectives difficult, to say the least. However, I believe the study was a success. With a study of the depth, breadth, and quite frankly, the length of this one, there is always the potential to mislead by summarizing the key points in only a few words. Nonetheless, I would like to highlight for you what are, in my judgment, the study's key findings and policy implications. These key findings cover thirteen nations (the G-10 plus Australia and Spain). The study documents high levels of merger and acquisition activity among financial firms during the 1990s and an increasing pace of consolidation, including a noticeable acceleration in the last three years of the decade. Most of the consolidation has been within countries and within segments of the financial sector. Cross-border and cross-sector consolidations have been less frequent. Our research shows that financial consolidation substantially decreased the number of banking firms during the 1990s in almost every country studied and that national concentration of the banking industry tended to increase. Financial consolidation has helped to create a significant number of large and, in some cases, increasingly complex, financial institutions. These firms increasingly operate across national borders and are subject to a wide range of regulatory regimes. As for the causes of all this merger and acquisition activity, overall, it appears that the most important forces encouraging financial consolidation are globalization of financial and nonfinancial markets, financial deregulation, improvements in information technology, and increased shareholder pressure for financial performance. Because these forces are likely to continue, financial consolidation is likely to continue as well, although the pace may be interrupted by fluctuations in the macroeconomic cycle and other factors. The study considered possible future scenarios but concluded that the likelihood of specific future developments is impossible to assess with confidence. My own guess is that various patterns will emerge. Globally active universal financial service providers will continue to develop. We should also see the further development of firms specialized in the production of particular components of financial services or in the distribution to end-users of products obtained from specialized providers--providers that may exist within or outside the traditional financial services industry. I fully expect a large number of efficient and profitable small and medium-sized financial institutions to remain important players in the United States. I would guess this will also be the case in many other nations. In addition, the uncertainties of successful post-merger integration may well favor more use of looser forms of consolidation, such as joint ventures and strategic alliances. The data that we collected suggested a number of conclusions. For example, financial consolidation has increased the concentration of payment and settlement flows among fewer parties. The risk implications of consolidation in payment and settlement systems deserve close monitoring. In addition, the study found that although consolidation has some potential to improve the operating efficiency of the combined financial institutions, and has done so in some cases, the overall evidence in favor of efficiency gains is weak. The study also found that the effects of consolidation on competition and credit flows are very case-specific and depend on the nature of markets for specific products and services. As I noted, this study was commissioned by finance ministers and central bank governors, so we investigated the implications of consolidation for central bank policies. The study found that financial consolidation has not significantly affected either the conduct or the effectiveness of monetary policy. However, it also suggests that central banks should remain alert to the implications of future consolidation-induced reductions in the competitiveness of the markets most important for monetary policy implementation. Similarly, central banks ought to monitor potential future changes in the transmission mechanisms for monetary policy. Importantly, the study also concluded that existing policies appear adequate to address individual firm and systemic risks now and in the intermediate term. However, going forward, the study identifies a number of areas that deserve careful attention by policymakers. For example, enhanced contingency planning could reduce the risks to individual firms and the broader financial system, should a large and complex financial institution become seriously distressed. Because no institution is too big to fail, I believe that regulators should develop a clearer understanding of several key factors. These factors include the administration of bankruptcy laws and conventions across borders; the coordination of supervisory policies within and across borders; the treatment of over-the-counter derivatives, foreign exchange, and other "market" activities in distress situations; the roles and responsibilities of managers and boards of directors; and the administration of the lender-of-last-resort function. Our study helped to clarify the need for international attention to contingency planning. In general, both crisis prevention and crisis management could be improved by additional communication and cooperation among central banks, finance ministries, and other financial supervisors, both domestically and internationally. Consolidation in the U.S. Against this international background, I would like to look at what has been occurring in the United States. In the U.S., more than 4,000 commercial banking and thrift organizations were acquired between 1990 and 2000. The pace of merger activity generally increased between 1990 and 1998, peaking at more than 500 deals in 1998. In 1999 and 2000, the number of mergers and acquisitions returned to the levels experienced at the start of the decade. Partly offsetting this trend, more than 1,400 charters for new banks and thrifts were issued during the 1990s. 1998 was also the standout year in terms of transaction size. Deals completed in that year accounted for roughly one-third of all bank and thrift assets acquired during the 1990-2000 period. In particular, a handful of these deals were extremely large and substantially influenced the structure of the banking industry. These transactions included Travelers-Citicorp, NationsBank-BankAmerica, Banc One-First Chicago NBD, and Norwest-Wells Fargo. Merger size dropped somewhat in 1999 and 2000, but the average size remained large by historical standards. Over the past decade, consolidation has had a profound effect on the structure of the banking and thrift industries. Between 1990 and 2000, the number of commercial banking and thrift organizations decreased by one-third, from roughly 12,000 to 8,000. This decline was driven by a sharp reduction in the number of banking and thrift organizations in the smaller asset-size categories. For example, during this period, the number of organizations with total assets of less than $100 million fell by nearly one-half, while the number of organizations with more than $100 million in assets increased slightly. While part of this change can be attributed to the effects of inflation on the value of firms' assets, even after controlling for inflation the number of small banking and thrift organizations declined compared with the number of larger organizations. Mergers have also significantly influenced deposit concentration at the national level. For example, the share of nationwide deposits managed by the 100 largest organizations grew from approximately one-half in 1990 to about two-thirds in 2000. In spite of this increase in concentration at the national level, the typical local banking market did not experience a significant increase in concentration. Regardless of whether we measure concentration using the share of market deposits controlled by the three largest bank or thrift organizations or using the broader Herfindahl-Hirschmann Index, we find that, on average, concentration in rural banking markets did not change and concentration in urban banking markets increased only modestly between 1990 and 2000. The minimal effect of consolidation on local market concentration may be attributable to several factors. First, much of the consolidation that has taken place in the U.S. over the past decade has been between banking organizations that served different geographic markets. Second, in those instances where the merging parties did serve the same local markets, antitrust scrutiny by the Federal Reserve and the Department of Justice has limited the extent of increases in local market concentration. Third, merging entities typically have experienced some degree of deposit runoff following merger consummation. Finally, in many cases, new entry has helped to offset the effects of consolidation on local market concentration. In addition to acquiring other depository institutions, banks and thrifts have engaged, to a limited extent, in cross-sector acquisitions. In 1999, the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act relaxed many of the restrictions on the financial activities of banking organizations by permitting the formation of financial holding companies-firms that could engage in a wide variety of financial activities, including commercial banking, securities underwriting, and insurance. Contrary to many observers' expectations, the ensuing cross-sector consolidation activity has been modest so far. Indeed, the largest cross-sector banking deal, the combination of Travelers and Citicorp, took place in 1998, before Gramm-Leach-Bliley was passed. Check Truncation Act Now I would like to take a few minutes to talk about some of our efforts to improve the efficiency of the U.S. payments system, which is a subject of concern for all banks. You may know that I co-chair the Payments System Development Committee with Cathy Minehan, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston. The PSDC was formed in mid-1999 to (1) identify strategies for enhancing the long-term efficiency of the retail payment systems, (2) identify barriers to innovation and work to eliminate or reduce those barriers where desirable or appropriate, (3) monitor developments in payments markets, and (4) conduct workshops and forums that encourage focused discussions on payments system improvements with the private sector. It is my view that we need to approach payment system innovations with an open mind and a willingness to learn. In a dynamic economy, markets need to play a key role in guiding the development of infrastructure. This means that innovation and competition will be central to the future development of the payments system--as they are in other areas of the economy. Policymakers for their part should strive to remove barriers to innovations that do not conflict with important public policies. They should resist calls to limit competition, but rather should take every opportunity to foster competition. Similarly, public policy should exercise restraint and resist calls for premature or short-sighted regulation. Even well-intentioned actions may create perverse outcomes, may not effectively address longer-term public policy concerns, or may short-circuit creative innovations. On the other hand, public policy will have to confront genuine and significant problems when these become clear and are not self-correcting. Now let me tell you about a particularly interesting project that we have undertaken to foster payment system innovation. Federal Reserve Board staff has been working with the financial services industry, including the ICBA, consumer representatives, and others on draft legislation to facilitate increased check truncation by reducing some of the legal impediments that exist under current law. We hope to refer the proposal to Congress for its consideration once the draft achieves a fair balance between the interests of banks and their customers. Under current law, the original instrument is required for presentment or return of a check, unless the parties agree to accept check information electronically. This requirement often limits the adoption of electronic check presentment because of the difficulties of obtaining large numbers of agreements among banks and with maintaining dual processing streams for paper checks and electronic replacements. To address these issues, a draft "Check Truncation Act" is being developed under which banks would have the option of truncating some or all of the checks they process. The hope is that such a law would facilitate the use of electronics in the check collection and return process by empowering banks to truncate checks when cost savings or other benefits can be identified. The truncating bank could collect or return checks by exchanging them electronically by agreement, as they can do today, or by substituting machine-readable copies of checks ("substitute checks") for the original checks. A substitute check would consist of a printed image of the check that could be processed through check sorting equipment as though it were the original check. The most significant aspect of the draft Check Truncation Act is its requirement that a substitute check be considered the legal equivalent of the original check for all purposes and for all parties and that banks accept the substitute check in lieu of the original check. In particular, banks would no longer be able to demand the original check because the substitute check would be valid not only as proof of payment but also as a negotiable instrument. The draft law would not mandate that banks truncate checks, or present checks electronically, or receive checks electronically. Those decisions would be left to the discretion of individual banks. As I mentioned earlier, however, the goal of the draft law would be to facilitate the use of electronics in the check collection and return process by empowering banks to truncate checks if cost savings or other benefits can be identified--in other words, when there is a good business case. Banks that choose not to receive checks electronically would be able to continue processing checks as they do today because any substitute checks they receive would be processed like any paper check processed today. Now, I certainly recognize the irony of the proposed act creating a new paper document--a substitute check--to promote electronics. The legal equivalence granted to substitute checks under the draft Check Truncation Act, however, would remove the barrier to expanded electronic check processing resulting from the requirement that banks enter into extensive bilateral and multilateral agreements with other banks for electronic processing. The draft law would allow banks greater operational flexibility and likely increase the number of banks that accept electronic checks for collection and presentment. Our discussions with banking industry representatives have identified a number of possible operational efficiencies that banks might be able to achieve if Congress enacted this law. For example, a depositary bank could truncate checks at the point of deposit--such as at an ATM or a remote branch--transmit the check images to a central operations center, and create substitute checks to send for collection. This process would eliminate the cost of transporting checks daily from the points of deposit and could allow for later deposit cut-off times for their customers. A bank could also transmit check images to an intermediary that could print substitute checks and deliver them to banks that do not accept checks electronically. This could substantially reduce transportation costs and speed the collection or return of some checks, particularly for checks destined to geographically remote locations or for large-dollar checks. At the other end of the check processing cycle, a paying bank could run its returned check file against its check image file to create substitute returned checks. This process would eliminate the need for a bank to run its entire presentment from the previous day through its sorters to pull the small number of checks that need to be returned unpaid. We believe that image-supported check truncation will become more cost effective for a growing proportion of banks as technology improves and the cost of electronic transmission declines relative to the cost of physical transportation. Beyond operational efficiencies, the draft Act could lower the hurdles that banks now face in moving from physical to electronic processing of checks. Today, electronic check presentment generally relies on electronic receipt of payment data contained in the MICR line of a check. Because the MICR line includes much less information than the original check, in most cases the original paper checks follow the electronic transmission. Collecting banks, which bear the lion's share of check collection costs are, therefore, limited in their ability to reduce costs. Improvements in image technology, continued declines in telecommunications costs, and continued reengineering of banks' back-office processes have the potential to alter current processes. Introducing an intermediate step of creating a substitute check that is the legal equivalent of the original check may help create conditions that are conducive to expanding the network of banks agreeing to electronic collection. Let me emphasize again, however, that each bank must weigh its own costs and benefits and decide whether to invest in image technology, to retain a service provider to provide image-based capture and data processing services, or to stay with traditional paper processing. Federal Reserve Payments Research I have spent the past few minutes talking about ways to reduce the cost of processing checks. You might infer from that discussion that we have a solid idea of the total number of checks being collected. Well, I am certain that it is a large number-our rough guess is in the range of 70 billion checks with a value well over $80 trillion per year. But the truth is that we really do not know how many checks are written in the U.S. each year. And, as I mentioned, the most recent survey data are more than twenty years old. The Federal Reserve Banks have recently begun a series of surveys to address this gap and to improve their understanding of payment choices and payments processing from the perspectives of consumers, businesses, and financial institutions. Earlier this year, the Reserve Banks engaged several research firms to conduct three surveys aimed at collecting some initial, quantitative data. The first survey collects the volume and value of checks paid by a relatively large sample of depository institutions from which we hope to estimate the total volume and value of check payments in the U.S. A second survey will collect check-payment data from which to estimate the use of checks by broad categories of payment types. The third survey will quantify aggregate volume and value data for various types of electronic payments. This spring, the check surveys were sent to a sample of banks, thrift institutions, and credit unions. Some of your institutions received a survey questionnaire. If you have completed and returned the survey, we thank you for your help. If you have received but not yet returned the survey, I encourage you to do so. I believe that the estimates based on this survey data will help all of us to better understand the U.S. payment system and to better plan for the future. Conclusion Today I have talked about several types of changes--the changes in markets for financial services due to consolidation, a possible legal change to facilitate the greater use of technology, and the changing patterns of payment instrument use over the past few decades that we hope to document through some new surveys. Clearly, these changes will continue and even accelerate, driven by the evolution in technology and, more fundamentally, by the evolution of ideas. Our greatest challenge may be to sort through the promises of the future and find practical ways to improve the present. Again, thank you for inviting me to speak here with you today. I look forward to continuing to talk with banks and their representatives about banking issues.
Remarks by Governor Laurence H. Meyer At the Edinburgh Finance and Investment Seminar, Edinburgh, Scotland May 24, 2001 The Global Outlook and Challenges Facing Central Banks around the World While the pace of economic activity has slowed most sharply in the United States, growth has also slowed in many countries. As a central banker, my focus will be on the challenges this slowdown poses for monetary policymakers. These challenges vary around the world, reflecting differences in country-specific shocks, the extent of the spillovers from these shocks, and the way individual economies respond to common shocks. Monetary policy responses will also vary, even when confronted by the same circumstances, because of differences in the structure of our economies, differences in the mandates under which central banks operate, related differences in strategies that guide the implementation of their policies, and limits on the ability of some central banks to engage in expansionary policy. Let me note, before proceeding further, that the views I am presenting here are my own. I am not speaking for the Board of Governors or the Federal Open Market Committee. The Global Slowdown Before turning to the challenges faced by central banks, I want to set out my interpretation of the sources of, and the global nature of, the slowdown. I will begin by identifying the country-specific and common shocks that are at work and by considering the links that spread country-specific shocks around the world. The most obvious interpretation of the global slowdown is that it stems principally from a country-specific shock and spillovers from that shock around the world--specifically, the sharp slowdown under way in the United States. The principal traditional channel for spillover effects is trade, with the sharpest spillovers in the current case to countries with the highest ratios of exports to the United States relative to their incomes. The U.S. slowdown is, at the very least, a key ingredient in the global slowdown. But let me offer several other interpretations, as alternatives or perhaps more as complements. Another explanation for the global slowdown is that there has been a coincidence of common adverse shocks. The most obvious is the rise in oil prices. Though this shock affects all countries, the effect on each country differs depending on the relative balance between oil production and consumption. This is an example of how common shocks can have different effects across countries. Two other potential common shocks are the global equity correction and the global retrenchment in high-tech investment. The effects of these shocks would also differ across countries depending, for example, on the size of market capitalization relative to gross domestic product for the equity correction and the share of high-tech production to GDP for the retrenchment in high-tech investment. The question with respect to the latter two shocks is whether they truly represent common shocks, or instead are better understood as country-specific shocks with spillover effects elsewhere. In this case, the shocks are a U.S. equity correction and a U.S. retrenchment in high-tech investment with spillovers to equity markets and high-tech production around the world. Indeed, one may wonder whether these two shocks--whether common or country-specific--are really independent. To an important extent, it was a revision to tech-sector prospects that led equity prices lower. A third source of the global slowdown is specific shocks that have occurred in other countries, in addition to those hitting the United States. I mention this because I don't want the United States to take all the credit. In particular, I believe that some of the credit should be shared with Japan and perhaps also with the emerging Asian economies. In the final analysis, the global slowdown is the result of some combination of country-specific shocks, spillovers from the country-specific shocks, and truly common shocks. As I noted earlier, the shape of the global slowdown will also be affected by the ability and willingness of the policymakers to respond to that slowdown and the effectiveness of those responses. Some countries, for example, are already benefiting from fortuitously timed fiscal stimulus this year and, in other cases, they are considering fiscal packages. Monetary policy has responded in a timely fashion in the United States and some other countries. In contrast, because macro policy options are more limited in Japan, the effects of adverse common shocks or spillovers from other countries will be larger there than they would be the if the Japanese had more flexibility to act. Several important linkages help transmit country-specific shocks around the world. Models typically focus on trade effects, particularly through the income-induced decline in imports by the country slowing down. This spillover from the United States is clearly greatest in the current case for Mexico and Canada, given that most of their exports go to the United States. The global retrenchment in the high-tech sector has magnified the effect of the U.S. slowdown on Japan and in emerging Asia and has added to their homegrown troubles. The high-tech retrenchment, on the other hand, has been less important for the euro area and in Latin America. The next linkage is through exchange rate movements. To a first approximation, exchange rate developments do not affect the magnitude of the slowdown, but they do affect the distribution of the slowdown around the world. Normally, we would expect the exchange rate in the country slowing down to depreciate, more so if the country was aggressively cutting policy interest rates. And, we would expect even more depreciation, if concerns about returns on capital were sharply depressing equity prices. The income-induced decline in interest rates, and hence depreciation in exchange rates, ordinarily plays the role of a built-in stabilizer in the country slowing down, but it also spreads the slowdown around the world. One of the surprising features of recent experience has been the continued appreciation of the dollar. The appreciation of the dollar relative to the yen is perhaps not so surprising, given the troubles in Japan, but the continued strength of the dollar in terms of the euro is a puzzle. The prevailing view until late 2000 was that the U.S. dollar was strong against a broad group of currencies--and especially against the euro and several other European currencies--because, to a large degree, internationally mobile capital sought higher rates of return in the United States. Following this logic, a slowing of the U.S. economy, a decline in expected profits, and a correction of asset prices should have weakened the dollar. I hesitate to offer a resolution to the puzzle of the depreciation that did not happen, given that I was among those who expected a depreciation of the dollar under these circumstances. Nevertheless, economists are much better at inventing explanations of past developments than predicting the future, so here goes. The current slowdown in the United States is expected to be only temporary and capital flows may be influenced more by differentials in long-term growth prospects than by shorter-run cyclical fluctuations. The prospect of a return to robust growth in the United States that is above the longer-run expected rate of growth in Europe may therefore continue to favor dollar-denominated assets. Indeed, this may be reinforced by the fact that dollar-denominated assets have become so much cheaper. Proponents of this view cite the continued need for significant progress in several core euro-area countries on structural reform, especially in labor markets, as an indication that the euro area may not be on the verge of an acceleration in productivity to close the growth gap with the United States. In any case, the continued appreciation of the dollar not only has dampened the normal offset from net exports to a slowdown in the U.S. economy, but it also has reduced the spillover from the U.S. economy to the euro area. Even though exchange rate movements have thus far tended to damp rather than reinforce the direct-trade effects, the spillover from the U.S. slowdown to global growth seems to me larger than expected, not smaller. It may simply be that it is difficult to disentangle the common shocks from the country-specific shocks and that the other country-specific shocks and the common shocks are strongly reinforcing the effect of the U.S. slowdown. But the apparent strength of the spillover from the U.S. slowdown may also suggest the existence of important additional linkages beyond the income and exchange rate induced changes in trade. These additional linkages most likely arise directly and indirectly, at least in part, from the increasingly tight connection among financial markets and the resulting synchronization of the global equity correction, as well as from the effect of the global equity correction on consumer and business confidence around the world. The tighter connection across global equity markets, in turn, may reflect the growing importance of cross-border capital flows, of multinational firms, of foreign direct investment, and of income flows from the accumulated stock of foreign direct investments. For example, the gross cross-border investment position of the United States grew at an annual rate of almost 19 percent per year during the second half of the 1990s--more than three times the growth rate for nominal gross domestic product. And annual gross direct investment capital flows (inflows plus outflows) have risen from 1-3/4 percent of GDP in 1993 to over 6 percent in 1999. The income flows from accumulated direct investments have almost doubled between 1993 and 1999, although it remains a little less than 1-1/4 percent of GDP. Finally, the importance of international firms has increased over the same time period and the correlation among the share prices of international firms is somewhat higher than for domestic firms. The global equity correction, in any case, means that negative wealth effects are shared around the world. However, in most countries the stock market capitalization relative to GDP is decidedly lower than in the United States, resulting in generally much more modest effects on aggregate demand for given percentage declines in wealth. The exceptions to this rule are Canada and the United Kingdom. One recurring theme has been the expectation that the euro area will be relatively insulated from the effects of country-specific and common shocks. The euro area, for example, has only modest trade links to the United States (minimizing the direct trade spillover from the United States), has benefited from a depreciation of the euro (further mitigating any trade effect), has a relatively modest market capitalization to GDP (minimizing either the spillover from the U.S. equity market correction or the effect of the global equity correction), and has a relatively modest share of high-tech production to GDP (minimizing the effect from the global retrenchment in high-tech investment). Nevertheless, while these channels have muted the slowdown in the euro area, they have not eliminated it. Now let me turn to the risks. The greatest risk, in my view, would arise from a sharper-than-expected slowdown in the United States--either an outright recession or a more persistent period of very low growth. A second risk--and this might well be part of the story behind the first--would be an aggravation of the current slowdown in the United States and globally as slower growth triggered an abrupt unwinding of pre-existing financial and other imbalances. This is the story that typically lies behind more severe downturns. One important possible imbalance is a capital stock "overhang" in the information technology sector, especially in the United States, but to a lesser degree in a few other countries as well. In this case, the continuing retrenchment in high-tech investment could suppress economic growth for a longer period. Another possible imbalance that continues to receive a lot of attention around the world is the large and still rising U.S. current account deficit. That deficit is, of course, simply the other side of the massive capital flows to the United States to take advantage of the higher perceived return there. The most benign adjustment would be for the euro area and other countries to benefit from an acceleration in productivity, much as the United Sates has enjoyed. This would lead to a reversal of capital flows and depreciation of the dollar, with income and relative price effects contributing to a moderation in the U.S. current account deficit. But the adjustment would be more manageable in the context of higher global growth, especially compared to an adjustment through a marked compression of imports, should U.S. income decline. A third global risk is the threat of financial instability in Japan. The renewed weakness of the Japanese economy, coming at a time when macro policy options are limited, is putting additional pressure on the Japanese banking and financial system. There is danger that a price will be paid--in Japan and globally--for the failure to move more decisively to resolve these problems. Another global risk is financial instability among emerging market economies. To date, jitters among emerging market economies have reflected idiosyncratic factors, for example, in Turkey and in Argentina. And there has been progress since the Asian financial crisis. In particular, most emerging market economies have moved to flexible exchange rates, and many have higher official reserves as well. Asian developing economies have current account surpluses instead of deficits and are less reliant on short-term foreign borrowing. But unfinished business remains--specifically a failure to deal decisively with financial sector weakness. Thus, a sharper slowdown among these countries could trigger further financial difficulties. The U.S. Story Given that the United States is playing such an important role in the global slowdown, and given that I should be expected to know more about the United States than about the rest of the world, let me spend a few minutes assessing the sources of the U.S. slowdown. That story begins with the period of exceptional economic performance from the end of 1995 through mid-2000. The driving force appears to have been a dramatic acceleration in productivity. After averaging 1-1/2 percent per year from the early 1970s through the mid-1990s, underlying productivity growth appears to have risen to 2-1/2 percent to 3 percent. The productivity shock set off a complex, dynamic response. First, it boosted aggregate demand as well as aggregate supply, indeed to the point that demand grew consistently faster than the new higher rate of growth of potential supply throughout this period. This demand effect was due to the simultaneous consumption and investment booms encouraged by the acceleration in productivity. The investment boom was a response to the profit opportunities associated with innovations, particularly in information technology. The consumption boom was due in part to a surge in equity prices, which was also a response to expectations of higher profitability. The acceleration in productivity also had a persistent, but ultimately temporary, disinflationary effect. As wages responded with a lag to higher productivity growth, unit labor costs fell, profits rose, and then competitive pressures passed along the lower costs to lower prices. In effect, the short-run non-accelerating-inflation rate of unemployment (NAIRU) declined, allowing above-trend growth to lower the unemployment rate without putting upward pressure on inflation. But both the demand and disinflationary effects are temporary. Once productivity growth stabilizes, even at a much-elevated level, these forces dissipate, growth slows, and pressures on prices might intensify. At some point, therefore, the economy faces the potential for overheating and higher inflation, at least if utilization rates remained at levels that are not sustainable in the longer run. So why did the economy slow so sharply? First, it slowed because the Federal Reserve was committed to achieving a better balance between the growth of aggregate demand and supply. By mid-1999, the above-trend growth had lowered the unemployment rate to a 30-year low of 4-1/4 percent, and there was concern that continued above-trend growth and still lower unemployment rates would be inconsistent with maintaining steady inflation. This motivated the Federal Reserve's gradual increase in the federal funds rate from mid-1999 to mid-2000, which cumulated to 175 basis points. From my perspective, it was essential to slow the economy at least to trend, preventing further increases in utilization rates. Indeed, some, including myself, believed it might be necessary to slow the economy to slightly below trend for a while to further reduce the risk of inflationary imbalances. By mid-2000, it appeared that growth was slowing to trend, so the Fed refrained from further tightening. By the fall, it appeared that growth had slowed to modestly below trend, also an acceptable outcome, in my view. So why did growth slow more sharply than that? The explanation is, I believe, a coincidence of adverse shocks that reinforced the effect of tighter monetary policy. These shocks included the rise in energy prices, an apparent stabilization in productivity growth, an increase in credit-risk spreads in the bond market, a tightening of credit standards at banks, the equity correction, and the retrenchment in high-tech investment. The latter four developments were, in part, a response to monetary policy tightening and the associated prospects of slower growth, but the magnitude of the responses were in each case out of proportion to the degree of tightening. The outsized responses in equity prices and high-tech investment presumably reflected an abrupt unwinding of pre-existing imbalances. Such a process is often an important contributor to the severity of cyclical slowdowns. Let me elaborate on the roles of productivity, equity prices and high-tech investment. The fate of these variables is, of course, very interconnected, and they have collectively played a dominant role both during the period of exceptional growth and the slowdown. Structural productivity growth appeared to rise year after year, from the end of 1992 through the beginning of 2000. It was the continuing rise in the growth rate of productivity that led to sustaining the temporary bonuses that took the form of higher demand and lower inflation. Once productivity growth stabilized, these bonuses were destined to dissipate, so the apparent stabilization of structural productivity growth in 2000 may have contributed to both the slower demand and to some upward pressure on inflation. The period of accelerating productivity was accompanied by a surge in equity prices--especially for high-tech firms--and a frenzy of high-tech investment spending to take advantage of new profitable opportunities. In each case, it appears--no doubt, more clearly in retrospect--that there were speculative excesses that would, at some point, be corrected. In such a circumstance, monetary policy could turn out to be a blunt instrument. It would have been an extraordinary achievement to fine tune a slowdown to prevent or unwind an imbalance between aggregate demand and aggregate supply without a risk of triggering an abrupt unwinding of these sectoral or market imbalances. Monetary policy, therefore, had to be alert to the possibility that the slowdown would be more severe than sought and that policy might, in such a circumstance, have to quickly reverse direction. This is precisely what we have done. Once demand slowed so sharply, the normal inventory cycle came into play. The inventory correction may, in this case, be sharper and shorter than usual. Production in the "new economy," can respond more quickly to signs of slower demand and emerging inventory building. But the slowdown has "new economy" written all over it in other ways as well. The equity correction, for example, is a product, in part, of excesses that accumulated during the economy's earlier adjustment to the productivity acceleration. In this case, the decline in equity prices is more than a cyclical correction and more likely a longer-lasting reappraisal of fundamental value and risk. And the retrenchment in high-tech investment also reflects the downside of the frenzy of investment during the early stages of the productivity acceleration. None of these developments suggests that the productivity acceleration was a mirage. Indeed, most observers are confident that productivity growth will remain elevated and that the continued pace of innovations will, in time, contribute to a solid rebound in investment. Still, it is true that some will have confidence in the structural productivity story only when it is tested by a cyclical decline. And the sharp deterioration in equipment spending, concentrated in the high-tech sector, is likely to take a little edge off structural productivity growth by slowing the contribution from capital deepening. Most important, the drag on consumption from the negative wealth effect and on investment as the past excesses in high-tech investment spending unwind will continue to be a drag on growth, even after the inventory liquidation has run its course. But, as the effect of the recent easing takes hold, as fiscal stimulus complements monetary stimulus, as energy prices perhaps decline a bit, and as the still-rapid pace of innovation rekindles the appetite for new capital goods, growth should gradually recover, and the economy should gradually return toward trend growth. Challenges Facing Central Banks around the World Returning to the theme I opened with, monetary policies around the world can differ because of differences in country-specific shocks, differences in how economies respond to common shocks, differences in initial conditions, and differences in central bank mandates and strategies. As I have already mentioned, the challenges faced by monetary policymakers in the United States reflect the specific shocks in the United States and the unique initial conditions we faced. Before the slowdown, output was arguably above potential, growth was above trend, and inflation was edging up. These initial conditions motivated the monetary policy tightening. Because the Fed operates under a dual mandate, we are responsible for promoting both price stability and full employment. We have been quick and aggressive in responding to what we viewed as a threat of a slowdown that was steeper than necessary to contain inflation, and the risks remain tilted in that direction. But we have to remember both halves of the dual mandate. Given that labor markets remain tight, that inflation remains above the rate that I would find acceptable over the longer run, and that core inflation has been edging higher, attention must also be given to calibrating the easing to avoid overshooting in the other direction in a way that ends up adding to price pressures as growth strengthens. The challenge in the euro area is different in some important ways. First, as I noted, the euro area has been insulated to a degree from the U.S slowdown by its modest trade links with the United States, and, in addition, faces smaller negative wealth effects and a more modest retrenchment in high-tech investment than does the United States. However, considerable uncertainty remains about the prospects for growth, and there are some indications that growth may be slowing more sharply than expected, undoubtedly contributing to the recent easing by the European Central Bank. Second, the initial conditions in the euro area were different than in the United States. Growth in the euro area was also above trend, but output was below potential, though the gap was generally thought to be small and closing. A slowing of growth to trend would mitigate the risk of overheating and would be an acceptable outcome. Some, to be sure, have called for a more accommodative policy to take advantage of, or test for, an acceleration in productivity growth. But central banks are cautious creatures and need to see signs of higher productivity growth before moving to accommodate higher growth in supply. Perhaps the more interesting question is whether the differences in monetary policy between the Fed and the ECB reflect not only differences in economic circumstances but also differences in how these two central banks would respond to a similar set of circumstances. In particular, do differences in the mandates under which the two central banks operate, and related differences in their strategies, also contribute to different policy outcomes? The ECB, like most inflation-targeting central banks, has a hierarchical mandate, different from the dual mandate in the United States. Under hierarchical mandates, price stability or low inflation is typically the primary objective and other objectives can be pursued only once the inflation objective has been achieved. The ranking of objectives contrasts with a dual mandate, under which neither of the two objectives takes precedence over the other. A second difference is that the ECB has an explicit numerical inflation objective, whereas the Federal Reserve has a less precisely defined objective of price stability. However, what appear as differences in principle may not always lead to differences in practice. For example, there may be little if any difference between the dual mandate and hierarchical mandate when it comes to the response by monetary policymakers to demand shocks. Demand shocks move output and inflation in the same direction. Under both mandates, policymakers may respond in the same direction and with the same intensity. By stabilizing output relative to full employment, policy under both mandates would also stabilize inflation. Supply shocks, on the other hand, move output and inflation in different directions, so that it does matter in this case whether or not policymakers directly respond to output gaps as well as deviations of inflation from its target. But if the inflation target is a forward-looking or a medium-term objective, policymakers will opt for a gradual return of inflation to its medium-term objective under both mandates and the difference in policy responses under the two mandates will be diminished. A second difference related to mandates and strategies is the precision and details of the price-stability objective. The ECB has an explicit medium-term numerical inflation objective--inflation less than 2 percent (but not less than zero)--while the Fed has a price stability objective but no explicit numerical objective. One would expect that the more precise the price-stability objective, the less flexibility policymakers will have to respond to demand or supply shocks. Indeed, this may be the purpose of such a precise definition; that is, a more precise definition may promote greater credibility about the commitment to price stability. While the ultimate determinant of credibility is surely performance, in the absence of a historical record to support its credibility, the ECB may benefit importantly from the credibility associated with its more precise definition. A less-precise definition, on the other hand, allows more flexibility in the response to shocks. Another aspect of the ECB inflation objective could be relevant. By defining the objective as inflation of less than 2 percent, the ECB appears to have an asymmetric inflation objective. For the ECB, 2 percent is the ceiling, not a midpoint of acceptable inflation outcomes. If inflation (or more precisely, the inflation forecast) rises above 2 percent, their strategy clearly dictates that monetary policy tighten. But if inflation falls below 2 percent, the ECB is not under the same pressure to ease--at least until inflation (or the forecast) threatens to fall below zero. I believe the most important considerations behind the different monetary policies pursued by the FOMC and the ECB are due to differences in circumstances--differences in initial conditions and differences in the mix and intensities of supply and demand shocks. Nevertheless, the differences in mandates and strategies likely also matter and lead to the two central banks, in effect, selecting different points along the trade off between output variability and inflation variability--with the ECB opting for lower inflation variability at the expense of somewhat higher output variability. The Bank of Japan has a unique challenge. Initial conditions in Japan are very different from either the United States or the euro area, and there are, in addition, severe limitations on the ability of monetary policy to respond conventionally to downward shocks to demand. Output is well below potential, there is ongoing deflation, and growth has been stagnant for a long period. Monetary policy responded by lowering the nominal policy interest rate to zero, exhausting the conventional opportunities for additional stimulus. Yet, the economy remains weak and further monetary stimulus would be welcome. This is especially true given concerns about the sustainability of their fiscal position--very large deficits and a very high and rising ratio of government debt to income. A spillover from the United States and the global slowdown will therefore have a sharper effect on Japan, to the extent that its monetary policy is unable to respond. However, even once the policy rate has been driven to zero, there is a potential for additional stimulus from monetary policy--from so-called unconventional operations, though there is considerable uncertainty about their effectiveness. In principle, this additional stimulus can be imparted by monetary policy operations in longer-term government or even private securities. The channels for the increased stimulus work through the imperfect substitutability of assets and expectations about future monetary policies. Such operations could lower long-term rates relative to short-term rates, lower private rates relative to government rates, result in a depreciation of the yen, extend the expectations of lower short-term rates over a longer period, and lead to expectations of higher inflation in the future. The Bank of Japan recently changed its operating procedure--from targeting an overnight interest rate to targeting the level of bank reserve balances at the Bank of Japan. In practical terms, this marked a return to the zero interest rate policy by targeting the level of reserves that had been held when they had been operating earlier at a zero interest rate. However, the new operating procedure provides the flexibility to move toward a more aggressive monetization strategy, should it opt to move in this direction, without having to change its operating strategy. Monetary policymakers in Japan have appeared to be reluctant, to pursue a bolder monetization strategy for several reasons. First, it might alter the incentives for fiscal policy, encouraging a delay in fiscal consolidation. This highlights a fundamental policy problem in Japan--tensions between the rest of government, principally the Ministry of Finance, and the independent central bank. The result is a noncooperative solution that may preclude important opportunities for improved policy. Second, a policy of aggressive monetization might have its principal stimulative effects through depreciation of the yen. Without a consensus within Japan and a tolerance of such a development among Japan's major trading partners, it would be best to proceed cautiously with such a policy. Third, a monetization strategy alone is unlikely to sustain anything other than anemic growth in Japan. What is needed is a combination policy that includes a real effort to resolve the banking problems, to deal with corporate debt, and to open markets to domestic and international competition. Footnotes The data on direct investment are from the IMF's Balance of Payments database and cover about 80 percent of the world. In making these calculations, an "international" firm was defined as one for whom 25 percent or more of total sales came from abroad in at least one year during the 1996-98 period. The ECB does not consider its policy as an inflation-targeting regime. It distinguishes its approach as a two-pillar strategy that includes a focus on money growth as well as on a medium-term inflation objective. Still, its approach has much in common with that of inflation-targeting regimes. Of course, even for a dual mandate, low inflation is the only long-run objective, assuming that monetary policy cannot affect the long-run levels of output and employment.
For immediate release
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board is requesting comment on a proposed interim policy statement and a package of short- and long-term proposals pertaining to its Payments System Risk (PSR) policy. In addition, the Board is rescinding the interaffiliate transfer policy. The proposed actions take into account the significant changes that have occurred in the banking, payments, and regulatory environment in recent years and reflect ongoing efforts by the Board to balance the costs, risks, and benefits associated with the provision of Federal Reserve intraday credit. More specifically, the Board is issuing and requesting comment on an interim policy that allows depository institutions with self-assessed net debit caps to pledge collateral voluntarily to the Federal Reserve Banks to gain access to daylight credit in excess of their net debit caps. The interim policy should provide flexibility to depository institutions in meeting any increased intraday liquidity needs brought about by payment system initiatives. The interim policy is effective immediately, with comments due by August 6, 2001. The Board is also requesting comment on other potential changes to its PSR policy. In particular, the Board proposes to increase the percent of capital used in the net debit cap calculation for most U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks, modify the posting time of electronic check presentments to depository institutions' Federal Reserve accounts for purposes of measuring daylight overdrafts, and retain the current book-entry securities transfer limit. Comment is requested by August 6, 2001. In addition, the Board is requesting comment on the benefits and drawbacks to several potential longer-term changes to its PSR policy, including lowering self-assessed net debit caps, eliminating the two-week average caps, implementing differential pricing for collateralized and uncollateralized daylight overdrafts, and rejecting payments with settlement-day finality that would cause an institution to exceed its daylight overdraft capacity level. Comment is requested by October 1, 2001. Finally, the Board is rescinding its interaffiliate transfer policy, effective January 1, 2002. The Board believes that the risks associated with the interaffiliate transfer policy are appropriately addressed through the existing supervisory process. The Board's notices are attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the settlement of its administrative enforcement proceeding against Incus Co., Ltd. and Carlos Hank Rhon of Mexico City, Mexico, Incus's registered owner. Incus, a bank holding company chartered in the British Virgin Islands, owns a majority of Laredo National Bancshares, the parent of Laredo National Bank and South Texas National Bank, all of which are in Laredo, Texas. Incus and Hank Rhon have agreed that: they will pay to the U.S. Treasury $10.75 million now and an additional $29.25 million within the next seven years; Incus's shares of Laredo National Bancshares will be placed into a voting trust. Independent trustees, proposed by Incus and Hank Rhon and approved by the Board, will vote the shares; Hank Rhon will resign as chairman of the board and a director of Laredo National Bancshares and will not be otherwise involved in its management or operation. He also has agreed not to serve in those capacities or as a controlling shareholder with other banking organizations in the United States, without the Board's prior approval. The settlement is enforceable under the Board's cease-and-desist and civil money penalty authority. The Board's Notice of Charges, issued in December 1998, alleged that Incus and Hank Rhon had committed various violations of the Bank Holding Company Act, the Change in Bank Control Act, and other laws involving the ownership of Incus and Laredo National Bancshares, and involving lending transactions at Laredo National Bank. Incus and Hank Rhon have denied that they committed the violations alleged in the Notice of Charges. The settlement does not relate in any manner to the condition of Laredo National Bank or South Texas National Bank. A copy of the settlement is attached.