For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today released the following statement from Governor Edward W. Kelley, Jr., announcing his plans to resign from the Board after at least one of the current vacancies is filled. Kelley said he will submit a formal letter of resignation to the President when an additional Governor has been nominated and confirmed, and is at work at the Board. "After fourteen highly rewarding years of service on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, I want to focus on family and other interests. I intend to resign but I will remain at the Board for as long as necessary to accommodate the need for a minimum of five active members. I am announcing my plans now to provide substantial notice to my colleagues and the Administration and to facilitate scheduling the work of the Board over the period ahead. It has been a great privilege to be a part of the Federal Reserve System, an institution for which I have the most profound respect. I look forward to working in the coming months with my friends on the Board and the staff, and in the Reserve Banks, to accomplish the continuing work of the organization and ensure a smooth transition." Kelley, 69, was first appointed to the Board by President Reagan, taking office on May 26, 1987. President Bush reappointed him in 1990 to a term that expires on January 31, 2004. The Board of Governors consists of seven members but it has been operating with two vacancies since July 1999.
Remarks by Governor Laurence H. Meyer Before the New York Association for Business Economics and The Downtown Economists, New York June 6, 2001 What Happened to the New Economy? In 1995, the growth rate of the gross domestic product was close to the prevailing estimate of trend, the unemployment rate was close to the prevailing estimate of the non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment (NAIRU), and inflation was modest. I am reviewing this bit of recent history just to set the stage for my arrival on the Board of Governors in mid-1996. What did the challenges facing monetary policy look like, and what did they turn out to be? The contrast is remarkable. When I joined the Board, the statement I made at my very first Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting was that, although economic performance had been very good--perhaps the first-ever soft landing--it would be a challenge to sustain that performance, and we certainly shouldn't expect it to get any better. Without a doubt, that was my worst forecast. In fact, as you all know well, the economy's performance did improve, dramatically, over the next four years. I have often described the ensuing reaction of the FOMC. First, we celebrated. Second, we gracefully accepted a share of the credit. Third--and in terms of time expended, this swamped all the others--we struggled to understand why performance had turned out to be so exceptional and what this explanation implied for the appropriate conduct of monetary policy. In the private sector, I learned that if you made a bad forecast, clients were more forgiving if, as a result, they ended up richer than they expected rather than poorer. So we struggled to understand the unexpected performance at the same time that we were accepting accolades for our contribution to the outcome, if not for our forecasting acumen. In my view, monetary policy played a modest but nevertheless important role. First, we contributed to a very good set of initial conditions as the economy entered 1996--the soft landing I mentioned. Low, stable inflation and steady growth facilitated good private decisionmaking and minimized economic distortions. Second, during the unexpected performance that followed, we adapted policy along the way, essentially accommodating, or at least not interfering with, the dynamism associated with a wave of innovation and entrepreneurial activity. One reason that I am beginning with this nostalgia is to focus on the exceptional performance of 1996 through mid-2000 and take your minds off the more recent travails of the economy. But I certainly understood that the time would come when monetary policymakers would find it challenging to keep the economy on a favorable course--as we had been briefly challenged in 1998. Indeed, last October, I said a transition to slower growth was likely already under way. When I first drafted that talk, I focused on the two sides of the economy's adjustment to a dramatic acceleration of productivity. The first I called the bright side. This side pertained to the period when households and businesses were just waking up to the new, more pleasant range of macroeconomic possibilities. This phase was dominated by above-trend growth, rising utilization rates, and steady-to-declining inflation. My focus in October was on what I called the transition to the other side. This is the side that arrives when productivity growth stabilizes and the temporary demand and disinflationary effects that flowed from the rising rate of productivity growth begin to dissipate. This period would be characterized by below-trend growth, rising unemployment, and, I suspected, some rise in inflation. My editors chided me for a lack of elegance as well as a lack of symmetry. If I characterized the first side as "bright," they noted, I should describe the other as "dark." I said, thanks, but no thanks. Fed governors don't talk about dark sides. In addition, while I saw the risk of a sharper-than-anticipated slowdown, I didn't view the other side as inevitably "dark." In any case, I wanted to note the positive possibilities--specifically, a benign outcome. So I focused on the possibility of another soft landing--though one different from the earlier one. The soft landing in this case--what I have called a reverse soft landing--would have to be one engineered by slowing the economy to modestly below trend growth for a period, returning to its potential level of output from above rather than below. The evidence available at the time simply did not foreshadow the rapid and dramatic swing from the earlier exceptional performance to flirtation with recession, which has been accompanied by an equally dramatic change in the national mood--from extraordinary optimism, indeed exuberance, to the current degree of concern. Much of the earlier optimism was linked to perceived fundamental changes in the economy, often summed up by the term "new economy." So the dramatic reversal in at least near-term prospects, and in the prevailing mood, raises the question: What happened to the new economy? I have chosen this as the theme for my remarks this afternoon. As I often do, I will organize my remarks as responses to several questions. First, do we, or did we, have a new economy? Second, is there is a historical precedent for the recent experience--a boom associated with a bunching of innovations followed by a period of adjustment in both financial markets and real investment? Third, returning to the specifics of the current episode, why did the economy make such an abrupt transition from exceptional performance to sharply lower growth? Fourth, assuming we were in one to begin with, what happened to the new economy? And, finally, what can we learn from this experience to help us in meeting the challenges facing monetary policy today? Let me also remind you, before proceeding further, that the views I am presenting this afternoon on the economic outlook and challenges facing monetary policy are my own and I am not speaking for the Board of Governors or the FOMC. I. Is There, or Was There, a New Economy? Is there a "new economy"? I always told my students to answer such questions decisively. I said, "Do not leave the grader in doubt about whether the answer is (as is the apparent choice here) yes or no." Indeed, the answer to the question "Is there a new economy?" is (or at least was) very clear: It depends! It depends on how you define new economy and where you live. If you use the narrow definition that I prefer and you live in the United States, the answer, I believe is, yes, we are in a new economy. The narrow definition identifies the new economy with the dramatic acceleration in productivity tied, to an important degree, to innovations in information technology. Productivity refers to output per hour, and it is perhaps the single most important determinant of economic well-being, closely related to real income per capita. But perhaps we should say, we are in a new economy again--that is, another period, like others over the long span of American economic history, during which a bunching of innovations has propelled the economy to a higher rate of growth for a while. The acceleration in productivity set off complex dynamics. First, it encouraged an investment boom to take advantage of new profit opportunities provided by technological advances and a consumption boom in response both to expectations of more-rapid growth of labor income and to the surge in equity values that reflected optimism about higher earnings growth. Growth soared, not just by an amount that paralleled the faster growth in supply, but for a while by more, thanks to the simultaneous consumption and investment booms. As a result, the unemployment rate moved progressively lower. At the same time, the higher rate of productivity growth meant a lower cost of production for a given level of wages. That initially boosted profits. But this was quickly followed by a disinflationary virtuous cycle that allowed the economy to accommodate a progressively tighter labor market without an increase in inflation. As income and capital gains soared, tax revenues did too, reinforcing the effects of the 1990 and 1993 tax increases and the restraint on federal spending. In the end, tax revenues increased by more than could be explained by the higher income growth and the high level of capital gains, but those developments still played an important role in the dramatic swing from large deficits to burgeoning surpluses. The swing from deficit to surplus, in turn, kept interest rates lower than they otherwise would have been by freeing up real resources to sustain the investment boom. The United States was the only major country in which the dramatic surge in productivity was evident, so foreign capital flowed in to take advantage of profit opportunities here. The result was a steady appreciation of the dollar. Again we cannot fully explain the exchange-rate movements with the changes in the rates of return on bonds and physical capital, but these developments at least played an important role in the exchange-rate movements. The stronger dollar, in turn, helped contain inflation and, along with faster growth here than in other industrial countries, contributed to a rising trade and current account deficit. II. A New Economy Again One of my themes today is that we are in the new economy again. That is, instead of viewing the current experience as unique, it is probably better understood as a replay of earlier historical episodes in which a bunching of technological innovations ushered in periods of high productivity growth. My first task in developing support for this interpretation was to see whether the economic history of the United States can be viewed as a series of what I will call productivity cycles--meaning relatively long periods of higher and then lower productivity growth. If this is possible, then I can examine these cycles for regularities related to investment booms and equity price surges, followed by retrenchments in investment and corrections in equity values. I should note that whenever I come up with difficult assignments like this, I immediately turn to our staff to do the heavy lifting and, as usual, they didn't disappoint. I have to begin with some disclaimers. First, the pre-World War II data are not as good and not as detailed as the postwar data, and different researchers put forward competing sets of historical data. So uncertainty is greater when it comes to dating episodes, comparing amplitudes from one episode to another, and, especially, going beneath the surface to look at other details of the experience. Second, the results of the historical tour are intriguing but not definitive. I don't want to oversell, but I do think some earlier experiences help put recent developments in perspective. plots the level of labor productivity from 1889 to 2000 and presents a summary of productivity growth over some interesting sub-periods that were judgmentally identified. Average labor productivity growth over the entire period was 2 percent. So we have, of course, periods of above and below "average" productivity growth. From 1889 to 1995, the duration of the periods shown in the figures is ten to twenty-eight years, averaging about twenty-one years; leaving out the one short period, 1917 to 1927, the average duration of the other periods is twenty-four years. Labor productivity growth during the high-growth periods averaged just about 3 percent a year, compared to just over 1-1/2 percent per year during the slower-growth periods. This is interesting since we have transitioned from a long period of 1-1/2 percent growth, from 1973 to 1995, to high-end estimates of 3 percent today. Of course, high-growth periods need not necessarily have similar growth rates; and the same with low-growth periods. Each episode depends on the character of the innovations in play. To my eye, the suggest a sequence of waves in labor productivity, periods of rapid growth followed by periods of more sluggish growth. Also looking at a long period of U.S. history, but stopping before the acceleration in productivity in the second half of the 1990s, and focusing on growth in multifactor productivity, Professor Robert Gordon of Northwestern University has offered a different interpretation. He emphasized the "one big wave" of improvement in productivity growth that began in about 1913 and extended to about 1972, with especially rapid growth during the golden age between 1950 to 1972. He links this rapid growth in this period to the string of important innovations in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. However one parses the history of productivity growth, the charts for labor productivity and Gordon's analysis of multifactor productivity suggest that periods of more rapid productivity growth can be linked, at least loosely, to the pace of innovation. Although Gordon has, at least in his most recent analysis, reached a similar conclusion about the dimension and source of the recent productivity acceleration as many others, he has argued that the computer does not measure up to the great inventions of the past, including electricity, internal combustion engines, petrochemicals, plastics, pharmaceuticals, and communications. But that seems to be a more philosophical question--more about the welfare effects of innovations--than one about the contribution of innovations to measured productivity growth, investment booms and asset bubbles. In addition, the information technology boom importantly involves improvements to the production process. Thus, as Paul David and others have noted, the closest parallel to the information technology revolution might be the introduction of electrical machinery. And, with both the electric motor and information technology, there was a delay between the time of the innovation and the increase in productivity growth, as Paul David has documented. At any rate, even if twenty-five years in the future, we look back on recent developments and conclude that they were not as important as the innovations earlier in the twentieth century, the recent innovations would still have played a significant role in boosting measured productivity. Given the productivity resurgence of the late 1990s--and the patterns evident in the historical data--I believe that the recent data should be interpreted as part of another high-growth wave following a low-productivity-growth period. If I am right, then the critical question is, what forces underlie the high- and low-productivity periods? I don't want to exaggerate my ability to provide a definitive answer, but the story may be, as Gordon describes for the period of his one big wave, a "happy coincidence of innovations." That is, high-productivity periods reflect the influence of a bunching of technological innovations. Low-growth periods reflect the productivity performance in the absence of bunching or with considerably less of it. What are the regularities associated with periods of higher productivity growth? Not surprisingly, investment in the sectors in which the innovations are taking place surges, and the stock prices of firms in these industries soar. Also excesses tend to emerge, at least in these industries, followed by corrections. The excesses and corrections generally involve both valuations of firms and investment in the innovating industry. After the initial frenzy of investment spending to take advantage of the new opportunities, the industries sometimes become overcrowded, or at least profitability is significantly diminished for a while, resulting in failures of many firms and a retrenchment in investment. Several examples of important innovations provide some concrete illustrations of this adjustment to higher productivity growth. The first example is the development of the motor vehicle industry and its contribution to productivity after the First World War. Investment in motor vehicle production surged in the 1910s and early 1920s. Share prices soared. General Motors' share price, for example, increased 5,500 percent from 1914 to 1920. By the early 1920s the industry had become overcrowded. It appeared clear at this point that the auto companies would be unlikely to meet the overblown profit expectations that had prompted both the pace of investment in the industry and the surge in equity valuations for auto firms. Share prices plummeted, with GM losing two-thirds of its value. Radio is a very interesting case study. It took a long time to develop a successful business model for this innovation. The early innovators focused on point-to-point communication, and it took considerable time to move to a business model in which the advertisers would pay for programming. This pattern seems analogous to the struggle for a viable business model for the Internet. Broadcast radio developed in the early 1920s, but many innovators did not survive. Of the forty-eight stations that were the first in their states, twenty-seven were out of business by 1924. Later in the decade the industry grew and stock prices surged, with RCA jumping nearly twenty-fold from 1923 to 1929. Share prices fell during the Depression, but, unlike stock prices in many other industries, RCA's share price did not return to its pre-Depression peak for about three decades, suggesting that its earlier price represented a bubble. Other examples also illustrate excesses associated with new technologies. The development of electric utilities was another important source of productivity gains in the 1920s. Expansion and consolidation considerably boosted efficiencies in the industry during that decade, although signs of excess capacity were not evident. On the other hand, share prices of these firms soared, with a stunning run-up late in the decade. Share prices collapsed in the Great Depression, but again did not return to the pre-Depression peaks until the mid-1960s, suggesting again the possibility that a bubble had developed in the earlier period. Finally, we consider the airline industry. After Lindbergh's 1927 transatlantic flight, airline stocks soared, and many companies rushed into the business. Stock in a company called Seaboard Air Lines took off even though it was just a railway company, a phenomenon analogous to that of adding a dot-com suffix to company names in the late 1990s. Interestingly, none of our examples overlaps with the golden age. That period seems to be characterized by a broader range of smaller innovations and perhaps, therefore, did not appear to give rise to the same frenzy of investment activity or euphoria with respect to valuations. In the examples above, innovations generally resulted in investment booms in the innovating sector but not always in the broader economy. The innovations often seemed to result in bubbles in valuations in the innovating sector, but this did not necessarily dominate the equity valuations for the entire economy. After a period, the innovating sector often experienced a shakeout or retrenchment, though that didn't always dominate the macrodynamics of the entire economy. Nevertheless, in the examples in which booms were followed by retrenchments, the sector in question made important contributions to productivity long after the shakeout. III. Sustainability and the New Economy Let me now return to the present day and turn to the task of understanding the sharp slowdown under way and the particular features of recent experience that seem so central to understanding the forces at work. I refer here to the correction in equity prices and the retrenchment of investment, both of which are centered on the high-tech area. As we begin to ask the question, what happened to the new economy, many of you, I expect, may believe that the answer stands right in front of you. I mean, of course, the view that monetary policy killed the new economy. So let me begin the story of the slowdown where it started--that is, with monetary policy. An important question about the economic performance over the period from 1996 to mid-2000--and a question of key importance to monetary policymakers--was whether it was sustainable. To be sure, if the higher rate of productivity growth continued, growth could remain elevated compared to its average rate over the previous two decades. But even if the new, higher rate of structural productivity growth were to persist, could aggregate demand grow faster than the upward-revised rate of increase in supply, and could the unemployment rate fall indefinitely, without the economy overheating and inflation rising? In other words, did new-economy forces eliminate the risks of overheating and higher inflation that were so much a part of the "old" economy? My unambiguous answer was "no." And that answer was shared by the FOMC, motivating the monetary policy tightening that began in the middle of 1999. Given the uncertainties about a sustainable configuration of unemployment, output growth and inflation, we lacked a precise roadmap of where we needed to go. While we didn't know precisely what trend growth was, we knew for certain that growth had been persistently above trend--given the continuing decline in the unemployment rate from 1996 though mid-1999. So it seemed prudent to slow growth in an attempt to move toward trend and that, I believe, was the intent as monetary policy began to tighten in mid-1999. Some, at least, worried about a second set of concerns related to sustainability. Were prevailing equity valuations sustainable? If not, a correction could occur. Was the high and rising current account deficit sustainable? If not, the dollar could decline sharply. Was the increase in the ratio of debt service to income and the low, even negative, personal saving rate sustainable? If not, consumer spending could slow sharply. The late Herb Stein, a very wise economist, once said that if something isn't sustainable, it won't continue! But it is often the case that unsustainable developments do not spontaneously unwind. Instead, they often reverse or correct only when a change in behavior is triggered by some external event--for example, a global financial crisis, an unexpected policy development, or an unforeseen deterioration in broader conditions. IV. Why Such a Sharp Slowdown? Why did growth fall more sharply than anticipated and what does this tell us about the new economy? Sharp slowdowns are often the result of three inter-related and reinforcing developments: a coincidence of adverse shocks, an unwinding of pre-existing imbalances triggered by the deterioration in broader macroeconomic conditions, and a collapse in consumer and business confidence. The economy slowed in part, as I have noted, because monetary policy was committed to such an outcome. By mid-2000, it appeared that the economy, in response to the cumulative tightening over the previous year, was slowing toward trend. The Fed stopped tightening and private forecasters were projecting a "soft landing." By October and November, it appeared that the slowdown was taking growth modestly below trend. Given the supply-side uncertainties I noted earlier, this outcome also seemed acceptable. But late in the year, the economy decelerated more sharply and we now know that growth fell to about 1 percent in the fourth and first quarters and it appears to have remained sluggish into the second quarter. We did not, however, have the data in hand at the time of the December meeting to confirm the degree or persistence of the slowdown. The Blue Chip consensus forecast in December, for example, still projected 3 percent growth over 2001. The sharper slowdown reflected, in part, the contribution of several additional shocks that reinforced the effect of the monetary policy tightening. Energy prices rose throughout 1999 and 2000. Oil prices shot up in the fall and natural gas prices soared late last year just as oil prices began to recede. The higher energy prices undermined consumers' purchasing power. As interest rates rose and the economy slowed, lenders became more discriminating about the creditworthiness of borrowers, reflecting concern about borrowers' ability to service all the debt that they had accumulated during the earlier period of exceptional performance. The result was increased interest rates for lower-rated borrowers and tighter underwriting standards at banks. The decline in equity valuations for high-tech firms, the virtual closing of opportunities for initial public offerings, and the higher quality spreads for low-rated borrowers naturally hit start-up and new technology firms especially hard. Also, equity prices fell sharply, particularly technology stocks--with the NASDAQ now having declined nearly 60 percent and Internet stocks about 70 percent from their peaks. This is a perfect example of an unwinding of a pre-existing imbalance--in this case an unsustainable rise in equity values in the technology sector. The correction of equity prices presumably reflected, at least in part, a reevaluation of the profitability of owning and producing high-tech capital and software, a deterioration in the expected earnings of telecommunications firms, and a reappraisal of the earnings prospects of dot-com firms. These reassessments of the value of these firms had much to do with earlier developments in the industry and little to do with monetary policy or the overall slowdown in growth. The frenzy of investment spending undertaken to take advantage of the investment opportunities arising from advances in technology resulted in some investments that were successful and others that were not. This is a second example--one that was perhaps less noticed earlier--of the unwinding of an unsustainable trend. At any rate, a shakeout in the high-technology area and retrenchment of investment spending followed. As demand weakened, inventories accumulated, and firms moved to cut production--not just to a level supported by the slowdown in demand, but even lower to shed the excess inventories. Inventory corrections are typically central to the swings in activity that occur during recessions or sharp slowdowns. The current correction does, however, seem to have a new-economy flavor. Because information technology provided firms with a more rapid flow of information about current sales and inventories, they may have responded more quickly to developments. The result might be a sharper initial decline in production, but with less persistence than otherwise. Finally, even as forecasters did their best to identify the coincidence of adverse events that was slowing growth, the economy weakened more than expected. This is also a fairly typical development--a coincidence of forecast errors in the same direction across many spending categories--during periods of unusually strong or weak growth. It is often related to sharp swings in business and consumer confidence--swings that are larger than would have been predicted from the contemporaneous changes in employment, income, interest rates, and so forth. V. What Happened to the New Economy? So what happened to the new economy? The answer, I believe, is that we are still in the new economy (again). The shape of the slowdown has the new economy written all over it, just as the shape of the earlier expansion did. We could say that the new economy has suffered an old economy disease--if not a full-fledged recession, at least a close relative, a growth recession--as a result of the developments I just described. A growth recession refers to a period of below-trend growth during which the unemployment rate rises. But that misses the distinctive features of the current slowdown. So I think the story is that we turned from a period in which all the forces operating on the economy were lined up to produce exceptionally favorable performance to a period when the economy must adjust to some of the imbalances that built up in the earlier period. Our job as monetary policymakers is to try to ensure that the adjustment is not too jarring. But there has been pain. Many investors are understandably unhappy at their loss of wealth. So much of what had been accumulated in a few years has quickly disappeared, almost as mysteriously. In addition, many firms have gone bankrupt and others will, especially some of the riskier ventures in the technology sector. But these patterns seem to have historical precedent in the corrections of both equity values and investment that follow, after a lag, the transition to a period of higher productivity growth. Some might expect that new-economy developments would make recessions less likely. That is not an entirely unreasonable presumption. The experience among faster-growing European economies in the earlier postwar period was that these economies tended to have fewer quarters of declining output--the sine qua non of a recession as defined in the United States--than was the case in the slower-growing United States. Now that the United States had become a higher-growth economy (again), it might be that cyclical episodes would be more likely to be growth recessions and less likely to be outright recessions. However, in the United States in the 1950s and 1960s--when average growth rates were about as high as today--the chance of negative-growth quarters was about equal to the chance in the 1970s and 1980s, when average growth was only half as large. In addition, to the extent that the high-tech revolution increased the ability of firms to recognize and respond to changes in demand and quickly remedy unwanted inventory accumulation, the response of output to demand shocks might be less persistent. On the other hand, it appears that the high-tech revolution didn't help firms or other forecasters anticipate changes in demand. There is no guarantee that a higher-growth economy is less vulnerable to recessions. Indeed, I believe that the new-economy developments that have raised sustainable growth might also, at least initially, have made economic performance more volatile. First, I noted that the adjustment to a higher rate of productivity growth might bring a temporary surge in output, on top of the higher average growth rates, while at the same time lowering the rate of inflation. Such a remarkable performance, while bound to be temporary, nevertheless could easily encourage unsustainable expectations. Hence, the attempt to take advantage of new-economy forces prompted such a frenzy of investment activity that many bad, as well as good, investment decisions were made. Bad investments result in some firms going out of business and others suffering temporarily depressed profitability and therefore curtailing further expansion for a while. And, in part because the profit opportunities of new technology firms were so difficult to gauge, exuberance took valuations to levels that proved to be unsustainable. VI. Prospects Two sets of new-economy forces are likely to be especially important in determining the severity of the slowdown. The first is the length of the adjustment period required to complete the shakeout and absorb any excess capacity resulting from the high-technology investment boom. The second is the time it takes for the accumulation of investment opportunities arising from the continued flow of innovations to lead to a revival of investment spending. With respect to households, it appears inevitable that the decline in equity valuations will result in a negative wealth effect; as a result, growth in consumer spending is likely to remain below the pace of increase in income for a while. This will, over time, partially reverse the earlier decline in the saving rate. The other related key will be the degree to which declines in consumer confidence, perhaps under the influence of a softer labor market, undermine consumer spending. The consensus forecast remains quite optimistic. It calls for a weak first half--but no recession--and some improvement in the second half, on the way to trend growth next year. One reason for a relatively optimistic assessment of recovery is that monetary policy has eased promptly and aggressively to support aggregate demand. To date, this easing has had only a little effect on aggregate demand. That is not a statement about the lack of potency of monetary policy, only about the well-know lag in the response of aggregate demand to monetary policy action. Given this lag, monetary policy could provide limited support for the economy during the period when weakness was developing. But the response to the cumulative easing to date should begin to mount in the second half, and continue to build in 2002. Moreover, if expectations in futures markets are borne out, energy prices should be moving lower. In addition, fiscal stimulus is on the way. But the key to the strength and rapidity of the recovery will be the balance between the working off of excesses associated with new-economy forces that built up in 1999 and early 2000 and the renewal of investment as new-economy opportunities continue to accumulate. While a recovery along the lines of the consensus forecast is reasonable, I see some downside risks to that outlook. There are no signs yet that the economy is strengthening relative to its first-quarter performance and growth is likely to remain sluggish into the third quarter. In addition, it is unlikely that we will see a repeat of the exceptional performance from 1996 through mid-2000 on the other side of the slowdown. First, the temporary demand and disinflation that accrued during the initial adjustment to an acceleration in productivity--and that contributed to the exceptional performance earlier--may now be behind us. Second, we are unlikely to see a repeat of the unsustainable rise in equity prices or frenzied pace of investment, at least for a time. The events of the past year are likely to linger in the minds of many. VII. Challenges facing monetary policy Learning from experience is the key to good forecasting and good policymaking. Movements from low to high (or high to low) productivity growth set off complex dynamics that typically dominate macroeconomic experience for a period. We have relatively few historical examples, so policymakers have had to learn as they confronted the most recent productivity acceleration. Let me identify some of the lessons, or at least identify some of the questions, that we might be asking about the appropriate conduct of monetary policy. Monetary policy can become an especially blunt instrument during a period of a productivity acceleration, at least once imbalances and vulnerabilities build, as they seemed to have. Any attempt to slow growth in such an environment--necessary as it may be--can produce a discontinuous response after some point by triggering an abrupt unwinding of financial and other imbalances. Monetary policy has to be alert to the possibility of such a discontinuous change and be prepared to reverse course, as we have done. Some, including myself, may have over-weighted our concerns over resource utilization rates during the high-growth period but underestimated the dangers from growing imbalances in other areas. The productivity shock appears to have lowered the short-run NAIRU, allowing a period of above-trend growth to be accompanied by stable-to-declining inflation. But the absence of the emergence of inflationary pressures, and therefore of a rise in real interest rates to contain them, may have contributed to an environment in which asset bubbles and real investment excesses could develop. This is obviously an area that should and will receive attention by researchers in the years ahead. Other lessons, closely related to the point I just made, are some insights about the strategy for monetary policy from the Taylor rule. Three components guide the Taylor rule prescription: the equilibrium real rate, the output gap, and the deviation of inflation from its target. Recent experience teaches us that the Taylor rule is simple in principle but complex in practice. For example, measuring the output gap has been difficult. I believe it is the short-run rather than the long-run value of the NAIRU that should underpin the unemployment gap (a relative of the output gap used in this rule), but there are a wide range of estimates of the short-run NAIRU. Equally important, the assumption of a constant equilibrium real rate seems untenable, especially during a transition from low to higher productivity growth and during a time when the equity premium seems to have moved around so much. Finally, there may be a challenge on the other side of the coming rebound in growth that has to be taken into account in setting monetary policy. The slowdown began at a point when output may have been above potential, and output growth was clearly above the rate of growth in potential supply. In the consensus forecast, the economy converges in 2002 to something very close to trend growth at full employment. This aftermath is very different from the usual pattern of weakness in the economy, during which slack opens up, resulting in a prospect for continuing disinflation during the early years of the ensuing expansion. Because the slowdown started from a relatively low level of inflation, the desirability of a significant decrease in inflation rates is not as great as it has often been in the past. Still, given the initial conditions, we have to be concerned that as we ease to mitigate the risks of a persistent slowdown or recession we do not at the same time create conditions that would lead to higher inflation as the expansion gathers momentum. VIII. Conclusion As I noted earlier, it is always important to learn or relearn valuable lessons from experience. Recent developments have taught or re-taught us a number of such lessons. Equity prices can go down as well as up. Firms need profits to survive. Business cycles happen. And although we cannot always anticipate or counter these developments perfectly, monetary policy remains a potent tool to aid economic stabilization and maintain low inflation and thereby to promote long-term sustainable growth. Footnotes Through 1947, the data in charts 1and 2 are from Kendrick (1961). From 1947 forward, the data are from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. These historical examples draw heavily from Frank and Browning (2001), Gould (1946), Wessel (2001), and White (1990). See White (1990). References Bresnahan, Timothy F., and Daniel M.G. Raff, "Intra-Industry Heterogeneity and the Great Depression: The American Motor Vehicle Industry, 1929-1935," Journal of Economic History , vol. 51 (June 1991), pp. 317-31. David, Paul, "The Dynamo and the Computer: An Historical Perspective on the Modern Productivity Paradox," American Economic Review , vol. 80 (May 1990), Papers and Proceedings, pp. 355-61. Frank, Stephen E., and E.S. Browning, "A Year After the Peak: Bursting of the Tech Bubble Has a Familiar 'Pop' to It," Wall Street Journal , March 2, 2001, p. C1. Gordon, Robert J., "Does the "New Economy" Measure Up to the Great Innovations of the Past?" Journal of Economic Perspectives . Fall 2000, pp. 49-74. -----------, "Technology and Economic Performance in the American Economy," April 2001. -----------, "U.S. Economic Growth Since 1870: One Big Wave?" American Economic Review , vol. 89 (May 1999), Papers and Proceedings, pp. 123-28. Gould, Jacob Martin. Output and Productivity in the Electric and Gas Utilities, 1899-1942. New York: National Bureau of Economic Research, 1946. Kendrick, John W. Productivity Trends in the United States . Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research, 1961. Wessel, David, "E-Progress Depends on E-Profits," Wall Street Journal , January 11, 2001, p. A1. White, Eugene N., "The Stock Market Boom and Crash of 1929 Revisited," Journal of Economic Perspectives , vol. 4 (Spring 1990), pp. 67-83.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the appointments of Donald Kohn as Advisor to the Board for Monetary Policy in the Office of Board Members, Vincent Reinhart as Director of the Division of Monetary Affairs and Brian Madigan as a Deputy Director of the Division of Monetary Affairs, all effective July 2, 2001. Mr. Kohn will continue as secretary of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), with responsibility for briefing the Committee and for its announcements, minutes and transcripts. He holds a Ph.D. from the University of Michigan and served as financial economist for the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City before joining the Board's staff in 1975. Mr. Kohn has been the Director of the Division of Monetary Affairs since 1987 but is relinquishing management of the division and will focus on issues related to monetary policy. Mr. Reinhart joined the Federal Reserve Bank of New York in 1983 and moved to the Division of Monetary Affairs at the Board in 1988. He was named an officer of the Board in 1994 and was named Deputy Associate Director in 1998. In 1999, Mr. Reinhart transferred to the Division of International Finance where, as Deputy Director, he had responsibility for the sections for International Banking, Financial Markets, International Financial Transactions, and Trade and Quantitative Studies. He did his graduate studies at Columbia University. Mr. Madigan joined the Board's staff in 1979 as an economist in the Division of Research and Statistics. He was promoted to Senior Economist in 1984 and became chief of the banking section in 1985. In 1987, he was named an officer of the Board. In 1988, Mr. Madigan joined the Division of Monetary Affairs, and in 1993 was promoted to Associate Director. Mr. Madigan has a Ph.D. in Economics from The Pennsylvania State University.
Remarks by Governor Edward M. Gramlich Before the American Bankers Association, Stonier Memorial Address, Washington, D.C. June 11, 2001 Governor Gramlich presented identical remarks before the Money Marketeers of New York University, New York, June 12, 2001 National Saving and Treasury Debt It is by now commonplace to note that U.S. macroeconomic performance was very good in the late 1990s. The nation benefited from a productivity growth spurt that simultaneously raised real incomes, stock market valuations, the value of the dollar, and government revenues. The rise in revenues created the first federal budget surpluses the country has seen in some time, lowered federal interest payments, and improved the long-term finances of the Social Security and Medicare trust funds. The productivity growth spurt also held down unit labor costs, thereby improving the inflation-unemployment tradeoff. Since productivity is measured as the ratio of output to labor input, many things could in principle have caused such a growth spurt. But there is one factor that plays a strong role in macroeconomics textbooks, though it is little talked about in the financial press. The national saving rate is the portion of today's output that can be devoted to investment, which, by equipping workers with more capital, in turn feeds productivity growth and raises long-term living standards. Studies from Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) data suggest that half or more of the recent productivity growth spurt in the United States was due to capital deepening, with much of that facilitated by higher national saving. The numbers are shown in . Chart 1 shows that both national saving and investment rates for the United States have risen noticeably recently, even with the cyclical dips in the early part of 2001. As can be seen in the chart, there was a large inflow of foreign capital in recent years, reflected in the difference between investment and saving. This inflow from abroad financed part of the capital deepening and resultant productivity change. But even though foreigners financed part of the U.S. investment boom, national saving rates went up as well, keeping real interest rates low and investment strong. In that sense, higher rates of national saving are among the unsung heroes of the good U.S. economic performance in the late 1990s. What, in turn, brought about this higher national saving? Chart 2 disaggregates overall national saving rates into two components: nonfederal and federal government saving rates. Nonfederal saving rates declined fairly steadily during the late 1990s. This means that more than all of the increased national saving was due to higher federal government saving. The country managed to replace the high federal deficits (dissaving) of the 1980s and early 1990s with high federal surpluses (saving) in the late 1990s. Instead of soaking up private saving to finance rising Treasury debt, as happened in the 1980s and early 1990s, the federal government of the late 1990s paid down debt and freed up funds for private wealth holders to invest in real capital, which generated real productivity gains. The fact that the federal government is retiring its debt has received much attention, but from a macroeconomic point of view the central point is that the high rates of national saving, generated largely by the high federal surpluses, have led to high rates of real capital investment. In that sense it is misleading to think of the federal surpluses as surplus funds: They have served a very important macroeconomic purpose. Although retiring outstanding Treasury debt was not, in this view, the basic aim of fiscal policy, outstanding Treasury debt levels do matter. When outstanding Treasury debt levels are high, as for most of the 1990s, high federal government surpluses can lead simultaneously to high national saving and debt repayment, which work hand-in-hand. The national saving finances investment and vigorous economic growth. The Treasury debt retirement reduces interest payments and future spending burdens. But as the Treasury debt is retired, these easy choices vanish. Once the debt is retired, the government will have to accumulate private or foreign assets, creating possible problems, or stop its contribution to national saving. The nation will have reached a crossroads. The obvious policy of debt repayment will have been pursued as far as possible: Then the nation will confront a more difficult question involving asset accumulation. In fact, the government could do several things to keep national saving high in such circumstances. After examining the numbers to see how close the nation is to this fiscal crossroads, I discuss five possible ways in which the United States could deal with this strange and unfamiliar issue of vanishing Treasury debt. I say at the outset that no way is perfect, but some or all might be very sensible ways to keep national saving high if and when the Treasury debt is paid down. I also stress that in this analysis I am speaking only for myself. Will Treasury debt really be paid down soon? There is skepticism that the Treasury debt will ever be retired, and I am not predicting that it will be. But it is clear that outstanding debt is being reduced at rates that, if continued, will result in low debt levels in the foreseeable future. Even if present rates of debt retirement do not continue, it will not be long before it becomes costly, or perhaps unwise, to retire remaining portions of this debt. decomposes the $3.349 trillion of interest-bearing Treasury debt held by the public or central banks at the end of fiscal year 2000. This debt comes in two categories, marketable and nonmarketable. Examining the three categories of nonmarketable debt first, the biggest slice is the $178 billion of savings bonds, still being vigorously promoted by the Treasury because of their convenience as a saving vehicle for many individuals. These savings bonds are not likely to be retired to any significant degree soon, and could be increased. A minimal amount of nonmarketable bonds are held by foreign governments through reserve arrangements. And a large share of nonmarketable bonds is held by state and local governments in escrow accounts for tax reasons. Although the state and local tax arbitrage provisions have changed in a way that makes these bonds less important, it is still reasonable to suppose that the size of state and local holdings will not change significantly and that the overall amount of this nonmarketable Treasury debt will remain roughly at present levels. The part that can be more easily retired is the $2.993 trillion of marketable debt. Most of this debt is in relatively short-term maturities and can be retired simply by rolling it over when it comes due. But $420 billion held by the private sector matures after 2010, and some of it might be costly to retire if present holders require increasing premiums to part with the Treasury debt they value highly. It may also be unwise to retire this debt if it serves a valuable liquidity function for financial markets. A big set of holders of this marketable debt is central banks, here and abroad. The Federal Reserve System held $511 billion of this marketable debt, $70 billion of which matures after 2010. It has accumulated this debt in the process of expanding the base of money and reserves. The Fed can generate the monetary base in alternative ways that do not require Treasury securities, and it has already announced that it is studying several options for reducing its reliance on Treasuries. Foreign central banks, for which Treasury debt is a common international reserve asset, will need to make similar adjustments. looks at alternative budgetary prospects. I assume that the nonmarketable debt is held constant, but that the marketable debt is steadily retired at rates given by the relevant budgetary scenario. There are some offsetting biases in this set of assumptions. On the one hand, some nonmarketable debt could be retired; on the other hand, some marketable debt, especially at the long end, will be difficult or costly to retire, or unwise to take out of circulation. The first row uses the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) baseline budget, amended to include the May budget actions by the Congress (the large tax cut plus planned appropriations increases). This amended baseline has surpluses averaging $346 billion over the 2002-2011 period and results in the marketable portion of the Treasury debt, including that held by the Fed, being fully paid off some time in fiscal 2010. Implicitly, this scenario assumes that by that time the Fed will have completely replaced all of the Treasury debt in its portfolio, as will other central banks. It also assumes that all other debt maturing after 2010 will have been bought back. If this debt is not retired, because it is costly to buy back or because the Treasury wants to keep some debt in circulation, the logic of the budgetary scenario implies that the Treasury will begin accumulating assets before 2010. The amended CBO baseline budget might be viewed as optimistic because it assumes that neither spending nor tax rates will violate the 2001 budget agreement while the government is accruing on-budget surpluses (surpluses over and above those generated by the Social Security trust fund). Suppose at the other extreme that spending and taxes are altered so that on-budget surpluses are zero over the 2002-2011 period and that the government surplus merely reflects the anticipated accumulation in the Social Security accounts. Politicians would not be financing general expenditures out of Social Security, which has become a political no-no, but they would be devoting the remaining surpluses to tax cuts or spending increases. While such an assumption seems more cautious and realistic, surpluses would still average $249 billion over the next decade, and the marketable debt would still be fully paid off by 2012, only two years later. Again, if some long-term debt maturing after 2012 is not retired, asset accumulation would begin sooner. For what it is worth, I will also introduce a third scenario, which I label the "fully funded federal budget." In the unified federal budget there are now four main retirement-related trust funds--for Social Security (far and away the largest), Medicare part A, military employees' retirement, and civilian employees' retirement. Suppose that each trust fund runs surpluses large enough to cover future anticipated benefit costs: over a seventy-five year period for Social Security and Medicare, and indefinitely for the other trust funds. These standards are slightly less restrictive than the standard the government now requires of private employers under ERISA. The resulting surpluses in the retirement accounts are matched, dollar-for-dollar, by improvements in the net financial position of the entire federal government. This means that the rest of the budget is balanced outside of the cash flow accumulations of these four trust funds. Taxpayers in effect get back all revenues not used for spending or to finance these trust fund obligations. This set of assumptions also means that the surplus is allowed to flow through to generate real tangible private capital to back these future benefit costs. In this event the surpluses average $582 billion, the outstanding marketable debt is fully retired in fiscal 2007, and asset accumulation begins sooner if the long-term debt is not retired. The most realistic of these scenarios, with only the Social Security surplus being used to retire debt, still has a payoff date a decade away, giving adequate time to plan. But as was said, it may be difficult, costly, or unwise to retire some of the long-term debt maturing after that time, implying that asset accumulation choices might have to be made within a decade. Moreover, the process of planning and changing laws will itself take time. If the nation wants to preserve its high national saving rates, which I argued above is an economic desirability, it is time to start analyzing options. Option 1: Private Saving The macroeconomic goal is to promote national saving, not federal saving per se. It is theoretically possible to continue high national saving rates even if taxes are cut and debt retirement stops. But to preserve national saving the tax cuts would have to be in a special form: They would have to increase private saving by nearly the full amount of the tax cut. Theoretically possible, but I fear not practically possible. There is a long history of economic research on the determinants of private saving. The fall 1996 Journal of Economic Perspectives includes a number of such studies, some of which find private saving responsive to targeted tax incentives, some of which do not. My reading of the evidence from those studies is that a very generous estimate of the effect of targeted tax incentives is something like a 50 percent offset. That is, if private saving incentives were increased by $100 billion, an enormous amount, national saving would drop by something like $50 billion, and most likely more. Hence, even a significant tax cut targeted to private savers is likely to cause a sizable drop in national saving. The extreme variant here would be to go all the way and replace our present income tax with a consumption tax. There are good reasons for such a shift, and indeed I even advocated such a shift several years ago. I frankly still have some fondness for a consumption tax, but the political and institutional impediments to its adoption are huge. If we are talking about ways to raise private saving significantly within a decade, it seems that we have to look beyond private saving incentives or a consumption tax. Option 2: Social Security reform, liberal style The Social Security, Medicare, and the other retirement trust funds mentioned above now own a large amount of special Treasury debt, $1.848 trillion at the end of fiscal 2000. Since this is not held by the private sector, it is not included in . It would require a legislative change, but these funds could be invested in private assets, replacing sizable portions of their current Treasury holdings with these private assets--stocks or bonds--and making an equivalent amount of Treasury securities available to the market. Depending on how much debt is replaced, there would be much more outstanding marketable Treasury debt for the government to pay off. Something very close to this option, where the largest of the funds, the Social Security trust fund, would back future benefits claims with private assets, was suggested by President Clinton in 1999. The inspiration for Clinton's proposal was to raise the rate of return on Social Security's assets, a prospect that many felt problematic because capital markets should equate forward-looking risk-adjusted rates of return on different assets. But my new justification for trust fund asset diversification would not be based on rates of return. The idea would simply be to increase the stock of outstanding marketable Treasury debt, without changing the overall national level of stocks or bonds. Such a change would have costs. There would be modest administrative costs in setting up a private investment board for the trust funds and even larger potential costs of political interference in the allocation of investment funds or the business affairs of the firms with stocks and bonds held by these trust funds. These are similar to the costs that could be incurred were the Treasury itself to invest in private assets, discussed further below. If these costs were not large, or could be managed, such a change could greatly extend the time before the debt repayment issue must be confronted. Indeed, in the budget scenario where the only surplus is for Social Security, the issue would possibly never be confronted because the Social Security surpluses disappear once the baby boom generation begins to claim benefits. In this scenario there might well be no date in which outstanding Treasury debt would fully be retired. Option 3: Social Security reform, conservative style Conservatives often advocate privatizing some or all of Social Security, say by directing some present-day payroll contributions into individual accounts. President Bush has spoken favorably about this idea and has recently formed a committee to analyze ways to implement it. These proposals usually refer to the annual inflow of payroll taxes and imply that over time some claims for future Social Security benefits are extinguished in exchange for explicit assets in individual accounts. It is possible to make this adjustment much more quickly just by switching claims and assets. I will analyze this asset conversion as a third option, with the understanding that the same comments would also pertain to more gradual partial privatizations of Social Security. Presently, the private sector has implicit claims, or accrued benefit promises, under Social Security of approximately $10 trillion. Suppose that some portion of these claims, say 20 percent, were reduced in exchange for Treasury bonds with the same present value. As described above, this switch could be made at one time or gradually over time. The new bonds--which I will call "recognition bonds," a term used by Chile when it implemented a one-time conversion--would be placed in individual retirement accounts with the stipulation that funds could not be spent before retirement, perhaps along with other safeguards. But the accounts would be individual, and individuals could manage them. Specifically, individuals could trade their government recognition bonds for private assets, stocks or bonds. By this conversion, Social Security would be making the implicit claims on it explicit, which is not a major change because historically nearly all of the implicit claims on the Social Security trust fund have been met. But the change would also greatly increase the stock of outstanding marketable Treasury debt. Taken far enough, there would never be a pay down date for any of the budget scenarios in . The costs of this plan would be essentially those that are always raised with Social Security privatization. Could individuals manage their accounts? Would they invest wisely? Would they spend their recognition bonds early in their retirement, saving nothing for later? Safeguards could be built in to assure that investment choices and spend out rates would be prudent, but there will still be privatization risks. At the same time, and as with the other options, these risks or costs should be weighed against the advantages of continued saving and capital accumulation. As a final comment on this option, though it has been very difficult for liberals and conservatives to compromise on anything about Social Security, there is no reason in principle why a joint plan could not be adopted, with some doses of option 2 and some doses of option 3. Option 4: Treasury accumulation of domestic assets The fourth option is for the Treasury simply to accumulate private domestic assets. The costs are essentially those of Social Security asset accumulation, though perhaps a little higher because it might be easier for politicians to tamper with the private assets owned by the Treasury than with assets owned by the semi-independent Social Security system. While these costs are real, the shopping list, given in , is also huge. All told, the private assets the Treasury could purchase now total about $46 trillion, roughly half of which is in the form of private equities. To be sure, there is some double counting in the table, which includes both assets and liabilities of the same financial institutions. It might indeed be disruptive for the Treasury to enter simultaneously markets on the asset and liability sides of financial institutions. But even with some appropriate allowance for double counting, these markets are large and growing rapidly. By the time the Treasury gets around to accumulating assets, its purchases would seem to be a drop in the bucket in most of the markets listed in . The real cost of this option, as with the option where the Social Security fund purchases assets, is whether these purchases could be made without interfering in the normal affairs of private business. The interference could take many forms. One form is that in purchasing some assets and not other assets, the Treasury might influence the structure of interest rates and distort the allocation of capital. In particular, businesses too small to qualify for stock indices could be placed at a competitive disadvantage. Another form of interference would arise if the Treasury were to find itself under political pressure to prop up failing businesses or make otherwise uneconomic investments. A third form is if the Treasury were to threaten to sell the stocks or bonds of private businesses, say tobacco companies or drug companies that distribute abortion pills, in pursuit of some political objective. A fourth is that the federal government might have a conflict of interest in regulating firms it also holds stock in. One could imagine many other types of difficulties. There are some assets where the marginal potential interference is not very great, because there already is interference. One example is the first item, the $618 billion of securities for which there is an explicit Treasury guarantee, floated mainly by Ginnie Mae. Given the guarantee, these securities are reasonably close substitutes to Treasury debt itself, and the economic effects of Treasury purchases of these securities would seem to be modest, similar to those if the Treasury retired its own debt. Purchases in the explicit guarantee market would extend the various payoff dates by a few years, depending on the budget scenario. But it is important to note that these explicit guarantees do not include the $1.7 trillion of government sponsored agency securities and the $1.8 trillion of mortgage pass-through securities floated mainly by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. On those there is no Treasury guarantee. For the domestic non-guaranteed assets in the table, a few important principles might serve to minimize potential distortions. Management of the Treasury asset accumulation fund could be placed in the hands of an independent board, charged only with the task of managing this fund. Members could be appointed by the President, confirmed by the Senate, and serve staggered terms to increase their political independence. The board could select fund managers on the basis of competitive bids. The fund managers could be authorized to make only passive investments in securities or bonds, or in broad index funds. The board could balance its holdings among these arms-length funds to neutralize further its impact on differential rates of return and costs of capital. The board could also require fund managers to commingle federal money with money from private accounts, thereby generating another constituency for non-interference. To minimize potential political interference further, the Treasury should be prevented from voting its shares. It could either hold non-voting stock or it could be required to vote its shares in a way that reflects the votes of other stockholders. There is a big and hotly debated empirical question as to how such an arrangement might work out. The most relevant experience is from state and local pension funds, also governmental entities holding large stocks of private assets. In the 1970s and 1980s there were several publicized instances where these funds sacrificed investment objectives to pursue political goals. Lately the experience is more mixed--recent studies indicate that social investments account for a minor share of most pension fund assets and have had relatively small effects on portfolio rates of return. What is unclear is whether this recent experience reflects new wisdom and safeguards for the funds, or simply the good economic times of recent years. Will the pressures for uneconomic investments return if the economy does not do as well? Option 5: Treasury accumulation of foreign assets There is an obvious way for the Treasury to accumulate assets without raising the political interference issue: simply buy foreign bonds. Again, the amounts available for purchase are huge. Using the sovereign bond market only, there are nearly $4 trillion worth of outstanding European bonds, $4 trillion worth of outstanding Japanese bonds, and about $2 trillion worth of outstanding bonds from other countries. The Treasury could simply hold these bonds, much as other governments now hold Treasury bills. Most of the bonds trade in large and active markets, and there seems to be minimal risk of political interference or broader foreign policy complications. At the macroeconomic level, national saving can be thought of as a way of building claims on other countries, and Treasury accumulation of foreign assets would simply be part of this process. On the plus side of the ledger, were the Treasury to accumulate foreign assets it would follow the precedent of other countries around the globe that for one reason or another have found themselves in similar circumstances. Norway's Petroleum Fund, Singapore's Government Investment Corporation, and Hong Kong's Exchange Fund have all been recipients of large accumulated surpluses, and have all invested the bulk of their holdings in foreign assets. All arrangements seem to have worked very well. There is, of course, potential exchange-rate risk for the fund itself. If the dollar were to rise, fund holdings would suffer capital losses; if the dollar were to fall, there would be capital gains. But the usual assumption is that foreign exchange markets are efficient, implying that on a statistical basis these exchange-rate risks should balance out. But there are at least two potential difficulties in holding foreign assets. One is politics. Will Congress accept investing assets in foreign bonds, over and above the stock of local companies? On first blush, it would seem that the answer is no, but more careful consideration suggests that the question might be complicated. Political interference works both ways. For every struggling firm that might want the Treasury to buy some of its stock, there are probably several firms that have no desire for the Treasury to be an important stockholder. And there are even more firms that do not want the Treasury to hold stock in their competitors. In view of these crosscurrents, it is easy to imagine a political truce, where U.S. businesses decide the best thing is to keep the Treasury out of domestic stock and bond markets and just have it buy foreign assets. The second problem refers to the overall value of the dollar: Will Treasury purchases of foreign assets lower the dollar? First off, $560 billion of the assets mentioned above are already dollar-denominated, implying no foreign exchange impact. Beyond that, such purchases would be equivalent to a sterilized foreign exchange intervention, under which the United States would be selling dollars to buy foreign assets without changing monetary policy. Most academic economists find such interventions to have little impact on exchange rates. Finally, it is not clear that building up Treasury stocks of foreign assets would represent a large change from what is going on now. At the present time the Treasury is gradually taking out of circulation its own securities, assets that are highly attractive to foreigners, with foreigners and domestic holders presumably spreading their freed-up funds across foreign and domestic assets in general. In the new regime, the Treasury would be explicitly purchasing foreign bonds, again freeing-up funds to be spread across foreign and domestic assets in general. The dollar has been very strong in the present regime, and it is not obvious that things would change much in any new regime. In a deeper sense, discussion on determinants of exchange rates seems ever-evolving. Most macroeconomics textbooks feature the idea that high fiscal deficits causing high interest rates should attract capital and raise the value of the dollar. But lately it has seemed that high fiscal surpluses causing low interest rates but high investment, productivity change, and stock values might also raise the value of the dollar. And the point of a regime of foreign asset accumulation would be precisely to keep investment and productivity strong, and quite possibly the dollar strong. In the end it seems hard to tell what would happen to the dollar in this option. Conclusion The high government surpluses of the late 1990s have led to high rates of national saving, which has helped finance high rates of capital investment and has been an important factor in the recent upsurge in productivity. From a macroeconomic standpoint it is highly desirable to remain on a fiscal track that produces budget surpluses or maintains high rates of national saving in other ways. As long as Treasury debt can be retired, there is no real difficulty with this course of action. Government surpluses can promote national saving and investment and simultaneously retire debt to lower federal interest burdens. But once the outstanding Treasury debt gets to low levels, new choices will have to be made. To maintain its direct contribution to national saving, the government will either have to devise highly successful private saving incentives, accumulate private or foreign assets directly, or accumulate assets indirectly through the Social Security system. There are ways of making the accumulations, either by having Social Security or the Treasury hold passive portfolio balance funds or foreign assets, or by creating private individual accounts within Social Security. While each of these options entails costs, if managed properly, the distortionary costs of such arrangements could be a small fraction of the huge benefits from the much larger capital stock that would result from continued high rates of national saving and investment. Should existing federal surpluses continue, the relative costs and benefits of these different arrangements should be weighed, and new asset management policies should be explored. Marketable debt 2.993 Nonmarketable debt Savings bonds .178 Foreign holdings .025 State and local holdings .153 Total 3.349 Alternative budget scenarios Billions of current dollars when relevant Amended CBO baseline 346 2010 Social Security surplus only 249 2012 Fully-funded federal budget 582 2007 * All scenarios assume the forecast surplus for 2001 is used to pay down debt. Fourth Quarter 2000 Trillions of current dollars U.S. Government guaranteed debt 0.6 U.S. Government sponsored agencies 1.7 Municipal bonds 1.0 Corporate bonds over 3.0 Asset-backed securities 0.9 Mortgage pass-through securities 1.8 Commercial mortgage obligations (AAA) 0.7 Certificates of deposit 1.0 Commercial paper 1.5 Commercial and agricultural loans 1.1 1-4 family residential mortgages 1.5 Commercial real estate loans 0.8 Consumer loans 0.7 Mutual funds over 7.0 Money market funds (1.8) Bond funds including corporates (0.8) Equity mutual funds (4.3) Corporate equity about 22.0 Gold 1.0
Testimony of Vice Chairman Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. Statement on renomination to the Board Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate June 13, 2001 Chairman Sarbanes, Senator Gramm, and members of the Committee, I am pleased to appear before you today as President Bush's nominee to serve on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. I am honored that the President has nominated me to serve a full term as a member of the Board. As a Governor, I am particularly mindful that the policy decisions of the Federal Reserve influence the economic well-being of all Americans. It has been my privilege to serve our fellow citizens in this capacity since 1997, giving this role my undivided attention, and I hope to be able to continue in that service. During my tenure we have faced a rapidly changing environment in many of our areas of responsibility, and I would like to review briefly some of those developments and our responses to them. Congress has given the Federal Reserve three monetary policy objectives: maximum employment, stable prices and moderate long-term interest rates. We have viewed these objectives as congruent with a goal of maximum sustainable growth, which can occur only in the context of long-run price stability. Fostering financial conditions in which Americans can realize the full productive potential of our economy has presented a number of challenges in recent years. The most important developments have been a step-up in the advance of technology--both in terms of the production of new goods and the more effective harnessing of past innovations--and a rapid accumulation of physical capital. These developments have made workers increasingly more productive. But faster productivity growth fed back on the demand for goods and services in ways that complicated the calibration of monetary policy. Faster growth in productivity and the reactions of businesses and households to this acceleration of productivity have combined with other forces-particularly those associated with the growing interconnectedness of the global economy- to require substantial adjustments in the Federal Reserve's policy interest rate in recent years. But those adjustments in our policy instrument have been in the service of our objective of promoting maximum sustainable growth. Making monetary policy has been only part of the challenge. During my tenure at the Federal Reserve we have also worked diligently to communicate to the public what we are doing with policy and why. Transparency in policy making is a key part of the democratic process, as well as being helpful in fostering efficient decision making in the private sector. Becoming more transparent has been a goal of the central bank in recent years, keeping in mind that we must balance the need to be open and accountable with the need to maintain an effective process of decision making by the Federal Open Market Committee. Transparency requires that we periodically review our procedures, as we did in 1999, to ensure that they appropriately balance these considerations. I do not know what future changes, if any, might be called for in how we communicate, but I am confident that the Federal Reserve will continue to look for ways to communicate clearly our policies and our supporting rationales. While macroeconomic conditions are of overriding importance, the role of the Federal Reserve is broader than monetary policy. Financial stability is an essential precondition for maintaining a strong economy, and the Federal Reserve has important supervisory and regulatory responsibilities for our nation's banking system. The Federal Reserve, and other regulators, must continue to foster a competitive environment that will benefit the users of financial services, while also promoting safety and soundness. I believe that we must achieve these goals with a minimum of regulatory burden and without leaving the impression that any institution is too big to fail. To minimize regulatory burden and achieve our other objectives, we should encourage what to my mind are the best regulators, namely market discipline and management accountability. Of late, our challenge has been to meet these goals as we implement the financial modernization law. In my opinion, Congress wisely removed several antiquated barriers to a modern financial structure in the United States, and now we need to design regulatory and supervisory policies that reflect the will of Congress and deal effectively with a changing financial services industry. Technology and deregulation, forces for change that I have just mentioned, have encouraged consolidation in the financial sector. With central bank and treasury officials from twelve other major industrial economies, I have reviewed the likely effect of the global trend toward consolidation and its implication for central banks and regulators. Because financial systems will continue to consolidate, as the forces that motivate that evolution are unabated, the regulatory community needs to monitor developments closely. But our study also found that existing policies appear adequate to allow regulators to maintain safe and sound financial industries now and in the intermediate term and for monetary policy to work through many of the same mechanisms as in the past. More than the structure of the financial services industry has changed of late. That sector has found uses for consumer information and created an array of financial products and services unimagined even a few years ago. These developments, in turn, raise some new concerns, and have re-ignited some existing ones, among consumers and legislators. Congress grappled with one of these issues, privacy, in the financial modernization law. Concerns about abusive lending practices have also re-emerged of late. In all areas, but particularly in areas as sensitive as these, regulators should faithfully administer consumer protection laws as written. Any necessary regulations should adequately inform consumers and protect them against abusive practices while also not discouraging legitimate extensions of credit, especially to those who might previously have been denied access to such credit. Financial literacy will certainly play an important role in avoiding the growth of abusive or deceptive financial practices and in allowing consumers to protect their interests. I believe that legislation, careful regulation and education are all components of the response to these emerging consumer concerns. I also hope, however, that businesses recognize that it is in their long-term interest to maintain the confidence of consumers by avoiding deceptive and abusive practices and by respecting the privacy of their customers. Finally, our payment system affects every consumer and business. This system too has been, and will continue to be, changed greatly by emerging technologies. From the time of its very founding, the Federal Reserve has had the responsibility to foster an efficient, safe and accessible payment system. During much of 1998 and 1999, our primary objective in this regard was to help banks and other participants in the payment system maintain smooth operations as the century date change passed. Domestically, we achieved this goal by working directly with the banking sector. Internationally, I was privileged to work through multilateral groups to raise the awareness of the international regulatory community of the nature of the Y2K challenge. Now, we can take a longer-term perspective and consider how we might facilitate innovation in the payment system. As an overseer and regulator, the Federal Reserve needs to approach payment system innovations with an open mind and a willingness to adapt. In a dynamic economy, markets need to play a key role in guiding the development of infrastructure. This means that innovation and competition will be central to the future development of the payment system--as they are in other areas of the economy. Regulators should strive to remove barriers to innovations when we can do so without sacrificing important public policies. We should take every opportunity to foster competition and maintain the integrity of the payment system, but public policy should not be built on a single vision or prediction of the future. Ultimately, consumers and businesses as well as service providers will determine the range of payment services that best meet their needs. Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee, during my years on the Board of Governors, I have done my best to contribute positively to all aspects of the Federal Reserve's many responsibilities. I look forward to the opportunity to continue to work with you and serve the nation as a member of the Board of Governors. Thank you for your attention and for considering my nomination. I would be pleased to respond to questions.
Remarks by Vice Chairman Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. At the U.S. Embassy, The Hague, the Netherlands (via videoconference) June 14, 2001 The Productivity Experience of the United States: Past, Present, and Future Thank you for inviting me to address this group of distinguished business and government leaders from the Netherlands. As always, the views I will be expressing are my own and are not necessarily shared by other members of the Board of Governors or of the Federal Open Market Committee. You have asked me to set the stage for our discussion with a brief review of the extraordinary performance of the U.S. economy during the second half of the 1990s. From 1995 to 1999, real gross domestic product grew, on average, about 4 percent per year. This pace was significantly above that in the previous five years, and you would have to go back to the 1960s to find even closely comparable periods of consistently robust economic expansion. In this environment, the unemployment rate fell to 4 percent, and the underlying rate of price inflation slowed, on net, despite very high rates of resource utilization. Even the most optimistic forecasters could not have anticipated such a favorable confluence of economic events. Productivity Growth and Cost Reductions So how did this confluence of positive events come about? The dominant force of late appears to have been a significant increase in the structural rate of productivity growth. Output per hour in the nonfarm business sector--a conventional measure of productivity--increased at an annual rate of almost 3 percent between 1995 and 1999, roughly twice the average pace that had prevailed over the preceding two decades. The most important explanation for this increase in the rate of productivity growth, I suspect, is longer-term structural changes arising from the boom in capital spending and the revolution in information technology. Let me turn to the evidence on this point. Technological Change and Productivity Growth Bob Solow--the MIT economist who won the Nobel Prize in economics for his work on the theory of economic growth--once quipped that you can see computers everywhere except in the productivity statistics. A few years ago that situation began to change, and we now have strong evidence that the faster productivity growth our economy has experienced is, in fact, due partly to the information technology revolution. Research by Federal Reserve Board economists Steve Oliner and Dan Sichel sheds some light on the sources of this faster productivity growth. The high (and rising) levels of business investment raised the amount of capital per worker and thereby boosted productivity. About 1/2 percentage point of the increase in productivity growth over the 1995-99 period can be attributed to this so-called "capital deepening," most of which reflected greater spending by businesses on computers, software, and communications equipment. The balance of the pickup reflected other factors, including technological innovations in the actual production of computer hardware and semiconductors as well as better management--perhaps assisted by these high-tech investments--of the nation's capital and labor resources. Oliner and Sichel estimate that the consolidated influences of information technology investments account for about two-thirds of the acceleration in productivity since 1995. This research supports the view that fundamental changes are under way in our economy. What's So Special about this Capital? That trend productivity has picked up and that high-tech investments are the source of the acceleration are important facts, but by now they are not new observations. Perhaps at this stage it would be useful to explore in greater detail this positive "shock" to the ability of our economy to produce goods and services. What is so special about computers and other information technologies that they can have such a strong influence on our economy? Let me highlight three special characteristics of high-tech equipment. First, computers and communications equipment depreciate at a very rapid pace. The current best estimate is that computers probably depreciate about 30 percent annually, although that estimate might be low, while other equipment probably depreciates at a rate of less than 15 percent annually. Therefore, computers are retired, on average, after three years, and the useful life for other equipment is about seven years. Firms must invest in computers at a faster rate than they do in other forms of capital just to maintain a given level of the capital stock. The rapid replacement of high-tech capital means that technological progress becomes "embodied" in the capital stock at a faster rate than is the case for longer-lived assets. The second feature of high-tech equipment that sets it apart from other classes of capital is the sensitivity of demand to fluctuations in the cost of capital. For decades, economists have debated the magnitude of cost-of-capital effects on traditional capital goods. A past consensus was that the cost-of-capital effect was small and difficult to identify empirically. But a somewhat different conclusion has arisen lately when the same basic models of investment are applied to spending on computers alone. The latest research suggests that the demand for computers is quite sensitive to movements in the cost of capital. The combination of an apparently high price elasticity and a rapid decline in relative computer prices--20 percent per year over the past decade--likely led to the boom in high-tech investment. A third characteristic of some high-tech investment is the magnitude of external or spillover effects that it generates. Some high-tech equipment generates benefits not only to the owner of the machine but to other agents in the economy as well. I am thinking in particular about so-called network effects-the observation that four computers networked together are more than twice as valuable as two. Supporting Structural Changes The technological changes inspired by investments in computers have enhanced the ability of businesses to reduce their operating expenses. In many industries, investments in information technologies have helped firms to cut back on the volume of inventories that they hold as a precaution against glitches in their supply chain or as a hedge against unexpected increases in aggregate demand. Product development costs have probably also been reduced through the use of better computer hardware and software, and new communications technologies have increased the speed with which firms can share information--both internally and with their customers and suppliers. Moreover, given intense competition and the resulting lack of pricing leverage, ongoing programs to reduce costs have become a key part of corporate strategies to maintain or improve profit margins. The focus on cost reduction has worked to head off the development of inflationary pressures in this expansion. Productivity and the Current Macroeconomic Setting As you are aware, the United States is experiencing a period of subpar growth. For the last three quarters, the annualized growth rate has been 1 3/4 percent, which is well below the trend rate of growth that many think our economy can sustain. During this period, productivity grew at an annual rate of about 2  percent during the second half of 2000 and declined at an annual rate of 1  percent during the first quarter of this year. This slowing in productivity growth has led a number of observers to ask whether the acceleration of productivity of the latter part of the 1990s was a cyclical phenomenon, which was bound to come to an end when the economy slowed, or a structural one. Cyclical forces, such as the inability of businesses to add to their payrolls as rapidly as they would have liked in response to the rise in demand, probably played some role in these productivity gains. In addition, some enthusiasts made overly optimistic statements about the benefits of these newer technologies. However, I believe that the answer to the question is that most of the growth in productivity was structural, or trend, and not cyclical. We should also be mindful that even during the period between 1995 and 2000, productivity increases on a quarterly basis fluctuated; the trend increase that is so clear now did not progress unabated. Two fundamental factors lead me to be cautiously optimistic that the much of the improvement in productivity is likely to be sustained. Notable advances in microprocessors, or semiconductors, have been key to the enhanced productivity growth that we have experienced. Semiconductor industry experts indicate that the improvement in performance described by "Moore's Law," which predicts that the capacity of chips will double every 18 to 24 months, continues to hold true. My understanding from conversations with, and announcements by, leaders of the semiconductor industry is that later this year or early next year chip manufacturers plan to begin using larger wafers, allowing them to reduce costs by 30 percent. They also plan to adopt thinner circuit lines, which will allow the manufacturers to etch more transistors on a single chip. A second reason to expect that much of the improvement in productivity growth is trend and not cyclical is that businesses indicate in their words and their deeds a commitment to improving productivity and maintaining costs by substituting capital, mainly IT capability, for labor. Overall growth of the economy has slowed to a pace between 1 percent and 2 percent at an annual rate for the most recent three quarters. However, investment in equipment and software has held at relatively high levels and is still sufficient to maintain relatively rapid growth of capital services. Moreover, end-use demand for communications services seems to remain strong. Since the early 1990s, the volume of data sent over networks in the United States has doubled each year, and there is no reason why that trend should abate. The Role of Government Policy You will have noted that I have not mentioned the role of government policy in creating a higher rate of trend productivity growth. As a policymaker, I'd like to think that well-executed monetary and fiscal policies--each focused importantly on their respective long-run goals--played some role in creating economic conditions that fostered noninflationary economic growth. It is important to note, however, that although sound policy undoubtedly helped create the conditions for growth, macroeconomic policy cannot create growth itself. Only businesses and consumers can do that. The economy of the United States has also benefited from past actions by the government to deregulate industries. The more intense focus on the removal of unnecessary government regulation started more than twenty years ago, during the Administration of President Ford, and gathered momentum during the Carter years. Deregulation has altered the business landscape by allowing--indeed forcing--businesses to focus more clearly on a more competitive marketplace with fewer constraints and increased flexibility. Again, as with macroeconomic policy, a policy of deregulating industry cannot create greater potential growth, but it can create the conditions under which such growth might occur. A third way in which the government and the private sector together have assisted the process of technology adoption is by fostering a highly flexible system of education and training that focuses on both theoretical and practical skills. In part because of the rapid changes in technology, today's students and workers no longer expect to keep a job for life, and they are keenly aware that, throughout their careers, new skills will be required for advancement. Employers, too, recognize the value added by developing human capital to complement their fixed capital. Thus, the United States has experienced a demand for educational services catering to participants at various stages in life. The demand for skill development and upgrading has been met in a number of ways--through on-the-job training, at so-called corporate universities, and in a range of public and private institutions of higher learning. Surveys conducted by the U.S. Department of Education show that participation in adult education programs expanded over the past decade, with 46 percent of all adults reportedly having been engaged in an adult education program in 1998-99. In part because much of the training is work-related, the rates of participation are positively related to formal educational attainment. The trend toward lifetime learning also shows through in the enrollment statistics for higher education. Today, more than 20 percent of the students in U.S. institutions of higher education are age 35 or older, up from less than 15 percent in 1985. In part, this increase has been fueled by the rising number of part-time students and of enrollees at two-year colleges. The latter group of schools, in particular, has lowered the cost of education for working students with night and weekend courses and with the development of contracts with employers to provide skill training. Another way to meet the needs for skill training in coming years will involve distance learning. In 1995, one-third of U.S. institutions of higher education reported some use of distance education--two-way or one-way videos, on-line connections, and the like. Another one-fourth planned to offer courses in the subsequent three years, with an eye to targeting workers seeking re-certification or skill updating. In addition, the U.S. government influenced the increase in productivity growth by supporting the early development of what later became known as the Internet. In the mid- to late 1960s the Department of Defense's Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) created a small network, ARPANET, which was intended to promote the sharing of computers among researchers in the United States. In 1969, ARPANET connected the first four university participants, and researchers on those campuses created the first hosts of the ARPANET. Over time, this process of linking computers evolved into the Internet. Importantly, much of the work of creating the standards that drove the early creation of the Internet was led by the private sector, both commercial and academic. Finally, the federal government is reported to be an active user of the Internet to sell its products, including financial products. A recent study indicates that the government of the United States made $3.6 billion of transactions over the web in 2000, which was significantly larger than the revenue of any web-based retailer. The Macroeconomic Implications of Faster Productivity Growth Theory teaches us that the step-up in the growth rate of productivity will have important and pervasive implications for the performance of the economy. The main reason policymakers and economists are interested in the growth rate of productivity is that it is the crucial determinant of the rate of change in the general standard of living. If productivity increases 1  percent per year on average, the standard of living will double about every 46 years--or about every two generations. On the other hand, if trend productivity growth steps up to 3 percent per year, the standard of living will double roughly every 23 years--or about every generation. That is certainly a difference worth studying and understanding, and at this stage our understanding is woefully incomplete. A second important reason for being interested in the growth rate of productivity is that in the near term it affects both the supply of and demand for goods and services. On the supply side, the effect is fairly clear and immediate: An increase in trend productivity growth implies a more rapid pace of growth of the economy's productive capacity. In short, the economy can produce more, overall, without running up against production bottlenecks. Of course, this effect tends to cumulate over time, with progressively larger increases in supply coming as time goes by. Separately, businesses may respond to the increase in trend productivity growth by stepping up the pace of their investment in plant and equipment, further boosting the growth in the supply potential of the economy. How does the increase in trend productivity growth play out on the demand side of the economy? One immediate effect is the step-up in capital expenditures that I just noted, as businesses perceive and react to new profit opportunities. In addition, stock market investors will react to the pickup in productivity growth by looking ahead, recognizing the improved prospects for future earnings, and bidding up equity prices today. The run-up in equity prices implies a reduction in the cost of capital for businesses, which could support a further increase in investment demand, especially on the part of firms that rely on this market for at least part of their funding. The increase in stock market wealth will also operate through the household sector. As you know, economists often speak of the "wealth effect." Econometric modeling indicates that consumers eventually tend to raise the level of their spending by approximately 3 to 5 cents for every incremental dollar of wealth. Given changes in stock market wealth as large as the ones we have seen recently, this wealth effect can have a noticeable effect on consumption and macroeconomic performance. To take the most prominent example, the wealth effect is the most important reason why the personal saving rate in the United States has fallen from roughly 8 percent in 1990 to -1 percent in the first quarter of this year. And to put a rough number on the impact on aggregate activity more recently, simulations by the Board staff using our econometric model of the economy suggest that wealth generated in the equity markets over the past four years added about 1 percentage point to the growth rate of real GDP. Overall, the stock market, working through the spending decisions of both households and businesses, will act to bring forward the demand effects of the improved outlook for supply, potentially even pushing demand up ahead of the increase in supply. It is important to emphasize that higher productivity growth translates into higher real income growth for employees. This added income is seen most clearly in the higher wages paid to that growing number of workers whose cash compensation is tied to company performance, either directly or through stock options. But real incomes should increase even for workers whose compensation is not directly linked to company performance, as profitable business opportunities bolster the demand for scarce labor. Conclusion Obviously the history of the productivity surprise in the United States is a long and complex one. Indeed, it is premature to write the entire story. But, the role of the Federal Reserve in this saga will continue unchanged. We have been given the responsibility to provide the monetary conditions that will promote the maximum sustainable growth in output. We will continue to perform that duty.
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan The growing need for skills in the 21st century Before the U.S. Department of Labor 21st Century Workforce Summit, Washington, D.C. June 20, 2001 I am pleased to have the opportunity to be part of todays 21st Century Workforce Summit and appreciate the hospitality of Secretary Chao and the Department of Labor. The past decade or so has been marked by a remarkable surge in technological innovation and business efficiency. This period of rapid innovation has brought with it enormous opportunities to enhance living standards for a large majority of Americans. Our ability to take full advantage of these opportunities depends crucially on how well we as a nation can integrate these new technologies into our society. In my remarks today, I would like to offer some perspective on the challenges created by the interaction of new technologies with the skills of the American workforce, and how the educational system has in the past and can in the future respond to these challenges. The process of innovation is, of course, never ending. Over the past 100 years, for example, the rate of increase of the gross domestic product of the United States, adjusted for price change, has averaged around 3 percent per year. Yet only a fraction of that increase represents growth in the tonnage of physical materials--particularly oil, coal, wood, raw chemicals--and increases in the amount of manual labor employed in the production process. The remainder represents new value-adding insights into how to rearrange physical materials and labor inputs to better serve human needs--in short, the conceptual content of the GDP. The inexorably rising share of the nations output that is conceptual appears to have accelerated following World War II with the insights that led to the development of the transistor, microprocessor, laser, and fiber optic technologies. By the 1990s, these and other critical innovations had fostered an enormous new capacity to capture, analyze, and disseminate information and had begun to alter significantly how we do business and create economic value, often in ways that were not foreseeable even a decade ago. Indeed, it is the proliferation of information technology throughout the economy that makes the current period so special. The types of skills needed to interact with the new methods of adding value associated with this diffusion of information technologies are complex. One obviously needs a core of highly skilled workers to push the frontier of technology forward and to make the newer technologies more accessible to the rest of the workforce. Once technology becomes more user friendly, the ability of the general workforce to create value is greatly facilitated. What is particularly telling in this regard is how well the American economy has performed with a workforce for which the average level of education has been roughly unchanged for a quarter of a century. As labor markets tightened in the mid-1990s, the anecdotal reports of worker shortages were worrisome. There were numerous stories of employers going through entire lists of people before finding someone who could do the job, and widespread concerns that a lack of high-tech skills among American workers would prevent much of the population from participating fully in the economic gains associated with the emerging high-tech revolution. Consistent with these anecdotes, in a national survey of small businesses, the percentage citing labor quality as their most important problem rose from less than 5 percent in 1993 to 20 percent by 1998. As it turned out, however, the capacity for American businesses to absorb the less educated part of our workforce seems to have been far greater than these anecdotes implied. The unemployment rate for adults with a high school education or less fell from 4 percent in 1998 to around 4 percent by the middle of last year. And, while the proportion of small-business managers who worried about labor quality has remained elevated in the past few years, it did not increase further in spite of the decline in unemployment. One explanation for this phenomenon is the often-observed multiplier effects of technological breakthroughs. For example, as engineers and programmers have developed increasingly more sophisticated hardware and software, the vast productive benefits of computers have become far more readily available to the average worker in recent years. Looking back a number of decades to the early stages of the information technology revolution, we can see that COBOL and Fortran were the visas into the world of technology. Those workers without very sophisticated programming skills could not interface with the new computer-driven technologies and thus often could not take advantage of the potential productivity improvements associated with those technologies. But todays increasingly user-friendly software has enabled workers with far less education and skills to engender value added from new technologies that their older brothers and sisters could not have foreseen a half generation earlier. In particular, we are finding that despite the awesome capabilities of our newer innovations, there are certain skills inherent in all human beings that technology cannot replicate. Low-skilled workers in decades past had to rely principally on their manual labor skills to create value added. Today, the newer technologies give similarly skilled workers the opportunity to vastly multiply their value-producing capabilities by leveraging their ability to identify and classify. For example, retail sales clerks not only facilitate sales in the conventional manner, but also automatically engender books of account, inventory control, and supplier reorders. But, while software has increased our capacity to integrate lower-skilled individuals into the workforce, the rapidity and unpredictability of innovation also imply a need to strengthen those cognitive skills of our overall workforce. An increasing proportion of the workforce must be equipped not simply with technical know-how, but also with the ability to create, analyze, and transform information and to effectively interact electronically with others. Moreover, learning will increasingly need to be a lifelong activity. The days when a high school or college education would serve a graduate throughout his or her working career are gone. Today's recipients of diplomas should expect to have many jobs and to acquire and use an ever-expanding range of skills over their working lives. It may not seem credible that an educational system shown by many studies to stifle learning between the fourth and twelfth grades relative to the systems of our foreign trading partners can provide our workforce with the necessary intellectual tools going forward. But, while such studies suggest there is much to be done, there also are reasons to be optimistic. In the past, our educational system, defined in its widest sense, has been guided importantly by the marketplace toward the broader needs of our economy. Indeed, the history of education in the United States traces a path heavily influenced by two themes: the need for a workforce with the skills required to interact productively with the evolving economic structure, and a thirst for knowledge among the American people. The educational system during the early years of the United States was far less formalized than today. There were, of course, grammar schools and colleges that catered to the wealthier segments of society. But most individuals had little access to more than a minimal level of formal schooling because they were needed to work on the farm. In 1800, for example, more than 90 percent of Americans lived on farms. Yet, our ancestors understood the value of education, and less formal arrangements were frequently used; home-based schooling, private tutors, and church-sponsored Sunday schools are just a few examples. The one-room schoolhouse on the prairie still provokes a remarkable, though perhaps not wholly justified, degree of nostalgia. People felt that once a child learned how to read and write, an unlimited world opened up. The focus in those early years was thus often on increasing literacy--beyond that, children were expected to read books to satisfy their interest in other subjects such as science or philosophy. In this sense, the inquisitive nature of the people of that time drove the need to know beyond the measures of formal education in those early years. Evidence of our ancestors intellectual capacity and desire to acquire a broader education are abundant. Abraham Lincoln, for example, had little formal education while a young child, but once taught how to read by his mother, he read voraciously in a wide range of subjects. And one can only marvel at the letters that twenty-year-old soldiers sent back home in the Civil War. They were remarkably thoughtful and literate. These soldiers, presumably with little formal education, were obviously reasonably well read. They did have the advantage, of course, of a world without television. Early in the twentieth century, advances in technology began to require workers with a higher level of cognitive skills, for instance the ability to read manuals, to interpret blueprints, or to understand formulas. Our market-driven educational system responded: In the 1920s and 1930s, high school enrollment in this country expanded rapidly, pulling youth from rural areas, where opportunities were limited, into more productive occupations in business and broadening the skills of students to meet the needs of an advancing manufacturing sector. At the same time, our system of higher education was also responding to the advances in economic processes. Although many states had established land grant schools earlier, support for these schools accelerated in the late nineteenth century as institutions located in states that specialized in agriculture and mining sought to take advantage of new scientific methods of production. A century ago, the content of education at an American college had evolved from a classically based curriculum to one combining the sciences, empirical studies, and modern liberal arts. Universities responded to the need for the application of science--particularly chemistry and physics--to the manufacture of steel, rubber, chemicals, drugs, petroleum, and other goods requiring the newer production technologies. Communities looked to their institutions of higher learning for leadership in scientific knowledge and for training of professionals such as teachers and engineers. During this time, the scale and scope of higher education in America was shaped by the recognition that research--the creation of knowledge--complemented teaching and training--the diffusion of knowledge. In broad terms, the basic structure of higher education remains much the same today, and it has been one that has proven sufficiently flexible to respond to the needs of a changing economy. Certainly, if we are to remain preeminent in transforming knowledge into economic value, the U.S. system of higher education must remain the world leader in generating scientific and technological breakthroughs and in preparing workers to meet the evolving demands for skilled labor. However, the pressure to enable all workers to benefit from the new technologies also requires that we strengthen the significant contributions of other types of training and educational programs, especially for those with lesser skills. The notion that formal degree programs at any scholastic level or that any other training program established today can be crafted to fully support the requirements of ones full working life has become subject to increasing doubt. It is evident that we need to foster a flexible education system--one that integrates work and training and that serves the needs both of experienced workers at different stages in their careers and of students embarking on their initial course of study. Community colleges, for example, have become important providers of job skills training not just for students who may eventually move on to a four-year college or university but for individuals with jobs--particularly workers seeking to retool, retrain, or simply to broaden their skills. The increasing availability of courses that can be taken at a distance over the Internet means that learning can more easily occur outside the workplace or the classroom. Economists have long argued that a significant proportion of the work knowledge that one acquires in a lifetime is produced on the job. Several decades ago much of that on-the-job training was acquired through work experience. Today, businesses and labor unions are placing greater emphasis on the value of formal education and training programs--ranging from corporate universities to partnerships with community colleges and other providers--as well as relationships with public agencies, including welfare-to-work and school-to-work programs. These efforts recognize that technologically advanced learning must be grounded in real-world curriculums that are relevant to changing business needs and that it be provided in flexible venues that open access to development of skills to as many workers as possible. Meeting the complex range of skills likely to be required of our workforce in the future presents a significant challenge to our educational system. But it is a challenge we cannot afford to ignore. We must provide young people with the opportunities and incentives to learn. We must ensure that our population at all ages and all competencies receives an education that will allow full and continuing participation in this dynamic period.
Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan Condition of the U.S. banking system Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate June 20, 2001 Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee, I am pleased to be here this morning to discuss the condition of the U.S. banking system. In my presentation today, I would like to raise just a few issues. I have attached an in which the Federal Reserve Board staff provides far more detail relevant to the purpose of these hearings. There are, I believe, two salient points to be made about the current state of the banking system. First, many of the traditional quantitative and qualitative indicators suggest that bank asset quality is deteriorating and that supervisors therefore need to be more sensitive to problems at individual banks, both currently and in the months ahead. Some of the credits that were made in earlier periods of optimism--especially syndicated loans--are now under pressure and scrutiny. The softening economy and/or special circumstances have especially affected borrowers in the retail, manufacturing, health care, and telecommunications industries. California utilities, as you know, have also been under particular pressure. All of these, and no doubt other problem areas that are not now foreseeable, require that both bank management and supervisors remain particularly alert to developments. Second, we are fortunate that our banking system entered this period of weak economic performance in a strong position. After rebuilding capital and liquidity in the early 1990s, followed by several years of post-World War II record profits and very strong loan growth, our banks now have prudent capital and reserve positions. In addition, asset quality was quite good by historical standards before the deterioration began. Moreover, in the last decade, as I will discuss more fully in a moment, banks have improved their risk management and control systems, which we believe may have both strengthened the resultant asset quality and shortened banks' response time to changing economic events. This potential for an improved reaction to cyclical weakness, and better risk management, is being tested by the events of recent quarters and may well be tested further in coming quarters. We can generalize from these recent events to understand a bit better some relevant patterns in banking, patterns that appear to be changing for the better. The recent weakening in loan quality bears some characteristics typical of traditional relationships of loans to the business cycle--the pro-cyclicality of bank lending practices. The rapid increase in loans, though typical of a normal expansion of the economy, was unusual in that it was associated with more than a decade of uninterrupted economic growth. As our economy expanded, business and household financing needs increased and projections of future outcomes turned increasingly optimistic. In such a context, the loan officers whose experience counsels that the vast majority of bad loans are made in the latter stages of a business expansion, have had the choice of (1) restraining lending, and presumably losing market share or (2) hoping for repayment of new loans before conditions turn adverse. Given the limited ability to foresee turning points, the competitive pressures led, as has usually been the case, to a deterioration of underlying loan quality as the peak in the economy approached. Supervisors have had comparable problems. In a rising economy buffeted by competitive banking markets, it is difficult to evaluate the embedded risks in new loans or to be sure that adequate capital is being held. Even if correctly diagnosed, making that supervisory case to bank management can be difficult because, regrettably, incentives for loan officers and managers traditionally have rewarded loan growth, market share, and the profits that derive from booking interest income with, in retrospect, inadequate provisions for possible default. Moreover, credit-risk specialists at banks historically have had difficulty making their case about risk because of their inability to measure and quantify it. At the same time, with debt service current and market risk premiums cyclically low, coupled with the same inability to quantify and measure risk, supervisory criticisms of standards traditionally have been difficult to justify. When the economy begins to slow and the quality of some booked loans deteriorates, as in the current cycle, loan standards belatedly tighten. New loan applications that earlier would have been judged creditworthy, especially since the applications are now being based on a more cautious economic outlook, are nonetheless rejected, when in retrospect it will doubtless be those loans that would have been the most profitable to the bank. Such policies are demonstrably not in the best interests of banks' shareholders or the economy. They lead to an unnecessary degree of cyclical volatility in earnings and, as such, to a reduced long-term capitalized value of the bank. More importantly, such policies contribute to increased economic instability. The last few years have had some of the traditional characteristics I have just described: the substantial easing of terms as the economy improved, the rapid expansion of the loan book, the deterioration of loan quality as the economy slowed, and the cumulative tightening of loan standards. But this interval has had some interesting characteristics not observed in earlier expansions. First, in the mid-1990s, examiners began to focus on banks' risk-management systems and processes; at the same time, supervisors' observations about softening loan standards came both unusually early in the expansion and were taken more seriously than had often been the case. The turmoil in financial markets in 1998, associated with both the East Asian crisis and the Russian default, also focused bankers' attention on loan quality during the continued expansion in this country. And there was a further induced tightening of standards last year in response to early indications of deteriorating loan quality, months before aggregate growth slowed. All of this might have been the result of idiosyncratic events from which generalizations should not be made. Perhaps. But at the same time another, more profound development of critical importance had begun: the creation at the larger, more sophisticated banks of an operational loan process with a more or less formal procedure for recognizing, pricing, and managing risk. In these emerging systems, loans are classified by risk, internal profit centers are charged for equity allocations by risk category, and risk adjustments are explicitly made. In short, the formal measurement and quantification of risk has begun to occur and to be integrated into the loan-making process. This is a sea change--or at least the beginning of one. Formal risk-management systems are designed to reduce the potential for the unintended acceptance of risk and hence should reduce the pro-cyclical behavior that has characterized banking history. But, again, the process has just begun. The federal banking agencies are trying to generalize and institutionalize this process in the current efforts to reform the Basel Capital Accord. When operational, near the middle of this decade, the revised accord, Basel II, promises to promote not only better risk management over a wider group of banks but also less-intrusive supervision once the risk-management system is validated. It also promises less variability in loan policies over the cycle because of both bank and supervisory focus on formal techniques for managing risk. In recent years, we have incorporated innovative ideas and accommodated significant change in banking and supervision. Institutions have more ways than ever to compete in providing financial services. Financial innovation has improved the measurement and management of risk and holds substantial promise for much greater gains ahead. Building on bank practice, we are in the process of improving both lending and supervisory policies that we trust will foster better risk management; but these policies could also reduce the pro-cyclical pattern of easing and tightening of bank lending and accordingly increase bank shareholder values and economic stability. It is not an easy road, but it seems that we are well along it.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of an Order of Prohibition against Nelly Kann de Gouverneur, a former employee and institution-affiliated party of Banco Mercantil, C.A., S.A.C.A., New York Agency, New York, New York. Ms. Kann, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order based on her alleged violations of law and unsafe and unsound practices in connection with the structuring of deposits of cash and monetary instruments by private banking customers of Mercantil resulting in violations of the Currency and Foreign Transactions Report Act (31 U.S.C.  5311 et seq.) A copy of the Order is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application of BB&T Corporation, Winston-Salem, North Carolina, to acquire F&M National Corporation, Winchester, Virginia, and its eleven wholly owned subsidiary banks. The Board also has approved BB&T Corporations proposal to acquire F&M's nonbanking subsidiaries, F&M Trust Company, Winchester, Virginia, and Johnson Mortgage Company, LLC, Newport News, Virginia. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
No content found
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Office of the Comptroller of the Currency Federal Reserve: Susan Stawick (202) 452-2955 FDIC Frank Gresock (202) 898-6634 OCC Dean DeBuck (202) 874-4876
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan The value of public outreach by the Federal Reserve At the dedication of the Visitors Center at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois June 28, 2001 Thank you. I am pleased to have the opportunity to help launch the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago's new Visitors Center and to participate in its dedication to the memory of Nancy Goodman. In this Center, the Chicago Fed has worked to explain the Federal Reserve and its role in the economy in a way that is accurate, informative, and even entertaining. That is no easy task. The Federal Reserve is a complex institution with a wide variety of responsibilities. And while we at the Fed think constantly about issues related to the challenges of check clearing, bank regulation, or monetary policy, we are most often communicating with colleagues and experts and thus do not confront the need to convey our observations in nontechnical, accessible, or entertaining formats. Nevertheless, as I think you'll see, the Bank has done a commendable job of creating appealing and enjoyable displays. Outreach efforts such as this are important because a central bank in a democracy depends on the trust and confidence of the citizenry. To earn and maintain that trust, the Fed must communicate to people about what we do and why we do it. These displays represent one innovative example of how the Fed fulfills its responsibility to reach out and educate the public about the important mission and work of its central bank. I have often remarked that the Federal Reserve draws its strength from its close ties to local and regional economies across the nation and depends heavily on input from a cross-section of the nation's citizens. We who have the privilege of serving as policymakers--the Board members in Washington and the presidents of the Reserve Banks--receive valuable information about economic and business life beyond Washington's Beltway from those who communicate with the Reserve Banks and those who serve as directors. As keen observers of local economies, the directors contribute vitally to the formulation of national monetary policy and to the governance of the Reserve Banks. It is thus appropriate that we are joined by many Seventh District directors today, and I want to take this opportunity to thank them and their colleagues for their contributions to our work. Considering the significant role this Visitors Center will play in the Bank's outreach efforts, it is fitting that we are dedicating it to the memory of Nancy Goodman, who died tragically in an auto accident last year. In her 32 years with the Chicago Fed, Nancy Goodman was instrumental in creating and guiding the Bank's public outreach program. She played a pioneering role at the Chicago Reserve Bank, both as a communicator and as the first woman to serve the Bank as a senior vice president and member of the Management Committee. I believe she would have been proud of this initiative to help the public understand how the Federal Reserve affects individuals' lives and the U.S. economy. Let me note in closing that the Federal Reserve's regional structure also allows the Banks to experiment with various techniques for reaching out to the public, a benefit exemplified by this Visitors Center. I understand this Center includes, for example, an interactive computer game in which visitors are challenged to pick the right monetary policy. When asked whether I might want to give it a try, I became very cognizant of the downside risk: flunking the quiz in front of you and the gathered media. So, of necessity, I developed a risk-minimizing strategy: I would now like to turn the podium over to the Chicago Fed's president, Michael Moskow, who has had the advantage of practicing the game during its installation. Thank you.