Testimony of Dolores S. Smith Director, Division of Consumer and Community Affairs How is the credit card industry treating its customers? Before the Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit of the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives November 1, 2001 Thank you for inviting me to appear before this subcommittee. I am the director of the Federal Reserve Board's Division of Consumer and Community Affairs, which carries out the Board's responsibilities for administering a number of the consumer protection laws that make up the Consumer Credit Protection Act, including the Truth in Lending Act. As the subcommittee focuses on how the credit card industry is treating its customers, I would like first to provide some background information that might be useful to the subcommittee. The Truth in Lending Act ("TILA") is the primary federal law that governs credit cards. It requires that consumers be provided with disclosures about the costs and terms of a credit card on or with a solicitation or application, at account opening before the first transaction, and with each periodic billing statement. TILA also requires creditors to credit accounts on the date the consumer's payment is received, it limits consumers' liability for unauthorized use of a credit card, and it provides procedures for resolving billing disputes. In addition to TILA, credit cards are also subject to various state laws that may regulate the terms of the accounts. As part of the bank examination process, the Federal Reserve enforces the federal banking laws, including the Truth in Lending rules, with respect to the approximately 980 state-chartered banks that are members of the Federal Reserve System. Other regulators enforce these rules with respect to other institutions. The Board also investigates consumer complaints against state member banks, and forwards complaints involving other creditors to the appropriate enforcement agencies. In addition, the Federal Reserve's Division of Research and Statistics monitors certain trends in the credit card industry. I will share some observations with the committee based on the information that we have gathered in carrying out these functions. Growth in the Credit Card Industry Among the notable changes in consumer financial services over the past few decades has been the growth in the use of credit cards. Credit cards are used both as a means of payment and as a ready source of credit. Recent estimates suggest that in 2000, consumers used about 1.4 billion credit cards (or roughly 9 cards per holder) to purchase nearly 1.5 trillion dollars in goods and services in more than 20 billion individual transactions. It is estimated that at year-end 2000, consumers in the U.S. owed nearly $675 billion on general purpose credit cards. In the Fair Credit and Charge Card Disclosure Act of 1988, the Congress directed the Federal Reserve Board to transmit annually to the Congress a report about the profitability of credit card operations of depository institutions, a copy of which is attached to my testimony . In 2000, credit card banks--those banks established primarily to issue and service credit card accounts--reported net earnings before taxes of about 3.14 percent of outstanding balances adjusted for credit card-backed securitization. This was slightly lower than in 1999. Recent earnings on credit card operations compare favorably with returns during the mid-1990s, but they remain below their high point attained in 1993. The Federal Reserve has for many years sponsored surveys of consumers to gather information on their financial circumstances including their use of different forms of credit. The most recent Survey of Consumer Finances shows that in 1998 almost three-fourths of American families had one or more general purpose or retail store credit cards. General-purpose cards that have a revolving feature, often referred to as "bank-type" cards, show the most notable increase, rising from 16 percent of families in 1970 to 68 percent in 1998. Moreover, the survey shows that the holding of bank-type credit cards has become more widespread across all income groups over this period. For example, among families in the lower income quintiles, holdings of bank credit cards increased from two percent in 1970 to 28 percent in 1998. Over the past several years, competition has led to substantial shifts in market shares among the industry's largest issuers of credit cards. Most of the larger issuers have grown by acquisition of credit card portfolios or by mergers. But several of the more rapidly growing firms have recently attracted market share by offering comparatively low-rate cards and attractive balance transfer programs. Others have gained market share through co-branding and offering rebates or annual fee waivers. The large number of direct mail solicitations of credit cards, some 3.5 billion in 2000, attests to the continuing desire of card issuers to expand and retain their cardholder base. The response rate on credit card solicitations in 2000 was estimated at .6 percent Recent Trends in Credit Card Pricing Over the past several years, pricing practices in the credit card market have changed significantly. Prior to the early 1990s, card issuers competed primarily by waiving annual fees and providing credit card program enhancements. Since then, however, interest-rate competition has played a much more prominent role. Many card issuers now offer a broad range of plans with differing rates depending on credit risk and consumer usage patterns. Risk-based pricing makes credit cards available to consumers with less-than-perfect credit histories, but also makes the credit more expensive for some consumers. Many issuers have also moved to variable-rate pricing, with rates that automatically adjust with changes in the market. A general decline in credit card interest rates from mid-1991 is the result of many factors, including a sharp drop in card issuers' cost of funds and greater competition on this aspect of credit card pricing. Today, credit card interest rates average about 14.6 percent. Apart from the information we have about interest rates, we have little systematic information about other aspects of credit card pricing. Consumers' Attitudes Toward Credit Cards The Federal Reserve has sponsored or participated in surveys of consumers' attitudes toward, and their understanding of, credit cards. The results of some of these surveys were published in an article in the Federal Reserve Bulletin for September 2000, a copy of which is attached . Overall, consumers' opinions about the use of credit cards are somewhat more negative in 2000 than they were a generation ago, but those who actually hold bank-type cards are more favorable in their views than the general population. A survey in January 2000 reveals a divergence of views, and suggests that consumers who currently have negative views may have developed these in part based on their perceptions of other consumers' difficulties, rather than from the individual's own experiences. Ninety-one percent of the surveyed consumers with bank-type cards agreed that they were generally satisfied in their dealings with their own credit card companies. Ninety percent agreed that their credit card company treats them fairly, and 86 percent agreed that they could easily get a card from another company if they were not treated well. And yet, about 40 percent of those surveyed said that credit card use is "bad" and that consumers would be better off if there were no credit cards. Consumers' views about their personal experiences with credit cards and their relations with their current card issuers are more favorable than their opinions of the relations of consumers in general. For example, 88 percent of surveyed consumers agreed with the statement that "credit card companies make too much credit available to most people." In contrast, about 90 percent of the holders of bank-type credit cards said that credit cards provide a useful service to consumers, and about 70 percent said that most people are satisfied in their dealings with card companies. About 60 percent disagreed with the statement that consumers would be better off without cards. Consumer Complaints As I noted earlier, the Board investigates consumer complaints against state member banks, and forwards complaints received about other creditors to the appropriate enforcement agency. The annual volume of complaints received by the Board has been increasing since 1997. Complaints about credit cards have similarly increased, rising by 58 percent over the same period. In the year 2000, the Board received approximately 2,400 complaints about state member banks; a like number of complaints about other institutions were referred to other enforcement agencies. About 1,000 of the 2,400 complaints processed by the Board, or about 40 percent, were complaints about credit cards. These complaints are divided into a number of categories, but our review of the complaint data shows that about 60 percent of the credit card complaints fall into three categories: disputes about billing errors; concerns about penalty charges and other fees (such as late fees, over-the-limit fees, and annual fees); and disputes involving alleged errors in reporting consumers' payment history and the denial of requests for credit cards due to erroneous credit reports. Information About Credit Terms The Board has also participated in surveys that looked at consumers' knowledge of credit terms and their views concerning the availability of information about account terms. It appears that consumer awareness of APRs on bank-type credit cards has continued to rise, and was measured by the survey at 85 percent of bank-type card holders. The survey also gathered information on consumers' perception about the ease of obtaining information about credit terms. About two-thirds of consumers in the 2000 survey who had bank-type credit cards said that obtaining information on credit terms is easy; only 7 percent of holders of bank-type cards believed that obtaining information on credit terms is "very difficult." The percentages of consumers holding these views about credit cards are similar to earlier surveys about credit generally. However, about 60 percent of the respondents did state that they found solicitations offering a low introductory rate to be confusing. Disclosures for Credit Card Solicitations and Applications The Fair Credit and Charge Card Disclosure Act of 1988 amended the Truth in Lending Act to require that the annual percentage rate (APR) for credit card purchases and certain other costs be disclosed in direct mail and other solicitations and applications to open credit and charge card accounts. Prior to that, consumers generally were not required to be provided with cost information until account opening. The purpose of the 1988 Act was to ensure that consumers receive key cost information about credit and charge cards early enough to have the opportunity to comparison shop. The act requires that the disclosures be given in the form of a table, with headings. The table is required to be in a prominent location on or with the solicitation or application. Over the years, as the pricing of credit card programs has become more complex, the cost disclosures accompanying credit card solicitations have also become more complex. Multiple APRs may apply to a single program. For example, there may be a temporary introductory rate that applies to purchases and balance transfers, a fixed or variable rate that applies after the temporary introductory period, a separate rate for cash advances, and one or more "penalty rates" that apply if the consumer makes late payments. As interest rates and other account features became more complex, and the cost disclosures became longer, some card issuers have chosen to use reduced type sizes instead of allocating additional space for the disclosures. In some cases it became difficult for consumers to use the disclosure table to readily identify key costs and terms for comparison shopping. In contrast, the promotional materials that accompany a credit card application or solicitation may highlight a low introductory APR in a large, easy to read type size. The rate that will apply after the introductory period may appear much less prominently in the promotional material, or it may appear only in the disclosure table. The disclosure table itself may be in a location that is less likely to capture the consumer's attention--for example, on the reverse side of an application or on the last page of a multi-page solicitation. Last year, the Board made changes in the regulatory scheme to help ensure that consumers receive meaningful disclosures on a more consistent basis. The Board revised its rules for credit card solicitations and applications to make the required disclosure table more noticeable, simpler, and easier to use. These changes became effective on a mandatory basis on October 1, 2001, and consumers should now be seeing improved disclosures with the credit card offers they receive. One of the key changes requires card issuers to disclose the regular APR for purchases in at least 18-point type, under a separate heading in the disclosure table, so that it is more prominent than any temporary introductory rate. The requirement that the disclosures be "clear and conspicuous" was also strengthened, to clarify that they must be readily noticeable. Disclosures automatically meet this standard if they are in at least 12-point type. Cash advance and balance transfer APRs must also be included in the table under the revised rules. Although the Truth in Lending rules require that a cost disclosure table be included with credit card solicitations, the rules generally do not regulate the manner in which the account terms and features are presented in a card issuer's promotional materials. Often the promotional materials highlight a low introductory rate, while the higher rate that will apply when the introductory rate expires is more difficult to locate. Sometimes it appears only on the disclosure table as a separate insert. We note that the bankruptcy reform legislation currently pending in the Congress contains a provision to address this concern, and would require card issuers to list the permanent rate more prominently in promotional materials. Enforcement As I mentioned earlier, the Federal Reserve conducts compliance examinations of about 980 state member banks. In terms of size, 72 percent of the banks examined have total assets of $250 million or less. For the vast majority, credit card lending is not a significant activity. In fact, of the banks supervised by the Federal Reserve, only three banks are identified as having substantial credit card portfolios representing 50 percent or more of the banks' total loans. In our examination of state member banks that are involved in credit card lending, we have not found any widespread practices that violate applicable laws or regulations. Violations have been found in only a small number of banks and, even in those cases, the violations generally have been isolated in scope. Attachments
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today the approval of the application of Jamaica National Building Society, Kingston, Jamaica, to establish a representative office in Fort Lauderdale, Florida. Attached is the Order relating to this action.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday approved actions by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Chicago and Minneapolis, decreasing the discount rate at the banks from 2 percent to 1-1/2 percent, effective immediately.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday approved actions by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Cleveland, Atlanta, Kansas City and Dallas, decreasing the discount rate at the banks from 2 percent to 1-1/2 percent, effective immediately.
Remarks by Vice Chairman Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. At the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants National Conference on Banks and Savings Institutions, Washington, D.C. November 8, 2001 Certified Public Accountants: Partners in Financial Stability I appreciate the opportunity to participate in the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants' (AICPA) National Conference on Banks and Savings Institutions. As Certified Public Accountants (CPAs) serving the banking industry you contribute to our financial system as bank managers, financial executives, analysts, internal and external auditors, and advisers. Your role in strengthening the internal control and transparency of banking organizations is a major one that we, as banking supervisors, are increasingly recognizing in our risk-focused examination policies, capital adequacy approaches, and disclosure initiatives. The Impact of Terrorist Attacks Recently you, as CPAs with key roles in our financial system, have seen at first hand financial institutions and other companies--and indeed our country--work to overcome the challenges caused by the attacks of September 11. Besides causing unimaginable personal loss and grief, the attacks rippled across our country, disrupting sales, production, and air travel and damping the confidence of consumers and businesses. And the attacks severely, if temporarily, disrupted financial market operations and activity. As testimony to the resilience of the American spirit, the immediate impact of the attacks has proved transient. Our society and, in particular, our financial system are rebounding from the initial influences of the attacks. In the financial sector, market participants showed great creativity, flexibility, and resolve in addressing the difficulties that arose on September 11. To help the process, the Federal Reserve moved quickly to ensure financial market liquidity through record lending at the discount window and an infusion of funds through open market operations. We encouraged financial institutions to provide their customers reasonable relief, such as waiving late payment fees, extending loan terms, restructuring debt obligations and easing credit terms in situations arising from the September 11 attacks. Also, the Federal Reserve and other federal banking agencies jointly issued a statement indicating our willingness to work with banks when increased extension of credit to customers may have caused a temporary decline in capital ratios. As companies directly affected by the attacks struggled to resume their business, the accounting profession assumed an important role. This was recognized in part by the release by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) on September 14 that relaxed the auditor independence rules to permit auditors to help their clients with internal reconciliations and certain accounting-records-related recovery efforts. With the SEC's action, many accountants and auditors quickly assisted clients in reconstructing records and information. As a result, many private firms and financial institutions were able to move to off-site locations and quickly restart operations. We applaud your efforts and those of the businesses you serve. The longer-term prospects for the U.S. economy remain sound, just as they were before September 11. Our flexible markets, entrepreneurial spirit, well-educated work force, and major advances in information technology provide a sound foundation for the long-term growth of productivity, employment, and standards of living. In the medium term, consumer and business behaviors will significantly affect the way our economy progresses. Policymakers have reacted vigorously to changing macroeconomic conditions. As you know, the Federal Open Market Committee has reduced its target for the federal funds rate by 150 basis points since September 11. Banking Supervision and Accounting and Disclosure The Federal Reserve has long supported sound accounting policies and meaningful public disclosure by banking and financial organizations with the objective of improving market discipline and fostering stable financial markets. Effective market discipline can complement bank supervision and regulation. With sufficient accurate and relevant information, market participants can better evaluate counterparty risks and adjust the availability and pricing of funds to promote better allocation of financial resources. The concept of market discipline is assuming greater importance among international banking supervisors as well. The most recent proposal to amend and augment the Basel Capital Accord, which was published in January and called Basel II, seeks to strengthen the market's ability to aid bank supervisors in regulating capital adequacy. It consists of three pillars, or tools: risk-based capital (pillar I), risk-based supervision (pillar II), and disclosure of risks and capital adequacy to enhance market discipline (pillar III). This approach to capital regulation, with its market-discipline component, signals that sound accounting and disclosure will continue to be important parts of our supervisory approach for many years to come. I understand that these efforts to enhance our capital rules will be addressed later today in a separate session, so I will not discuss them in depth. However, I would like to point out that our goal in the Basel process is to develop a risk-sensitive framework that provides appropriate incentives to banking organizations to maintain strong capital positions and sound risk-management systems. The history of the 1990s, which included episodes of global financial instability spreading from small countries through international capital markets and banks, underscores the need to maintain adequate capital in the internationally active banks. For the sake of maintaining financial global stability, I hope that everyone values that goal. On an international level, Basel II would also improve disclosure by many banks in foreign countries as well as in the United States. The proposal recommends specific disclosures to convey better an institution's capital adequacy and risk profile. The incentives in Basel II should greatly diminish the opacity that cloaks many international financial institutions and help bring about a convergence in international norms on banking disclosure. I believe that counterparties will expect, indeed force, greater disclosure. Recent history certainly teaches us that understanding a counterparty's balance sheet and risk appetite is necessary for accurately pricing any transaction or even for deciding whether to engage in a transaction. Increased Supervisory Emphasis on Controls and Risk Management The Federal Reserve also seeks to strengthen audit and control standards for banks. This goal is in large part due to our recognition several years ago that examining banks' business processes can provide a clearer assessment of their safety and soundness than focusing exclusively on transactions--that is, reviewing the means rather than the results. Examining such processes became more necessary after we recognized years ago that the widening use of derivatives enabled an institution to substantially change its risk profile within hours--possibly shortly after the conclusion of an examination. In addition, interim reporting is becoming more important in our monitoring of individual banks and the sector as a whole. The quality of management information and financial reporting is dramatically affected by internal control systems, including internal and external audit programs. Financial reporting and good internal controls are rising in importance with banking regulators because they directly affect our ability to promptly identify institutions in distress and work toward a satisfactory resolution. My view is that the financial sector benefits when bankers, regulators, and auditors all focus on the quality of internal control systems. Banks benefit directly from having more efficient and effective operations and indirectly from improved audit efficiency and reduced regulatory burden. Auditors benefit from learning more about their client's business and better understanding the supervisor's perspective. As banking supervisors, we benefit from tapping the auditor's expertise in assessing systems of internal control. Auditor expertise is not sufficient, however. Auditor independence is also critical to the relationship between supervisors and the profession. Without it, the process breaks down; suspicions rise over auditor motives and the supervisor's ability to rely on auditor findings and recommendations is diminished. The revisions of Basel II also address internal controls through a proposed capital charge for operational risk. Developments such as the widespread adoption of technology, large-scale mergers, e-commerce, and the increased prevalence of outsourcing, can increase operational risk. While the regulatory reforms are being developed--and in the interim before a formal revision to the Basel Accord--supervisors will continue evaluating management's ability to control operational risk. This aspect of the effort to amend the Accord has been criticized by some in the industry either as unnecessary or as creating a formulaic approach that is only a crude approximation of a proper capital charge. I suggest the events of September 11 indicate that operational risk is an issue that cannot be ignored. I invite both internal and external auditors to monitor Basel II and offer their counsel on how best to reflect operational risk in capital. Both managers and supervisors focused on the operational aspects of banking in the years leading up to year 2000, a date that was uneventful in large part because of the preparations that were made. Now we know that the possible loss of physical facilities and key personnel, which were generally not considered as part of Y2K planning, must be factored into financial firms' disaster-recovery scenarios. Similarly, providing reliable backup to key infrastructure--electricity, telephone, water--is likely to play a larger role in financial institutions' planning. As we go forward, the operational preparedness of regulated institutions will figure more prominently in our supervisory program. The Role of the External Auditor in the Banking Sector The Federal Reserve and other supervisory agencies have long recognized the key role that the accounting and auditing profession plays in assessing internal controls. Guidance issued by the Federal Reserve and other regulatory agencies reflects the important role that both internal and external auditing play in enhancing internal systems and monitoring risk. As required by statute, banking organizations with assets of more than $500 million must have annual independent audits. The banking agencies encourage all small institutions to follow suit. In a similar vein, the Basel Committee has produced extensive guidance on the roles of both the external audit and internal audit and the ways these can be factored into the supervisory process. As I said, market discipline is becoming a key element of supervisory thinking, and market discipline depends on prompt, accurate financial information. External auditors help significantly in ensuring that financial statements are reliable and useful to the marketplace. Periodic financial statements of banking organizations are also used by the Federal Reserve in our risk-focused supervision programs. These reports contribute to pre-examination planning, facilitate off-site monitoring programs, and ultimately help in determining the institution's financial condition. A strong external audit program assists us in moving away from detailed, burdensome, and what some consider invasive examinations. Supervised institutions might well decide to use the expertise of the external auditor for more than routine financial reports. External auditors could also review the quality of internal controls and systems and assess the internal audit function's scope and adequacy. We are all well aware that a strong system of internal control is the foundation for the safe and sound operation of the financial organization. Furthermore, a financial institution's board of directors is responsible for setting the control environment, and senior managers are responsible for laying down the internal control process. Recognizing that responsibility, I would not be surprised if boards of directors and senior managers are asking their external auditors to review the internal audit function and recommend improvements in light of the changed business environment post-September 11. External auditors should be prepared to answer such questions from directors as the following: Is the internal audit function appropriate for the size of our institution and the nature and scope of our business, and are we receiving unbiased assessments? Is our internal audit function competent given the current environment? Are the resources available to our internal audit function adequate given the nature, complexity, and risk of our institutions' activities? Are weaknesses being fully identified and reported promptly to us? External auditors can also help federal regulators by encouraging financial institutions to frequently reassess and refine their risk-management practices. A risk-management system should continually monitor financial risks in a changing business climate, such as the outlook for credit risk, market risk, liquidity risk, and operational risk. Of course, the potential benefits of external audits can be realized only when audits are performed according to high professional standards. This is not a time when the accounting profession can be complacent. Each firm should review its own internal practices to ensure that audits are of the best quality, consistent with sound practices and high standards of ethics and independence. The peer-review process should be viewed as an opportunity to improve quality rather than a somewhat routine compliance obligation. I certainly encourage the auditing profession to police itself and to strive continually to improve audit quality. By doing so you avoid suspicions regarding the competence and judgment of independent auditors. Also keep foremost in mind that your ultimate client is not management but the shareholder. You need not only to watch for misleading financial statements but also for companies that apply the technical rules underlying accounting standards in ways that cover losses or otherwise obscure the condition and performance of an institution. Attention to these matters will help ensure that audits deliver their promised benefits, that transparency is enhanced, and that market participants and supervisors are better able to regulate the risk-taking of financial institutions in ways that promote financial stability. Conclusion In the face of a rapidly evolving external environment, I see wisdom in staying the course, encouraging improved risk-management processes and better disclosure. I also see, however, that the time is right for banks and other financial institutions, infrastructure providers, and utilities to work independently and, possibly, collaboratively, to yield a tougher, more resilient financial system. I am sure that regulators will support those efforts, and I encourage the accounting and auditing community to provide your professional support as well. The accounting and auditing community has traditionally played an important role improving risk-management and disclosure practices. Whether manager, analyst, auditor, or adviser, CPAs truly are partners in the quest for greater financial stability. I appreciate the opportunity to share these thoughts with you today, and thank you for the important role you play.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between the Bank of Ephraim, Ephraim, Utah, and the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. A copy of the Order is attached.
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan Energy supply At the James A. Baker III Institute for Public Policy, Rice University, Houston, Texas November 13, 2001 Chairman Greenspan presented identical remarks at the meeting of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce board of directors, Washington, D.C., November 14, 2001 Thank you, Jim, for that kind introduction. As I understand it, the goal of the Baker Institute here at Rice is to expand the bridge between the world of ideas and the world of action. There are few who have over the years joined those worlds as successfully as you have. As economic policymakers understandably focus on the impact of the tragedy of September 11 and the further weakening of the economy that followed those events, it is essential that we do not lose sight of the policies needed to ensure long-term economic growth. One of the most important objectives of those policies should be an assured availability of energy. That imperative has, if anything, been elevated by the heightened tensions in the Middle East--an area that harbors two-thirds of the world's proven oil reserves. It is one you doubtless know well, since I am told the Baker Institute is engaged in a series of major research projects on energy supply and security issues. This evening I would like first to review our recent experiences with prospective imbalances in energy supply and demand and the importance of market prices in resolving those imbalances. Then I plan to focus on the extraordinary role played by technology in augmenting potential energy supplies, particularly of oil and gas. Technology alone is unlikely to restore the United States to the position of price leader, which characterized our role in world oil markets for most of the industry's first century. We, presumably, will never return as the overwhelmingly dominant world producer. The position of the United States in price leadership and in the exercise of pricing power in oil markets dates back to John D. Rockefeller and Standard Oil. Reportedly appalled by the volatility of crude oil prices in the petroleum industry's early years, he endeavored with some success to control them. After the breakup of Standard Oil in 1911, pricing power remained with the American oil companies and later with the Texas Railroad Commission, which raised allowable output to suppress price spikes and cut output to prevent sharp declines. Indeed, U.S. crude oil production still accounted for more than half of the world total as late as 1952. However, that historic role came to an end in 1971, when excess capacity in the United States was finally absorbed by rising demand. At that point, the marginal pricing of oil, which for so long had been resident on the Gulf Coast of Texas, moved to the Persian Gulf. To capitalize on their newly acquired pricing power, many producing nations in the Middle East nationalized their oil companies. But the full magnitude of their pricing power became evident only in the aftermath of the oil embargo of 1973. During that period, posted crude oil prices at Ras Tanura in the Persian Gulf rose to more than $11 per barrel, significantly above the $1.80 per barrel that prevailed unchanged from 1961 to 1970. The sharp price rise of the early 1970s engendered an abrupt end to the extraordinary period of growth in U.S. oil consumption and the increased intensity of its use that was so evident in the decades immediately following World War II. Between 1945 and 1973, consumption of oil products rose at a startling 4-1/2 percent average annual rate, well in excess of growth of real GDP. Subsequent to 1973, however, oil consumption grew, on average, only 1/2 percent per year, far short of the rise in real GDP, an issue to which I shall return. But despite OPEC's persistent endeavors to control oil prices, the story since 1973 has been more one of the power of markets than one of market power. The signals provided by market prices have eventually resolved even the most seemingly insurmountable difficulties of inadequate domestic supply. The gap projected between supply and demand in the immediate post-1973 period was feared by many to be so large that rationing would be the only practical solution. But it did not quite happen that way. To be sure, mandated fuel-efficiency standards for cars and light trucks accompanied slower growth of gasoline demand. However, some observers argue that, even without government-enforced standards, market forces would have driven increased fuel efficiency. Indeed, the number of small, fuel-efficient Japanese cars that were imported into the United States markets increased significantly in the late 1970s after the Iranian Revolution drove up crude oil prices eventually to $40 per barrel. Moreover, at that time, prices were expected to go still higher. Projections of $50 per barrel or more were widely prevalent. The Department of Energy had baseline projections showing prices reaching $60 per barrel--the equivalent of more than twice that in today's prices. The failure of oil prices to rise as projected in the late 1970s is a testament to the power of markets and the technologies they foster. Today, in real terms the price of crude oil is three-fifths less than in December 1979. It is encouraging that, in market economies, well-publicized forecasts of crises more often than not fail to develop, or at least not with the frequency and intensity proclaimed by headline writers. This was certainly the case for the concerns about potential surges in the price of gasoline this past summer. The reason, of course, is that producers and consumers alike react to price signals in ways that help to fend off the predicted disasters. This phenomenon was especially evident a year ago, when markets worked to help allocate limited supplies of fuel oil and to mitigate the problems that many had feared at the outset of the heating season in the United States, especially in the populous northeastern states, where fuel oil is widely used for heating. In response to low inventories of home heating oil, prices rose, demand slowed, and we drew in large amounts of heating oil from Europe. In the event, retail prices peaked early last winter and have declined appreciably since. While the potential for a shortage of heating oil dominated concerns a year ago on the eastern seaboard, sharp increases in natural gas prices were threatening to markedly escalate the heating bills for the rest of the nation, which, in fact, they did for several months. A significant shortfall of gas in storage, brought about by growing domestic demand and a limited ability to import, had been a particular concern at the time. But since the start of the year, spot prices for natural gas have fallen significantly, largely because the earlier run-up in prices induced a dramatic rise in drilling, a boost to production, and a curtailment of demand. Of course, demand has also been restrained by the overall weakness of the economy. Responses to rising prices were also a major factor in stemming California's electric power crisis of earlier this year. When higher prices for wholesale electricity were finally allowed to be passed on to households and industry customers last spring, demand slowed dramatically. To be sure, had California experienced average summer weather, the partial passthrough of cost increases to the retail level arguably would have been inadequate to equilibrate demand and supply. But milder weather, coupled with a slowing economy, brought California through the summer with an ample buffer of excess capacity relative to peak loads. This was scarcely an exercise in free-market dynamics, but the experience did underscore that even the demand for electric power is price sensitive. Although the short-term problems of the past year in the markets for gasoline, natural gas, and electric power were resolved without significant disruption, these events and others over the past few years have brought renewed attention to the longer-run prospects for American energy markets. Largely in response to past oil price increases, the energy intensity of the United States economy has been reduced by almost half from the levels of the early 1970s. Much of the energy displacement was accomplished by 1985, within a few years of the peak in the real price of oil. Progress in reducing energy intensity has proceeded further since then but at a lessened pace. This more modest pace should not be surprising, given the generally lower level of real oil prices that has prevailed since 1985. What has changed dramatically in recent years is the production side of the oil and gas markets, where technological changes are taking place that are likely to make existing energy reserves stretch further while keeping long-term energy costs lower than they otherwise would have been. The development of seismic techniques and satellite surveillance that are facilitating the discovery of promising new oil reservoirs worldwide have roughly doubled the drilling success rate for new-field wildcat wells in the United States during the past decade. New techniques allow far deeper drilling of promising pools, especially offshore. The newer recovery innovations reportedly have raised the proportion of oil reserves eventually brought to the surface from one-third to nearly one-half in recent decades. One might expect that, as a consequence of what has been a dramatic shift away from the hit-or-miss wildcat oil and gas exploration and development of the past to more advanced technologies, the cost of developing new fields and, hence, the long-term marginal costs of new oil and gas would have declined. And, indeed, these costs have declined, but by less than might otherwise have been the case, because much of the innovation in oil development outside of OPEC has been directed at overcoming an increasingly inhospitable and costly exploratory environment. That has been the consequence of more than a century of draining the more immediately accessible sources of crude oil. One measure of the decline in the marginal cost of additions to oil availability in recent years is the downdrift in the prices of the most distant contracts for future delivery of Light Sweet crude oil. Spot prices have soared and plunged over the past decade, but for the most distant futures contracts--which cover a time frame long enough to seek, discover, drill, and lift oil--prices generally have moved lower. The most distant futures prices in 2001 dollars fell from $25 per barrel just before the Gulf War to $17 to $18 a barrel a year and a half ago. The current six-year futures contract has risen, on net, over the past year and has been a little more than $21 per barrel in recent days. Arguably, however, this rise is related less to technology and the structure of underlying marginal costs and more, in all likelihood, to the future implications of current heightened Middle East tensions. The long-term marginal cost of extraction presumably anchors the long-term equilibrium price and, thus, is critical to an evaluation of the magnitude and persistence of any current price disturbance. Over time, spot prices are inexorably drawn back to the long-term equilibrium price, as the balance between underlying supply and demand is restored. A premium over long-term marginal costs doubtless exists for oil because so much of the world's crude oil reserves are in areas where disruptive turmoil is always a latent threat. The longer-term outlook for natural gas prices is less tied down by history or current practice. Unlike oil, the natural gas consumed in the United States, as you know, is almost solely produced in the United States and in Canada, from which last year we imported 16 percent of our 23 trillion cubic feet of demand. The story of gas supply in the United States, in contrast to oil, is thus largely a domestic one. Compared with oil, the industry is relatively new. Natural gas, as you know, is more difficult to transport in its gaseous form through pipelines and particularly challenging in its cryogenic form when transported as a liquid. It is the latter problem that has kept imports of liquefied natural gas at negligible levels. Drilling technologies for natural gas have mirrored those for oil, and through much of the industry's history one could not tell whether a successful drilling hit would turn up valuable crude oil or natural gas, which was often flared for lack of transport facilities. But with many of the transportation hurdles surmounted, demand has surged over the past two decades, reflecting the myriad new uses for natural gas in industry and as a clean-burning source of electric power. At times in recent years, supply has not kept pace with the growth of demand. Indeed, the inventories of natural gas held in underground storage caverns were drawn down to record low days' supply levels last winter. As a consequence, spot prices of gas quadrupled, engendering a surge in domestic drilling. But the very technologies that have improved our drilling success rates have also enabled us to drain newly discovered gas reservoirs at an increasingly faster pace. Data for Texas, for example, show that in recent years more than 50 percent of recoverable gas reserves were extracted from wells in the first year of operation, compared with roughly 25 percent in the 1980s. As a consequence, to achieve a rise in net marketed gas, gross new discoveries, and the drilling activity associated with them, have had to accelerate. The combination of demand for environmentally superior gas in our power plants and continued expansion of household and industrial use will be putting significant pressure on the reserve base as the economy recovers. Virtually all new electric power facilities now on the drawing board are gas-fired or dual-fired. To meet the higher anticipated needs, the always-present tradeoff between our energy requirements and our environmental concerns will doubtless be heightened in the years ahead. Such inevitable tradeoffs have stimulated renewed interest in a greater expansion of coal, nuclear power, and nonconventional sources of energy. The nation, of course, has large reserves of coal, and, in terms of thermal equivalents, we produce more of it than either natural gas or petroleum. Moreover, rapid technological improvements in coal mining have resulted in productivity gains in this industry that have exceeded those for the economy as a whole by a wide margin and have led to sizable declines in the relative price of coal. Still, the use of coal has been restrained by environmental concerns over emissions from coal-burning power plants. Technology has already alleviated some of these concerns and, given the realistic range of alternatives, coal is likely to remain a significant factor in our energy future. An obvious major alternative to coal in electric power generation is nuclear power. Low prices for competing fuels and concerns about safety have been a drag on this industry. Nevertheless, its share of electricity production in the United States increased from less than 5 percent in 1973 to 20 percent about a decade ago and has since maintained that share. Given the steps that have been taken over the years to make nuclear energy safer and the obvious environmental advantages it has in terms of reducing emissions, the time may have come to consider whether we can overcome the impediments to tapping its potential more fully. Up front, of course, are the concerns of making plants safe from terrorist attacks. More difficult is the challenge of finding an acceptable way to store spent fuel and radioactive waste. If this problem can be resolved and if some of the long-deferred research and development efforts to make nuclear power more economical were to bear fruit, the potential for this source of energy could doubtless be much enlarged. The remainder of our domestic energy production comes from a variety of renewable energy sources, the most prominent of which are hydroelectric power from dams and the energy generated through the recycling of waste and byproducts from industry and agriculture. Solar and wind power have proved economical in some small-scale and specialized uses, but together they account for only a tiny fraction of renewable energy. More broadly, substantial experimentation and exploration is under way in the application of advanced technologies to alternative approaches to energy production and conservation. Improvements in fuel cell technology, for example, hold considerable promise in a wide variety of commercial applications, and fuel-efficient hybrid cars are approaching wider use. With rapid scientific advances, it is not inconceivable that technological breakthroughs will allow nonconventional energy sources to play a larger role in meeting our demand for energy than is currently the case. In the more distant future remains the potentials of fusion power. A significant breakthrough in this area has been sought for years but seems discouragingly beyond reach. But success could provide a major contribution to our nation's future power needs. The input costs of fusion power would be minor, and it produces negligible nuclear waste or pollutants. We cannot say with certainty how these technological possibilities will play out in the future, but we can say with some assurance that developments in energy markets will remain central in determining the longer-run health of our nation's economy. The experience of the past fifty years--and indeed much longer than that--suggests the important role that can be played by market forces in conserving scarce energy resources, directing those resources to their highest valued uses, and ultimately ensuring adequate productive capacity for the future. It is obvious that to successfully exploit new sources of energy and the technologies that engender energy conservation will require considerable long-term investment in research, exploration, and development. An updated and improved means of energy transport, especially electric power transmission and distribution, will also be essential. To be sure, energy issues present policymakers and citizens with difficult decisions and tradeoffs to make outside the market process; as always, national security and environmental concerns need to be addressed in setting policy. But those concerns should be addressed in a manner that, to the greatest extent possible, does not distort or stifle the meaningful functioning of our markets. We must remember that the same price signals that are so critical for balancing energy supply and demand in the short run also signal profit opportunities for long-term supply expansion. Moreover, they stimulate the research and development that will unlock new approaches to energy production and use that we can now only scarcely envision.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation New York State Banking Department Federal and state banking regulators today announced the issuance of a joint Order to Cease and Desist and Order of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty and Monetary Payment against the State Bank of India, Mumbai, India, and the banks three branches in New York, New York, its branch in Chicago, Illinois, and its agency in Los Angeles, California. The State Bank of India, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order. The State Bank of India paid a total of $7.5 million in fines under the Order issued by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the New York State Banking Department. One half of this amount will be paid to the U.S. Department of the Treasury and the other half to the State of New York under applicable federal and state laws. The fines result from the banks apparent engagement in unsafe and unsound practices related to its failure to establish and maintain procedures reasonably designed to assure and monitor compliance with the Bank Secrecy Act, violations of the FDICs regulations relating to Bank Secrecy Act compliance, failure to maintain correct and accurate books and records, and violations of New York State law relating to the banks obligation to maintain accurate books and records and to make reports to the New York State Banking Department. A copy of the joint consent Order is attached. Media Contacts: Federal Reserve Board: Dave Skidmore (202) 452-2955 Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation: David Barr (202) 898-6992 New York State Banking Department: Bethany Blankley (212) 618-6620 Federal Reserve Board: Dave Skidmore (202) 452-2955 Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation: David Barr (202) 898-6992 New York State Banking Department: Bethany Blankley (212) 618-6620
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Cerritos Valley Bancorp, Artesia, California; the Cerritos Valley Bank, Artesia, California; and the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
Remarks by Governor Laurence H. Meyer Before the National Association of Business Economics, St. Louis, Missouri November 27, 2001 Before and After To promote macroeconomic stability, monetary policy must respond to changing economic conditions. On that premise, I always start my thinking about monetary policy by identifying what I like to call the outlook context. Is inflation likely to be stable, or will it rise or fall? Is the economy losing momentum rapidly or will it likely grow at or above trend? The outlook context today must include both the state of the economy before September 11 and the implications of the events of September 11. At this point, of course, it is impossible to fully disentangle the contributions of the pre-September 11 momentum and the post-September 11 impact. Moreover, neither contribution is crystal clear--especially the latter, for which we have only early data. Conceptually, however, assessing economic prospects today requires us to blend the two considerations. Then I will turn to the challenges policymakers face as a result of the complex forces identified in the outlook context. Here I will address three questions: Has monetary policy been less effective recently compared with earlier periods of aggressive easing to counter sharply slower growth or the onset of recession? What are the implications of facing a significant adverse shock at an already-low nominal federal funds rate? What is the appropriate relationship between monetary and fiscal policies, in general and today? Let me remind you, before I proceed further, that my remarks today reflect my own views of the outlook and challenges facing monetary policy. I am not speaking for the Federal Open Market Committee or the Board of Governors. Challenges Facing the Fed Immediately after the Events of September 11 Before I turn to the outlook and the challenges faced by monetary policymakers, I want to discuss the Federal Reserve's reaction to the disruption of financial transactions and the increased demand for liquidity and bank lending that resulted from the events of September 11. When we think of September 11, we will always, first and foremost, remember the thousands whose lives were lost or were irreparably harmed--the personal tragedies. Immediately after the attacks, many others worked hard to restore a normal course of business, essential to avoid compounding the personal tragedies with economic dislocations. Doing so was especially a challenge for those involved in the financial services industry. The area in New York City hit by the attacks--including the two World Trade Center towers--housed many financial firms and constituted an important part of the infrastructure of financial markets. The events of that day could have disrupted those markets and the activity that they financed for a considerable time. Instead, we learned once again that the financial sector is enormously resilient. In many cases, people needed only a cubicle and a computer to return to work. In contrast, restarting an airplane factory or an auto factory if its production had been disrupted would have taken an extremely long time. Such resumption of business by financial firms depended on careful planning in advance, on backup data, on software, and so forth. To be sure, securities markets and transactions, particularly the clearing and settlement in the government securities markets, were disrupted for a period. But financial markets and firms adapted and responded, contributing to the quick resumption of normal business. The Fed, too, had many challenges at that time. One was that Vice Chairman Roger Ferguson was the only Board member in Washington D.C. on September 11. The Chairman was in Basel, I was in Beijing, and the two other Governors were elsewhere in the United States. This didn't diminish the ability of the Federal Reserve System to respond quickly and effectively. The Vice Chairman, together with the Reserve Bank presidents and staff members at the Board and the Reserve Banks, did a superb job. We wore many hats on that day and the days immediately following. First, we acted as the provider of liquidity. Normal channels of borrowing and payments were disrupted. Some banks that were counting on receiving funds had to rely on the Federal Reserve instead. Security firms and businesses impeded in their usual borrowing turned to the banks, and, for primary dealer firms, to Federal Reserve open market operations, increasing the need for extra Federal Reserve liquidity. The Vice Chairman issued a brief statement immediately after the attack that signaled the Fed's readiness to supply liquidity as needed: "The Federal Reserve is open and the discount window is available for meeting liquidity needs." We used every existing vehicle for injecting liquidity and even invented a new one--the use of large swap lines with foreign central banks to inject dollar liquidity. Discount window loans soared instantly from around $200 million to a peak of about $45 billion on September 12 and later, as markets began to function better, Federal Reserve repurchase agreements soared from $25 billion to nearly $100 billion. Second, we used monetary policy to counter what was sure to be a sharp adverse shock to demand and to bolster confidence that the Fed would do what was necessary to support the economy. As supervisors, we and our sister banking agencies asked banks to work with their customers to meet legitimate credit needs. We benefited from our diverse financial system--one in which a strong banking system complements a dynamic capital market. When one is ailing, the other will often be--and in this case was--ready to take up the slack. And the banking system did its part admirably. We surveyed banks about whether they were limiting the drawdowns on pre-existing lines of credit. They informed us they were not. And we sought to understand the exposure of the banking system to the industries most immediately affected, such as airlines, insurance, travel, entertainment, and lodging. We also had to focus on our own operational responsibilities, ensuring the continuation of vital payment services, including electronic transfers and check clearing. Finally, we had to work with market players to resolve clearance and settlement disruptions as a result of damage to telephone and other physical infrastructure. We were in touch with the banks and other participants in financial markets, we were in touch with the other banking and security regulators, and we were in touch with each other within the Federal Reserve System. The Fed and other banking and financial supervisors have received much praise for their quick and effective response. Though pleased with our ability to cope, we recognize that the country now faces contingencies for which no one specifically planned. So, like many other organizations, we are looking for lessons to be learned and actions to be taken. The Outlook Context Of course, coping with the implications of the terrorist attacks for our financial infrastructure has been only a part of the difficult job we faced in recent weeks. Assessing the condition of the economy and the appropriate course for monetary policy have remained central concerns at the Fed. The outlook today is a complicated mixture of the momentum and forces at work before September 11 and the new set of forces as a result of the events of that day. Forecasters today often begin by almost apologizing for even offering a point forecast of economic activity over the coming year, given the prevailing uncertainties. But we all have our jobs to do, including forecasters. Forecasters can offer us a careful assessment of the forces at work and some plausible scenarios of how they may interact. Policymakers have to begin with a best guess about the outlook to guide their policy response. The uncertainties we face today reflect at least three considerations. First, we were still struggling to understand the severity of the slowdown and the prospects for recovery before September 11. Second, the effects of September 11 depend, to a major degree, on the psychological influences on households and businesses. I am often asked, by the way, whether I believe that the economy drives psychology or psychology drives the economy. I always respond that I believe the economy drives psychology; and that, if I believed the reverse, I would have become a psychologist. I will return to the role of psychology in a minute, and even admit its potentially important role in shaping the near-term prospects. The third consideration is that unexpected events--from additional terrorist incidents at home to how well the war on terrorism is going abroad--may be especially important in shaping the outlook. The State of the Economy before September 11 We need to integrate two aspects of the state of the economy before September 11 into the current outlook. First, and perhaps most obvious, is the momentum of the economy and specifically how close the economy was to a rebound. Second, the strength of the rebound will ultimately depend importantly on the pace of underlying productivity growth and hence the average rate of growth possible once the economy reaches full employment. Momentum before September 11. At least two schools of thought about the economy's momentum existed just before September 11. Some believed that economic expansion would resume within a quarter or two, while others foresaw a more protracted period of weakness. Though I viewed economic growth as perhaps bottoming out after slowing to a near-zero rate in the second and third quarters, I expected growth to build only slowly and therefore expected the pace of recovery through the first half of 2002 to be disappointing. To understand the sharpness of the slowdown that still gripped the economy at the time, we have to begin with the period of exceptional performance in the second half of the 1990s. Many interpreted this experience as suggesting that old rules no longer applied and, as a result, discounted long-standing regularities between resource utilization rates and inflation and worried less about limits to sustainable growth. I was not inclined to this view. To be sure, higher productivity growth was likely for a considerable period. But the initial adjustment to the acceleration in productivity also brought temporary bonuses that were not likely to persist over the longer run. They took the form of a temporary spurt in demand growth--pushing the unemployment rate progressively lower--and a temporary disinflationary impetus, preventing the increased utilization rates from immediately raising inflation. The persistent above-trend growth and progressive increase in utilization rates suggested to me a danger of overheating and higher inflation. This concern encouraged a series of tightening moves in an attempt to slow economic growth at least toward the new higher trend and thereby prevent still higher utilization rates. In my view, a period of below-trend growth was likely to be required to unwind what I viewed as an unsustainably high rate of resource utilization. As a result of a coincidence of forces, the economy slowed much more steeply than the Fed expected or intended. Besides the effect of monetary policy, a sizable rise in energy prices over 1999 and 2000 and into early 2001 contributed to an erosion of aggregate demand. But most important was the shock that hit the economy in late 2000 and early 2001--a reassessment of the profitability of producing and owning high-tech equipment. This shock was manifest in both the financial markets and in the real economy. It resulted in a sharp correction in equity prices in the technology sector--the bursting of the technology bubble--and, at the same time, it led to a sharp retrenchment in the demand for and production of high-tech equipment. The economy slowed to the point where real GDP was nearly flat in the second quarter of this year and likely would have been nearly flat in the third quarter, even without the events of September 11. The pre-September 11 prospects for recovery reflected the cumulative easing by the Fed, a sizable fiscal stimulus already in train, declining energy prices, and the normal internal dynamics that contribute to recoveries. I will return to these prospects for recovery in a moment. Long-term growth prospects. The strength of the rebound expected before September 11 also was being shaped by the underlying pace of productivity growth. Recent revisions to the National Income and Product Accounts and other data, as well as the sharpness of the retrenchment in high-tech investment, had forced a reassessment of the prospects for longer-term productivity growth. The revisions suggested that, while that performance was still impressive, it was less exceptional than it had appeared before the revisions. In particular, the revisions had lowered the rate of productivity growth from 1998 through 2000 and, as a result, trimmed most estimates of the sustainable rate of economic growth going forward. Before the annual NIPA revisions earlier this year, many had revised their forecasts of underlying productivity growth progressively upward to near 3 percent or even slightly higher, compared with the 1-1/2 percent rate achieved during the twenty-five years before the mid-1990s. The revisions suggested that underlying or structural productivity growth peaked at closer to 2-1/2 percent--still a remarkable improvement over the pre-1995 average but not quite as spectacular as many had thought. In addition, some of the earlier productivity growth, reflecting the frenzied pace of investment in high-tech equipment, now appears to have been unsustainable. Consensus estimates of longer-term productivity growth were revised downward to a range of 2 percent to 2-1/2 percent. The Effects of September 11 In thinking about the effects of the September 11 events, I find focusing on three subperiods to be useful. The first subperiod includes the third and fourth quarters and perhaps the first quarter of next year. The second is the remainder of a typical monetary policy forecast period, in this case through 2003. And the third is the longer run, beyond 2003. The near-term effects. The near-term effects are dominated by the disruption to certain industries--airlines, in particular, but also other travel-related industries such as hotels, entertainment, and tourism--and the psychological effects on households and businesses. Policymakers can do very little over this timeframe to affect the outcome, other than to bolster consumer and business confidence by what they do and say. We have a variety of measures of consumer sentiment. In normal times, these measures, in my view, offer relatively little predictive power for household spending. That is because the economy usually drives psychology and mostly not the other way around. As a result, we can predict consumer confidence with the same variables we use to predict household spending. Measures of consumer confidence have relatively little incremental value in explaining consumer spending in such periods. During the Gulf War, however, we learned, if we did not already know, that in extraordinary times consumer confidence can change abruptly in a way not foreshadowed by the incoming economic indicators. Another way of saying this is that sometimes the equations we use to predict consumer confidence make dramatic forecast errors. Such errors may indicate an "exogenous" psychological shock and thus provide additional information to forecasters. In the aftermath of September 11, it was widely expected that consumer sentiment would plummet and that the data would provide information about the severity of the psychological shock and help to forecast the projected cutback in consumer spending. Even before these data were available, many forecasters were calibrating the impact on consumer spending in terms of the Gulf War experience. The two leading measures of consumer confidence rendered something of a split decision after September 11. The University of Michigan measure slid in September, but most of the decline occurred before September 11 and was broadly consistent with the deterioration shown by the incoming economic data. This measure has remained fairly stable since then. The Conference Board measure, on the other hand, declined sharply in October, but this sharper drop in the Conference Board measure brought it into closer alignment with the cumulative decline in the Michigan Index. So, surprisingly, at this point, whether September 11 significantly affected consumer confidence is unclear. At least, the effect is smaller than what many had expected. We don't have good measures of business sentiment, but it is generally reasonable to mark down business spending plans in anticipation of a negative psychological effect if you are doing so for households. In the current case, businesses have apparently made an especially grim assessment of the near-term strength of the economy and orders for nondefense capital goods have plunged, resulting in further cutbacks in investment and downward revisions to the forecast in the near term. On balance, the magnitude of the further declines in consumer and business spending as a result of the events of September 11 is unclear. It seems, in my view, to have had a material effect on business spending and, perhaps, a somewhat smaller effect on consumer spending. Of course, at times of high of uncertainty, the signals are typically mixed. So they are today. We have some signs of quite remarkable resilience. For example, the stock market plummeted immediately after September 11, but it has already returned to its pre-September 11 level. The exchange value of the dollar, measured against the currencies of a broad range of our trading partners, has remained remarkably stable, despite the presumption that the September 11 shock would disproportionately affect the United States relative to our trading partners. Auto sales soared to record levels in October, prompted, to be sure, by zero-interest rate financing. They likely will fall back once the incentives are reduced, but, in any case, the surge signals that households are still willing to make large long-term commitments despite the uncertainty and risks of a recession. Moreover, non-auto retail sales have recovered some--though not all, to be sure--of the ground they seem to have lost in the immediate aftermath of September 11. The rest of the short-run forecast. The consensus forecast today is generally described as V-shaped, starting from September 11. This description refers to the pattern of an outright decline in output for a couple of quarters, followed by a quick move to above-trend growth. The forces of recovery include an unusually aggressive macroeconomic policy response, including this year's easing of monetary policy to date and the stimulus associated with a series of fiscal policy actions--including those already implemented and those still under consideration. Until recently, I would have said "under consideration and expected," but recent developments have forced a reassessment of the certainty of a further stimulus package. I will return to the fiscal policy story in a moment. But more stimulative policies are far from the only factor that should contribute to a rebound. Recoveries also reflect powerful internal dynamics. For example, the amplitude of declines in output during recessions is often determined to a major degree by the severity of inventory liquidation. Once firms have reduced their stocks to desired levels, they quickly raise production to avoid a further decline in stocks. Doing so helps kick-start recoveries. All the natural forces we expected to contribute to recovery before the events of September 11, while perhaps delayed, are likely to become part of the recovery in 2002. Aside from a rebound in inventory investment, these include the end of the retrenchment under way in high-tech investment. Just the return to flat investment spending, from the sharp declines of recent quarters, will give the economy an important boost. Such a rebound will likely be reinforced by a dissipation of gloom and resulting rebound in consumer confidence. Together these factors suggest the potential of a return to more solid rates of growth next year. Forecasters, at such times as this, like to remind their audiences that they are making conditional forecasts. That is, their forecasts are based on certain assumptions. Of course, a forecaster has to be held accountable for his or her judgment about assumptions, as well as the forecast given the assumptions. But, in this case, a typical assumption is that the terrorist attack was a one-time event and is not followed by other disruptive and destructive events. Of course, the anthrax mail-attacks are another form of terrorism and may have already had an incremental effect on consumer and business psychology and behavior. They will divert additional resources into provision of security rather than production of final output. Until the last few weeks, most of the events that could materially affect the economy seemed more likely to be "bad" events damping near-term confidence and spending. But the more-rapid-than-expected progress of the war in Afghanistan reminds us of the possibility of upside surprises as well. In any case, we must recognize the heightened uncertainty to the forecast associated with the unusual degree of "event risk." Longer-term considerations. The possible effects of September 11 on productivity growth are the major issues over the longer term. Three sets of forces could lower longer-term productivity growth. The first is a reallocation of resources toward security away from the production of other goods and services. The purchase of increased security by a firm shows up as an added expense of producing goods. That is, business costs increase without resulting in higher measured output. Costs associated with security definitely are rising noticeably. In addition, some firms may diversify the location of their workers, increasing security at the expense of higher production costs. Financial firms, as well as firms in some other sectors, may build in redundancies to ensure continued operations in the event of future terrorist attacks. Firms may also add a larger buffer in the form of inventories to mitigate the supply disruptions that might follow terrorist attacks, retreating somewhat from just-in-time inventory management. Many productivity shocks, in my view, are probably more to the level of productivity than to the growth rate of productivity. Of course, if the adjustment to the level occurs over a protracted period, it may feel like a shock to the growth of productivity. With a technological innovation, for example, the higher level of productivity is likely to emerge only gradually, as the innovation is disseminated through the economy. In addition, such a technological advance may not really be a one-time event but may be based on a continuing series of innovations. In any case, such innovations are likely to result in higher growth over a number of years. The effects of higher business costs associated with security are (we can hope) a one-time decline in the level of productivity. I expect the level effect to be completed within only a year or two, given the immediacy of the need. The result in this case is, therefore, a transitory effect on the growth rate of potential output for a year or two, followed by a return to the rate of productivity growth that would have prevailed in the absence of the higher costs for security. The second set of forces that could lower long-term productivity growth relates to the federal budget. The increased spending on defense and homeland security are unlikely, in my view, to be offset fully by cuts in government spending for other programs or by higher taxes. As a result, budget surpluses will likely be lower over the longer run than otherwise. To the extent that they are, national saving will be lower, real interest rates will be higher, and private capital formation will be lower. As a consequence, the level of productivity will be lower than otherwise, with the growth effect spread over a considerable period. Given the link between national saving and productivity and the dimension of the expected effect, I expect that the resulting decline in productivity through the crowding-out effect would be small, perhaps not more than 1/10 percentage point a year for a while. Third, a wide variety of other indirect behavioral responses are possible. For example, firms in general may be somewhat more averse to risk and less willing to make long-term commitments. Households may want a larger cushion of accumulated wealth, perhaps increasing the saving rate for a time. They may also reallocate their wealth toward safer and more-liquid assets. These developments, on balance, would take a toll on longer-term productivity growth. Nevertheless, in my view, they are not large enough to alter the conclusion that the pace of innovation in information technology and other industries has raised underlying productivity growth to a rate faster than prevailed in the twenty-five years prior to the mid-1990s. Still, the productivity story is exceptionally complex. On the one hand, we can take some comfort that underlying productivity growth should continue at a pace above that achieved from the early 1970s to the mid 1990s. On the other hand, the economy is suffering the consequences of a more recent decline in underlying productivity growth--a decline from the higher rate of underlying productivity growth enjoyed in the late 1990s and into early 2000. Challenges Facing Monetary Policy Monetary and fiscal policymakers face many challenges under the circumstances. I will focus on the challenges facing monetary policymakers. One of these is calibrating monetary policy appropriately in light of fiscal policy. Is Monetary Policy Less Effective than Previously? Monetary policy before September 11 had eased by 300 basis points, the most aggressive easing over a comparable period in almost twenty years. However, many see the effect of that easing as disappointingly small. As a result, a question often asked today--indeed, almost always asked when the economy is in the midst of a recession or pronounced slowdown--is whether monetary policy is less effective today than it used to be. One explanation is the normal lags in response of spending to monetary policy actions. We would not, for example, have expected much effect through the second quarter and only a modest effect in the second half, based on past experience and the forecasts of our models. But other factors, too, have contributed to the perception that monetary policy is less effective. These include the fact that the shocks weighing on the economy have been larger in magnitude and spread out in time and, partly as a result, forecasters in general have been continually revising down their forecasts of economic activity. Many have been surprised, in particular, by the sharpness and persistence of the retrenchment in high-tech investment and by the degree to which economic activity abroad slowed along with that in the United States. Perhaps the most important consideration has been the evolution in overall financial conditions as monetary policy has eased. Monetary policy does not work through the effect of a decline of the federal funds rate itself on spending. Indeed, there is no direct effect here at all. Monetary policy works through the so-called transmission mechanism, through channels that include short-term private interest rates, longer-term private interest rates, equity prices, and the exchange rate. The effects on other rates and asset prices depend on the changes in the target funds rate relative to expectations already embedded in the financial markets and on changes in those expectations as a result of policy actions, statements accompanying those actions, and other developments. Other things being equal, a decline in the funds rate will lower short- and long-term private interest rates, raise equity prices, and depreciate the dollar. The combined effects can be quite powerful. In the current episode, however, other things have not been equal, and the dollar has not depreciated nor has the stock market appreciated. Of course, monetary policy presumably wouldn't have eased so much if the dollar had depreciated or the stock market had risen. At any rate, there has been painfully little pass-through from the funds rate to the operative channels, other than declines in private short-term interest rates. The absence of pass-through does not reflect a change in the fundamental effectiveness of monetary policy so much as the offsetting effect of other financial shocks that were occurring at the same time the Fed was easing. One way of quantifying the degree of pass-through is to compute a financial conditions index that combines the effects of all the transmission channels into a single number. Goldman Sachs and Macroeconomic Advisers have developed differing methodologies for computing such an index. Basically, they weight changes in various financial conditions by their relative importance as determinants of private spending. The message from such indexes is that financial conditions have not improved since the Fed began to ease and, indeed, may even have deteriorated. The response of overall financial conditions to monetary policy easing in this episode has been unusual, if not unique. In previous recession periods, financial conditions have generally improved as the Fed has eased, reflecting the pass-through to lower short- and long-term private rates, higher equity prices, and a lower exchange rate. The major reason for the failure of financial conditions to improve in this case is that one of the major shocks--the reassessment of the profitability of owning and producing high-tech equipment--was, at the same time, a shock to financial markets and to aggregate demand. The financial shock was the revaluation of equity values as a result of this reassessment--the bursting of the equity bubble in the technology sector. In addition, the dollar appreciated rather than depreciated, for reasons no one seems to fully understand. So two of the key channels in the transmission of monetary policy behaved differently than expected. Whether or not long-term interest rates have fallen as much as would have been expected from historical regularities is more difficult to assess. One reason is that part of the decline in long-term rates occurred before the Fed began to ease, but in anticipation of that easing. In addition, the limited effect on long-term government rates may partly reflect the offsetting upward pressure from the change in long-term budget implications of recent and prospective fiscal policy measures. These include the large tax cut passed earlier this year, the effect on spending of the fiscal measures already passed in response to the events of September 11, and effect of further spending increases and further tax cuts now under consideration. The fiscal policy effects appear to be contributing to expectations of a robust recovery and a relatively quick and aggressive reversal of monetary policy. This presumption can be seen in the federal funds futures market, from which we can extract a forecast of the expected funds rate over the next year and a half. The market expects the funds rate to begin rebounding in mid-2002 and to rise significantly over the following year. Finally, rising risk spreads have boosted longer-term private rates, especially on below-investment-grade securities. On balance, a number of factors have combined to restrain the economy, despite the sizable cumulative decline in the federal funds rate. I would not conclude, however, that monetary policy is in general less effective because of structural changes that may have occurred. But I do believe that the financial shocks that have occurred--including the shocks to equity prices and the dollar--have required monetary policy to move more aggressively than otherwise would have been the case. The Implications of an Initial Low Federal Funds Rate: Hold Our Powder or Respond Especially Aggressively to Adverse Shocks? On September 11, the federal funds rate was already low--3-1/2 percent. Since that time, the funds rate has been reduced another 1-1/2 percentage points. Indeed, on September 11, there was less room to maneuver than in previous post World War II recessions. Does this mean that the Fed should "keep its powder dry," as some have argued, holding back on further easing in case the downturn turns out to be more serious or in case there are additional adverse shocks? I believe such a strategy would be misguided--indeed the reverse of what would be appropriate. Given the initial low level of the nominal federal funds rate, we face the risk that, in what is arguably a worst-case scenario, that rate could be driven to zero, the practical limit for a nominal interest rate. This of course is the situation that has lately confronted the Bank of Japan and is referred to the problem of the zero nominal bound. In my view, the appropriate policy response, when confronted with such a potential limit, is to respond especially aggressively to any adverse demand shock, in effect, substituting speed of the move for the cumulative size of the easing. The danger in waiting is that inflation might drift lower, limiting the ability to drive the real federal funds rate into negative territory, as might be necessary to support a timely recovery. In the worst case, as in Japan today, inflation might turn to deflation, limiting the ability to lower the real policy rate even to zero. The implication of starting with an unusually low interest rate is therefore not to go slowly but to more aggressively respond to any adverse shock. I did not view this consideration as relevant before September 11 and not even immediately after. But it was a consideration in my favoring the last 50-basis point move. At the very least, this line of reasoning is a powerful counter-argument to the "keep your powder dry" strategy. Monetary and Fiscal Policies The last of the policy issues I want to address is the relation and interaction between monetary and fiscal policies. Beginning in the Reagan Administration, a division of labor had evolved between these policies. Fiscal policy became less focused on short-run stabilization and more focused on longer-run considerations, such as promoting growth through reductions in marginal tax rates (the Reagan approach) or through reductions in structural budget deficits (the Clinton approach). This left short-run stabilization for the most part in the hands of the Fed. Many argue that this focus fits with the comparative advantage of monetary and fiscal policies. It is widely believed that monetary policy has no effect on long-term growth rates for real GDP, aside from the benefits arising from achieving and maintaining price stability. In particular, beginning from a position of price stability, more accommodative monetary policy cannot raise the economy's long-term rate of growth. Monetary policy, on the other hand, is often viewed as having a comparative advantage in short-run stabilization. That advantage is based on the ability of monetary policymakers to change policy in a flash, compared with the difficult and often contentious process of legislating changes in taxes or spending, which are subject always to the threat of a presidential veto. This characterization is, I think, quite fair. It describes differences in what Milton Friedman called the inside lag for the two policies--the lag between the shock and action in response to the shock. The inside lag is unquestionably shorter for monetary policy. But Friedman also noted an outside lag--the lag from the policy response to its effect on aggregate demand and spending. Here the lag for monetary policy is probably longer than for some fiscal policy actions--for example, for spending that can be implemented quickly, like extensions of unemployment insurance, and for some tax changes, including tax rebates or surcharges, changes in withholding rates, and some temporary investment incentives, depending on the specific design. Indeed, Friedman argued that the long and variable lags for monetary policy, due to outside lags, made monetary policy an unlikely instrument for short-run stabilization. Of course, some fiscal policy actions have very gradual effects as well--perhaps as gradual as those from monetary policy actions. These slowing-acting policies include changes in capital gains tax rates, supply-side responses to changes in marginal tax rates, and many programs where spending builds gradually over time. Monetary and fiscal stimulus can complement each other when shocks are large and adverse and when interest rates are already low. However, putting together an appropriately stimulative fiscal package is not always easy. The political debate and resulting delay in implementing fiscal stimulus following the events of September 11--even when all sides seemed to agree that a prompt fiscal response was appropriate--remind us that fiscal policy generally is not an agile or flexible instrument for short-run stabilization. One recurring problem is that virtually every fiscal change has some effect on the distribution of government benefits or taxes across taxpayers of different incomes. Every time we try to implement a stabilization package, we therefore get Republican and Democratic options that reflect their philosophical differences. From Reagan through Clinton, it was widely accepted that good fiscal policy meant permanent changes with positive supply-side effects. To be sure, Republicans and Democrats always differed about how to implement such a supply-side fiscal policy. But when the need is for temporary demand-side stimulus, they differ even more. The first principle in the design of a temporary demand stimulus is, virtually by definition, to avoid permanent changes that were not appropriate before the need for the demand stimulus. Permanent changes mean effects on out-year budgets--in this case lower surpluses, hence lower national saving, higher real interest rates, lower private investment and lower growth in productivity and output. This problem is not just in the future. Bond markets have become very aggressive in building in expectations of rising short-term rates over time into today's long-term interest rates. Higher long-term rates today in response to the long-term effects of permanent fiscal policy changes would offset part of the intended stimulus. The second principle for a temporary demand-side fiscal program is to implement policies that have a large "bang for the buck." Even with agreement on these two principles, designing a temporary demand-stimulus package is a challenge. In general, temporary policies have effects that are more difficult to predict than those from permanent changes. And temporary policy changes typically leave a hole on the other side and therefore create other problems down the road. Still, on balance, a package of well-crafted, temporary, quick-acting demand-side fiscal measures would, in my view, make a constructive contribution to supporting and strengthening the rebound expected next year. The current debate in the Congress about fiscal stimulus creates a challenge for forecasters and monetary policymakers alike. Monetary policymakers condition their policy on a forecast, and the forecast must include some assumption about fiscal policy. In most cases, and especially when fiscal policy was not a player in stabilization policy, this dependence of monetary policy on fiscal policy was not a serious issue. But today, the forecast for 2002 is quite sensitive to whether or not a stimulus package is implemented and to the specifics of the package. I, for one, have assumed that the Congress would reach a timely agreement and implement a package with temporary measures characterized by relatively high bangs for the buck. While I have some doubt that this will be the outcome, I have not changed my forecast yet. Conclusion The economy contracted in the third quarter and appears to be contracting again in the current quarter. Fortunately, a considerable amount of stimulus is already in train because of the combination of monetary policy easing and fiscal policy measures already enacted. The Congress may still pass additional fiscal stimulus before year-end. In addition, the internal dynamics that support recovery may soon come into play. In this case, the economy should gradually strengthen over next year. For the moment, the risks continue to be to the down side, but the front-loaded response of monetary policy has already made an important contribution to countering the further adverse shock and, in addition, has provided some insurance against downside risks. Once the economy shows signs of moving to a rate of growth above trend, the Fed will have to reassess the appropriate degree of stimulus and, at some point, begin the return to a more neutral policy. Footnotes Many forecasters during this period began to measure underlying or "structural" productivity growth in terms of the path of its components: multi-factor productivity growth and the contribution to productivity growth from capital deepening. Multi-factor productivity is the increase in productivity that is not directly related to the growth of non-labor physical inputs, specifically capital. Capital deepening is the increase in productivity as a result of the increase in the amount of capital relative to labor. The multi-factor productivity component is adjusted to remove cyclical influences. The capital-deepening component, on the other hand, reflects the year-to-year pace of investment and hence increments to the capital stock. The frenzy in high-tech investment, particularly in 1999 and into early 2000, resulted in an unsustainable pace of capital deepening. As a result structural productivity growth during this period was higher than would be sustainable when high-tech investment returned to a more normal pace.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the issuance of a Cease and Desist Order against the Gulf Bank, Miami, Florida. A copy of the Order is attached.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Office of the Comptroller of the Currency Office of Thrift Supervision Agencies Adopt Recourse, Direct Credit Substitutes and Residual Interests Final Rule The federal bank and thrift regulatory agencies today announced the publication of a final rule that changes their regulatory capital standards to address the treatment of recourse obligations, residual interests and direct credit substitutes that expose banks, bank holding companies, and thrifts (collectively, banking organizations) to credit risk. The final rule, published in todays Federal Register , synthesizes the capital treatment outlined in two notices of proposed rulemakings issued in 2000--Recourse and Direct Credit Substitutes and Residual Interests in Asset Securitizations or Other Transfers of Financial Assets. The final rule treats recourse obligations and direct credit substitutes more consistently than the agencies current risk-based capital standards, and introduces a credit ratings-based approach to assigning risk weights within a securitization. The final rule also imposes a dollar-for-dollar capital charge on residual interests and a concentration limit on credit-enhancing interest-only strips, a subset of residual interests. The rule is effective on January 1, 2002. Any transactions settled on or after January 1, 2002, are subject to this final rule. Banking organizations that enter into transactions before January 1, 2002, may elect early adoption, as of November 29, 2001, of any provision of the final rule that results in a reduced capital requirement. Conversely, banking organizations that have entered into transactions before January 1, 2002, that result in increased capital requirements under the final rule may delay the application of this rule to those transactions until December 31, 2002. Media Contacts: OTS Sam Eskenazi (202) 906-6913 OCC Kevin Mukri (202) 874-5770 Federal Reserve David Skidmore (202) 452-2955 FDIC David Barr (202) 898-6992 OTS Sam Eskenazi (202) 906-6913 OCC Kevin Mukri (202) 874-5770 Federal Reserve David Skidmore (202) 452-2955 FDIC David Barr (202) 898-6992
Remarks by Governor Edward M. Gramlich At the New Technologies and Monetary Policy International Symposium, Bank of France, Paris, France November 30, 2001 Asset Prices and Monetary Policy During the past several years, changes in asset prices have attracted considerable attention from the public, from economic researchers, and from monetary policymakers. That attention is well deserved: Recent changes in asset valuations have been enormous, and they appear to have had substantial effects on the economy. The observation that asset prices influence macroeconomic performance is hardly new. Undergraduate macroeconomic textbooks generally teach that increases in wealth should boost household spending and that increases in stock prices should stimulate business investment. Moreover, a growing body of empirical evidence at both the aggregate level and the level of individual households and businesses supports these basic presumptions. But while progress has been made, I believe that our understanding of the empirical relationships and of the theoretical underpinnings of those relationships still remains incomplete. My remarks today will cover three topics. First, I will discuss the available empirical evidence from the United States on the effect of changes in asset prices on household consumption and business investment. Second, I will highlight a few aspects of the relationship between asset prices and household spending that I believe merit further research. Third, I will review how monetary policy has responded to asset price fluctuations among other elements of the economic environment in the United States during the past few years. Empirical Evidence on Asset Prices and Spending At the aggregate level, a wealth effect on consumption has been a mainstay of large-scale econometric models for at least thirty years. The forecasting model in use at the Federal Reserve Board in the early 1970s incorporated a 5-1/2 cent increase in consumption for each dollar of additional wealth. The econometric model of the U.S. economy in use today at the Federal Reserve Board includes a wealth effect as well, although somewhat smaller in size. Not all researchers agree, but most statistical studies suggest that an additional dollar of household wealth leads, over time, to a permanent rise in household consumption of about three to five cents. An important question for both economists and policymakers is whether households net worth summarizes all of the information about their balance sheets that is useful in predicting their spending, or whether a decomposition of net worth into various asset and liability categories can improve forecasts of their spending. Unfortunately, this question has proved difficult to answer. Today I will focus on the possibly different influences of equity wealth and housing wealth, although other components of balance sheets may be important as well. In the current version of the Federal Reserves econometric model, the estimated marginal propensities to consume out of stock market and other wealth are virtually indistinguishable. However, I would not want to exaggerate the ability of either the data or our statistical tools to pinpoint these separate influences, and at times in the past, the models estimated marginal propensity to consume out of non-stock-market wealth has been nearly twice as large as the marginal propensity to consume out of stock market wealth. Moreover, some recent research conducted outside the Federal Reserve argues that the marginal propensity to consume out of housing wealth likely exceeds the marginal propensity to consume out of equity wealth. The relationship between wealth and consumption as reflected in the Feds model has certainly had some real-world analogues in the past few years. For instance, sales of luxury goods such as jewelry and expensive automobiles were very brisk in the late 1990s, with reports indicating that spending was especially robust in locales where individuals were reaping large wealth gains from the technology and financial sectors. More generally, we observed a dramatic decline in the personal saving rate in the late 1990s. Personal saving--which is measured in the U.S. National Income and Product Accounts as the difference between disposable income and outlays--dropped from 6-1/2 percent of disposable income at the end of 1994 to roughly 1 percent in early 2000, when equity prices peaked. The magnitude of this decline is consistent with the runup in equity prices and the marginal propensity to consume out of equity wealth that appears in the Feds model. Nevertheless, until recently economists have been able to marshal little formal evidence that the observed relationship between aggregate spending and aggregate wealth could be traced to changes in spending by those households that actually experienced wealth gains. But that gap in our understanding is now being filled, at least regarding equity wealth. Several recent papers--including some by economists at the Federal Reserve Board--have documented a microeconomic relationship corresponding to the relationship that we have long observed in aggregate data. For example, one study that analyzed the response of individual households to changes in stock market wealth found that, over the 1983-to-1999 period, the spending of U.S. households that own stocks responded to movements in the stock market, whereas the spending of non-holders of stocks has no apparent link to stock prices. A second study has estimated that, in the second half of the 1990s, households in the top of the income and education distributions in the United States showed the largest consumption increases, consistent with the fact that these households owned the most stocks and experienced the largest gains in wealth. Unfortunately, microeconomic evidence on the link between housing wealth and consumption is much more limited. But the substantial gains in housing wealth that have been experienced in recent years and the disparate movement of house and equity prices make this an issue of both policy and academic interest. I hope that future analyses will add to our understanding of this linkage. Hence there seems little empirical question that changes in household net worth cause changes in household spending. To be sure, not every analysis of the link between stock prices and spending comes to the same conclusions as those of the studies I mentioned. Moreover, we certainly do not have a complete understanding of all aspects of this relationship. For example, we have fairly limited evidence to guide us on the important issue of distinguishing the role of housing wealth from equity wealth. On balance, however, the link between aggregate household wealth and spending has remained one of the sturdier relationships in macroeconomics. When we turn to business spending, the evidence in support of a direct causal link from equity prices to business investment is weaker. Indeed, neither Tobins q nor other approaches to formalizing the effect of equity prices on business investment have fared well in most empirical tests. Other influences on business investment aside from asset-price fluctuations--such as the acceleration in business output and the cash flow of firms--often have proven more robust and more important explanators of capital spending than stock prices. However, some careful research--again partly conducted by Federal Reserve economists--suggests that a cost-of-capital effect on investment comes through clearly in empirical models based either on natural experiments with exogenous shocks to the cost of capital or on other econometric techniques that identify the exogenous parts of observed changes in user cost. Other recent work suggests that investment is also affected by at least those movements in stock prices that reflect the discounted value of expected profits. This important literature is too complex for me to review in detail today. Let me say simply that, despite the empirical puzzles, I believe that the cost-of-capital effect is likely to be at work when stock prices rise or fall significantly. Two Unresolved Issues Regarding the Link between Wealth and Consumption Let me return to the relationship between household wealth and consumption. Although the current body of empirical literature on this topic sends a rather clear message, it does not answer all the questions. Let me highlight two unresolved issues that I find particularly intriguing and that deserve further study. The first issue pertains to the underlying forces causing the value of the stock market to change. The value of equities can change for two basic reasons: because market participants adopt a new view of future profits, or because market participants apply a different set of discount factors to those expectations of future profits. The discount factors incorporate both risk-free interest rates and equity premia, but I will refer to the discount factors simply as interest rates. Consider the effect of an increase in expected profits, say from a spurt in productivity. To the extent that higher expected profits reflect higher expected future output and income--and not just a redistribution of income from labor to capital--both economic intuition and formal models suggest that desired household spending should increase, all else equal. Consumers foresee their future higher income and want to spend some of it now. That response is a straightforward wealth effect on consumption. Now consider instead the effect of a decrease in interest rates, setting aside for a moment the implications of the interest-rate decline for investment and future output. In this scenario, households are not expecting higher future returns but are simply discounting the same stream of returns at a different rate, so it is less clear that they are truly better off and should increase their consumption. A further complication in evaluating these two scenarios is that the aggregate response of household spending and investment will generally feed back to asset markets and generate further changes in prices and discount rates. The nature and magnitude of these interactions depend on the consumption and investment decisions of households and firms, on the extent of unused labor and capital resources, on the openness of the economy, and on other factors. Untangling these connections is difficult theoretically, and even more so empirically. But the basic point is that wealth changes reflecting future profits (or productivity) and wealth changes reflecting interest rates could have very different effects on consumption. Analyses of the wealth effect often give insufficient weight to these complexities. I believe that further research on both the theoretical and empirical aspects of this issue could contribute significantly to our understanding of the relationship between asset prices and macroeconomic outcomes. A second area in which some further work is warranted is housing. The basic puzzle is this: Roughly speaking, the population currently occupies the stock of residential real estate and will continue to do so no matter what happens to its price. Suppose there is a rise in the relative price of housing. There is no doubt that this rise would increase computed nominal net worth, but why should it support increases in household spending? To articulate the puzzle more carefully, suppose that I intend to live in my current house forever and that the price of the house increases because of a decline in the discount rate for future housing services. In that case, my measured nominal wealth would be greater, but the nominal value of the housing services I am consuming currently and will consume in the future would also be greater. Thus, the increase in the value of my home would not provide me with any additional resources for greater consumption of real housing services or other goods and services. Yet, as I noted earlier, the empirical evidence supports the view that changes in the price of residential real estate do affect household spending. So what is missing from our simple story? One possibility is that the hypothesized increase in the price of my house reflects a change in the housing services that the house is expected to provide, perhaps because individuals have come to think that houses will depreciate more slowly in the future than we had believed. In this situation, a higher house price would be accompanied by an increase in my real consumption of housing services over time but--as long as I stayed in the same house--by no change in my consumption of other goods and services. A second complicating factor is that many homeowners do not intend to live in their current houses forever. Many expect to move to smaller houses, condominiums, or retirement communities as they get older. These individuals, who plan to downsize their housing over time, are truly better off when house prices increase, and any standard theory would predict that they will increase their consumption. At the same time, many individuals who do not currently own homes--or who own small homes--likely plan to purchase homes and increase their consumption of housing services in the future. These upsizers are worse off when house prices increase, and they will reduce their consumption of non-housing goods and services. The effect of changes in house prices on desired aggregate consumption depends on the relative number of individuals in these two groups and their marginal propensities to consume out of housing wealth. A third factor, which Chairman Greenspan has recently emphasized, is the effect of realizing capital gains in housing by selling ones house or by borrowing through a home equity loan. Accumulated home equity is not itself a liquid asset. In addition, its value is somewhat uncertain: Although general trends in real estate prices can be easily observed, nobody receives a statement in the mail saying how much his or her home is worth, and nobody can look up the value of his or her home in the newspaper. Selling a house, or getting ones house appraised and taking out a home equity loan, converts this illiquid home equity of uncertain value into liquid funds with known value. Recent Experience and the Response of Monetary Policy Let me now turn to the recent U.S. experience, including the macroeconomic consequences of movements in asset prices since the mid-1990s and the response of monetary policymakers. As you know, the second half of the 1990s saw a record-breaking run-up in equity values in the United States. In early 1995, the net worth of U.S. households was about 4-1/2 times their after-tax income, quite close to the average ratio during the preceding quarter century. Roughly five years later, in early 2000, the ratio of wealth to disposable income peaked at more than 6--the highest value in the fifty years for which comparable wealth data are available. Now, approaching the end of 2001, the wealth-income ratio has fallen back nearly to 5--still a bit high by historical standards but well below the peak. The primary driver of these recent developments has been the dramatic advance and partial retreat in the value of publicly traded equities. Between early 1995 and the peak in early 2000, the Wilshire 5000 stock-price index (which is a broad measure of equity prices) tripled, adding nearly $12 trillion to the wealth of U.S. households. Since the peak, the Wilshire 5000 has dropped by about one-third, corresponding to a loss in wealth of roughly $6 trillion. Not only have the recent movements in U.S. stock prices been extremely large, they have arguably affected more households than did past movements in the stock market because of the broadening ownership of corporate equities in the United States. According to the Survey of Consumer Finances, which is conducted every three years by the Federal Reserve, roughly 32 percent of American families owned equities in 1989 (either directly or indirectly through mutual funds, retirement accounts, and other managed assets). By 1998, 49 percent owned equities in some form. Thus, in less than a decade, the United States evolved from a society in which one-third of families owned stocks to one in which one-half of families owned stocks. During the same period, the value of residential real estate rose, but more slowly and more steadily than did the value of equities. Ten years ago, the value of residential real estate was about twice the value of the household sectors corporate equities. As stock prices soared in the 1990s, the share of equity holdings in household portfolios surpassed the share of owner-occupied housing. However, the recent combination of a strong housing market and faltering stock market has put aggregate housing wealth back on par with aggregate equity wealth. Now let me turn to the influence of these movements in asset prices on the conduct of monetary policy. The fundamental goal of our policy is to achieve maximum sustainable output and employment, which can be reached best in an environment of price stability. Therefore, the Federal Reserve must take an active interest in all the factors that affect economic performance, including business and consumer confidence, economic growth abroad, the foreign exchange value of the dollar, fiscal policy, and, of course, asset prices. We take the level of the stock market into account when we consider the economic outlook and monetary policy. But let me be clear: We do not target a particular level of equity prices. We attempt simply to judge the likely influence of the stock market as well as other important factors on the level of aggregate demand and aggregate supply and, hence, on the economys ability to achieve price stability and maximum sustainable employment. In this respect, the stock market plays the same role in our analysis as does any other influence on our outlook. While our goal of price stability can foster a favorable environment for business investment, we make no pretense to being able to control how that plays out in the stock market. We cannot avoid gauging the effect of the stock market on economic performance, but we do not target stock prices. The dramatic movements in asset prices over the past several years have affected aggregate demand and, to some extent, aggregate supply in the United States. In the late 1990s, the growth rate of U.S. labor productivity increased beyond the expectations of most observers. An important source of the faster pace of productivity was a surge in capital spending fostered by the development of new technology. Faster productivity growth was among the factors that boosted equity valuations; in turn, larger expected productivity advances and a lower cost of equity capital provided a further stimulus to investment. The pickup in investment combined with the wealth effect on consumption to boost aggregate demand. The rapid pace of investment also helped to hold down inflationary pressures by increasing the growth of productive capacity. However, by the summer of 1999, the persistent strength of domestic demand and tightening resource utilization in the United States, especially for labor, heightened concern among policymakers that inflationary pressures could undermine the impressive performance of the economy. Accordingly, the Federal Reserve raised short-term interest rates. The objective was not to bring down the stock market but rather to bring the growth of aggregate demand and aggregate supply into better alignment. Of course, the U.S. economy has now slowed very sharply. One factor has been the apparent reconsideration of expected profitability in the high-tech sector. This reassessment depressed equity prices for high-tech firms, and it has significantly restrained investment in these types of equipment, which had been substantial contributors to the previously rapid rate of economic growth. Slowing investment and a shift from a positive to a negative wealth effect on consumption have significantly damped the growth in aggregate final demand since late last year. The associated inventory correction has accentuated the decline in production. Since the September 11 terrorist attacks, heightened uncertainty and concerns have also weighed on the U.S. economy. These factors, and many others, have informed our decision to shift the stance of monetary policy aggressively and reduce the target federal funds rate by 4-1/2 percentage points since the beginning of the year. Conclusion Hence there is no question that asset prices influence the macroeconomy. They should theoretically, and they clearly seem to empirically. But one would think that wealth changes coming from investors re-evaluation of future profits would have different effects from those coming from interest-rate changes or changes in the relative price of housing. This puzzle should, I feel, loom large on the research agenda for academic economists and, for obvious reasons, on the policy agenda for central banks. Footnotes Karen E. Dynan and Dean M. Maki, Does Stock Market Wealth Matter for Consumption? Finance and Economics Discussion Series Paper (Board or Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May 2001). Dean M. Maki and Michael G. Palumbo, Disentangling the Wealth Effect: A Cohort Analysis of Household Saving in the 1990s, Finance and Economics Discussion Series Paper (Board or Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April 2001). Jason G. Cummins, Kevin A. Hassett, and R. Glenn Hubbard, A Reconsideration of Investment Behavior Using Tax Reforms as Natural Experiments, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2:1994, pp. 1-59; and Stacey Tevlin and Karl Whelan, Explaining the Investment Boom of the 1990s, Finance and Economics Discussion Series Paper (Board or Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 2000) and Journal of Money, Credit and Banking (forthcoming). Jason G. Cummins, Kevin A. Hassett, and Stephen D. Oliner, Investment Behavior, Observable Expectations, and Internal Funds, Finance and Economics Discussion Series Paper (Board or Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May 1999). These calculations include both equities held directly and equities owned indirectly through mutual funds, defined contribution pension plans, defined benefit pension plans, life insurance companies, and personal trusts. Figures from the 2001 Survey of Consumer Finances are not yet available.