Remarks by Governor Edward M. Gramlich At the Consumer Bankers' Association Community Reinvestment Act Conference, Arlington, Virginia April 8, 2002 CRA at Twenty-Five
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application by SinoPac Holdings, Taipei, Taiwan, to become a bank holding company by indirectly acquiring Far East National Bank (U.S.A.), Los Angeles, California. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan Monetary policy and the economic outlook Before the Joint Economic Committee, U.S. Congress April 17, 2002 I appreciate the opportunity to appear before the Joint Economic Committee to discuss the current state of the economy. As we noted in our statement following the Federal Open Market Committee meeting in March, "The economy, bolstered by a marked swing in inventory investment, is expanding at a significant pace. Nonetheless, the degree of strengthening in final demand over coming quarters, an essential element in sustained economic expansion, is still uncertain." Little, if anything, has happened since the FOMC meeting to alter that assessment. This morning I would like to elaborate on some of the forces that are likely to shape activity in the months ahead. As I just noted, the behavior of inventories currently is the driving force in the near-term outlook. Stocks of goods in many industries were drawn down significantly last year, and preliminary data suggest that the pace of liquidation tapered off markedly in the first quarter. This development is important because the reduction in the rate of inventory liquidation has induced a rise in industrial production. The pickup in the growth of activity, however, will be short-lived unless sustained increases in final demand kick in before the positive effects of inventory investment dissipate. We have seen encouraging signs in recent months that underlying trends in final demand are strengthening, but the dimensions of the pickup are still not clear. * * * A number of crosscurrents are likely to influence household spending this year. Through much of last year's slowdown, housing and consumption spending held up well and proved to be a major stabilizing force. But because there was little retrenchment during the cyclical downturn, the potential for a significant acceleration in activity in the household sector is likely to be more limited than in past business cycles. One important source of support to household spending late last year--energy prices--will likely be less favorable in the months ahead. With the rise in world crude oil prices since the middle of January, higher energy costs are again sapping the purchasing power of households. To the extent that the increase in energy prices is limited in dimension--with prices not materially exceeding the trading range of recent weeks--the negative effects on spending in the aggregate should prove to be small. However, a price hike that drove oil prices well above existing levels for an appreciable period of time would likely have more far-reaching consequences. In assessing the possible effects of higher oil prices, the inherent uncertainty about their future path is compounded by the limitations of the statistical models available to analyze such price shocks. When simulated over periods with observed oil prices spikes, these models do not show oil prices consistently having been a decisive factor in depressing economic activity. Yet, coincidence or not, all economic downturns in the United States since 1973, when oil became a prominent cost factor in business, have been preceded by sharp increases in the price of oil. This pattern leads one to suspect that the responsiveness of U.S. gross domestic product to energy prices is far more complex and may be quite different when households and businesses are confronted with abnormal price hikes. Macroeconometric models typically are specified as linear relationships, and they reflect average behavior over history. These models cannot distinguish between responses to outsized spikes and normal price fluctuations and thus may not capture the effect of sudden and sizable shifts in oil prices on the economy. Another factor likely to damp the growth of consumer spending in the period ahead, at least to some extent, is the change in overall household financial positions over the past two years. Household wealth relative to income has dropped from a peak multiple of about 6.3 at the end of 1999 to around 5.3 currently. Econometric evidence suggests that wealth is an important determinant of spending, explaining about one-fifth of the total level of consumer outlays. Indeed, about nine-tenths of the decline in the personal saving rate from 1995 to 1999 can be attributed to the rise in the ratio of wealth to income, and the subsequent decline in that ratio is doubtless restraining the growth of consumption. Much of the movement in household net worth in recent years has been driven by changes on the asset side of the household balance sheet. But household liabilities have generally moved higher as well. Accordingly, the aggregate household debt service burden, defined as the ratio of households' required debt payments to their disposable personal income, rose considerably in recent years, returning last year to close to its previous cyclical peak of the mid-1980s, where it has remained. Neither wealth nor the burden of debt is distributed evenly across households. Hence, the spending effects of changes in these influences also will not be evenly distributed. For example, increased debt burdens appear disproportionately attributable to higher-income households. Calculations by staff at the Federal Reserve suggest that the ratio of household liabilities to annual after-tax income for the top fifth of all households ranked by income rose from about 1.1 at the end of 1998 to 1.3 at the end of 2001. The increase for the lower four-fifths was not quite half as large. Although high-income households should not experience much strain in meeting their debt-service obligations, others might. Indeed, repayment difficulties have already increased, particularly in the subprime markets for consumer loans and mortgages. Delinquency rates may well worsen as a delayed result of the strains on household finances over the past two years. Large erosions, however, do not seem likely, and the overall levels of debt and repayment delinquencies do not, as of now, appear to pose a major impediment to a moderate expansion of consumption spending going forward. Although the macroeconomic effects of debt burdens may be limited, we have already observed significant spending restraint among the top fifth of income earners--who accounted for around 44 percent of total after-tax household income last year--presumably owing to the drop in equity prices, on net, over the past two years. The effect of the stock market on other households' spending has been less evident. Moderate-income households have a much larger proportion of their assets in homes, and the continuing rise in the value of houses has provided greater support for their net worth. Reflecting these differences in portfolio composition, the net worth of the top fifth of income earners has dropped far more than it did for the remaining four-fifths over the two-year period. As a consequence, excluding capital gains and losses from the calculation, as is the convention in our national income accounts, personal saving for the upper fifth, which had been negative during 1999 and 2000, turned positive in 2001. By contrast, the average saving rate for the lower four-fifths of households, by income, was generally positive during the second half of the 1990s and has fluctuated in a narrow range in the past few years. Accordingly, most of the change in consumption expenditures that resulted from the bull stock market and its demise reflected shifts in spending by upper-income households. As I noted earlier, the restraining effects from the net decline in wealth during the past two years presumably have not, as yet, fully played out and could exert some further damping effect on the overall growth of household spending relative to that of income. Perhaps most central to the outlook for consumer spending will be developments in the labor market, which has improved some in recent months. The pace of layoffs quickened last fall, especially after September 11, and the unemployment rate rose sharply. But layoffs have diminished noticeably in 2002, and payrolls grew again in March. In typical cyclical fashion, the unemployment rate has lagged the pickup in demand somewhat, but it has remained between 5-1/2 and 5-3/4 percent of late, after rising rapidly in 2001. Over the longer haul, incomes and spending are driven most importantly by the behavior of labor productivity. And here the most recent readings have been very encouraging. Typically, labor productivity declines when output is cut back and businesses are reluctant to proportionately reduce their workforces. However, output per hour continued to grow last year. Indeed, it rose at an annual rate of 5-1/2 percent in the fourth quarter of last year and appears to have posted another sharp advance in the first quarter. No doubt, some of the recent acceleration reflects normal statistical noise. More fundamentally, some of this pickup probably occurred because businesses have remained cautious about boosting labor input in response to the surprising strength of demand in recent months. But the magnitude of the gains in productivity over the past year provides further evidence of improvement in the underlying pace of structural labor productivity. This development augurs well for firms' ability to grant wage increases to their employees without putting upward pressure on prices. In housing markets, low mortgage interest rates and favorable weather have provided considerable support to homebuilding in recent months. Moreover, attractive mortgage rates have bolstered the sales of existing homes and the extraction of capital gains embedded in home equity that those sales engender. Low rates have also encouraged households to take on larger mortgages when refinancing their homes. Drawing on home equity in this manner is a significant source of funding for consumption and home modernization. The pace of such extractions likely dropped along with the decline in refinancing activity that followed the backup in mortgage rates that began in early November. Mortgage rates have gone back down again in recent weeks and are at low levels. This should continue to underpin activity in housing, but with perhaps less spillover to consumption more generally. The ongoing strength in the housing market has raised concerns about the possible emergence of a bubble in home prices. However, the analogy often made to the building and bursting of a stock price bubble is imperfect. First, unlike in the stock market, sales in the real estate market incur substantial transactions costs and, when most homes are sold, the seller must physically move out. Doing so often entails significant financial and emotional costs and is an obvious impediment to stimulating a bubble through speculative trading in homes. Thus, while stock market turnover is more than 100 percent annually, the turnover of home ownership is less than 10 percent annually--scarcely tinder for speculative conflagration. Second, arbitrage opportunities are much more limited in housing markets than in securities markets. A home in Portland, Oregon is not a close substitute for a home in Portland, Maine, and the "national" housing market is better understood as a collection of small, local housing markets. Even if a bubble were to develop in a local market, it would not necessarily have implications for the nation as a whole. These factors certainly do not mean that bubbles cannot develop in house markets and that home prices cannot decline: Indeed, home prices fell significantly in several parts of the country in the early 1990s. But because the turnover of homes is so much smaller than that of stocks and because the underlying demand for living space tends to be revised very gradually, the speed and magnitude of price rises and declines often observed in markets for securities are more difficult to create in markets for homes. * * * The technological advances contributing to the gains in productivity that we have achieved over the past year should provide support not only to the household sector but also to the business sector through a recovery in corporate profits and capital investment. The retrenchment in capital spending over the past year and a half was central to the sharp slowing in overall activity. These cutbacks in capital spending interacted with, and were reinforced by, falling profits and equity prices. Indeed, a striking feature of the current cyclical episode relative to many earlier ones has been the virtual absence of pricing power across much of American business, as increasing globalization and deregulation have enhanced competition. Business managers, with little opportunity to raise prices, have moved aggressively to stabilize cash flows by trimming workforces. These efforts have limited any rise in unit costs, attenuated the pressure on profit margins, and ultimately helped to preserve the vast majority of private-sector jobs. To the extent that businesses are successful in boosting profits and cash flow, capital spending should begin to recover more noticeably. Part of the reduction in pricing power observed in this cycle should be reversed as firming demand enables businesses to take back large price discounts. Though such an adjustment would tend to elevate price levels, underlying inflationary cost pressures should remain contained. A lack of pressures in labor markets and increases in productivity are holding labor costs in check, resulting in rising profit margins even with inflation remaining low. Although energy-using companies will experience some profit pressures as recent increases in spot oil prices become imbedded in contracts, these effects should be limited unless oil prices increase appreciably further. To be sure, over time, the current accommodative stance of monetary policy is not likely to be consistent with maintaining price stability. But prospects for low inflation and inflation expectations in the period ahead mean that the Federal Reserve should have ample opportunity to adjust policy to keep inflation pressures contained once sustained, solid, economic expansion is in view. Improved profit margins over time and more assured prospects for rising final demand would likely be accompanied by a decline in risk premiums from their current elevated levels toward a more normal range. With real rates of return on high-tech equipment still attractive, the lowering of risk premiums should be an additional spur to new investment. Reports from businesses around the country suggest that the exploitation of available networking and other information technologies was only partially completed when the cyclical retrenchment of the past year began. Many business managers still hold the view, according to a recent survey of purchasing managers, that less than half of currently available new and, presumably profitable, supply-chain technologies have been put into use. Recent evidence suggests that a recovery in at least some forms of high-tech investment is under way. Production of semiconductors, which in the past has been a leading indicator of computer production, turned up last fall. Expenditures on computers rose at a double-digit annual rate in real terms in the fourth quarter. But investment expenditures in the communications sector, where overcapacity was substantial, as yet show few signs of increasing, and business investment in some other sectors, such as aircraft, hit by the drop in air travel, will presumably remain weak in 2002. On balance, the recovery this year in overall spending on business fixed investment is likely to be gradual. * * * The U.S. economy has displayed a remarkable resilience over the past six months in the face of some very significant adverse shocks. But the strength of the economic expansion that is under way remains to be clarified. Some of the forces that have weighed heavily on the economy over the past year or so have begun to dissipate, but other factors, such as the sharp increase in world oil prices, have arisen that pose new challenges. As a result, the course of final demand will need to be monitored closely. Still, there can be little doubt that prospects have brightened. Spending in the household sector has held up well, and some signs of improvement are evident in business profits and investment. Fiscal policy continues to provide stimulus to aggregate demand, and monetary policy is currently accommodative. With the growth of productivity well maintained and inflation pressures largely absent, the foundation for economic expansion has been laid.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application by Chinatrust Financial Holding Company, Ltd., Taipei, Taiwan, to become a bank holding company by indirectly acquiring Chinatrust Bank (U.S.A.), Torrance, California. Attached is the Board’s Order relating to this action.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the applications by Charter One Financial, Inc., Cleveland, Ohio, and Charter-Michigan Bancorp, Inc., Dearborn, Michigan, to acquire Charter One Bank, N.A., Cleveland, Ohio. Attached is the Board’s Order relating to this action.
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan Finance: United States and global At the Institute of International Finance, New York, New York (via videoconference) April 22, 2002 In recent weeks, economic forecasters in the United States have been debating whether an apparent turning point in the current business cycle augurs a modest or a more robust recovery in the months ahead. Much less attention has been paid to a far more significant event: the impressive ability of the American economy to withstand a severe decline in equity asset values, a sharp retrenchment in capital spending, and an unprecedented blow from terrorists to the foundations of our market systems. As I outlined in congressional testimony last month, if the indications that the contraction phase of this business cycle has drawn to a close are ultimately confirmed, we will have experienced a significantly milder downturn than the long history of business cycles would have led us to expect. Remarkably, the imbalances that triggered the downturn and that could have prolonged this difficult period did not fester. The obvious questions are, what has changed in our economy in recent decades to produce such resilience, and will these changes persist into the future? Doubtless, the substantial improvement in the access of business decisionmakers to real-time information has played a key role. Thirty years ago, the timeliness of available information varied across companies and industries, often resulting in differences in the speed and magnitude of their responses to changing business conditions. In those earlier years, imbalances were inadvertently allowed to build to such an extent that their inevitable correction engendered pronounced economic stress. The process of correcting those imbalances and the accompanying economic and financial disruptions too often led to deep and prolonged recessions. Today, businesses have large quantities of data available virtually in real time. As a consequence, although their ability to anticipate changes in demand seems little improved, they, nonetheless, address and resolve economic imbalances far more rapidly than in the past. The apparent increased flexibility of the American economy arguably also reflects the extent of deregulation over the past quarter century. Certainly, if the energy sector were still in the tight regulatory fetters of the 1970s, our flexibility today would be markedly less. That the relatively recently developed markets for natural gas and electric power endured the Enron collapse without significant disruption was encouraging. Although the terrorist attacks hit air travel especially hard, deregulation of that industry has demonstrably increased the quantity and flexibility, if not the profitability, of air travel over the past twenty years. Trucking and rail deregulation have added flexibility to the movement of goods across our nation. I need hardly remind this audience that one especially potent force for enhancing overall economic flexibility and resilience arguably has been the combination of deregulation and innovation in the financial sector. New financial products have enabled risk to be dispersed more effectively to those willing, and presumably able, to bear it. Shocks to the overall economic system are accordingly less likely to create cascading credit failure. Lenders have had the opportunity to be considerably more diversified, and borrowers have become far less dependent on specific institutions for funds. A major contributor to the dispersion of risk has been the wide-ranging development of markets in securitized commercial and residential mortgages, bank loans, and credit card receivables. These markets have tailored the risks associated with holding such assets to fit the preferences of a wider universe of investors. Especially important has been the flexibility and size of the secondary mortgage market. Since early 2000, this market has facilitated the large debt-financed extraction of home equity that, in turn, has been so critical a support for consumer outlays in the United States throughout the recent period of cyclical stress. Undoubtably, this market's flexibility has been enhanced by the extensive use of interest rate swaps and options to hedge maturity mismatches and prepayment risk. Financial derivatives, more generally, have grown at a phenomenal pace over the past fifteen years. Conceptual advances in pricing options and other complex financial products, along with improvements in computer and telecommunications technologies, have significantly lowered the costs and expanded the opportunities for hedging risks not readily deflected in earlier decades. The performance of these increasingly complex financial instruments, especially over the past couple of stressful years, has been noteworthy. These financial products have contributed importantly to the development of a far more flexible and efficient financial system--both domestically and internationally--than we had just twenty or thirty years ago. Greater resilience has been evident in many segments of the financial markets. One prominent example is the telecom sector. Worldwide borrowing by telecom firms amounted to more than a trillion dollars during the years 1998 to 2001. The financing of the massive expansion of fiber-optic networks and heavy investments in 3G mobile phone licenses by European firms strained debt markets. At the time, the financing of these investments, to a large extent, was seen as prudent because the telecom borrowers had very high market valuation that could facilitate, if needed, a stock issuance take-out of bank and other debt. In the event, of course, prices of telecom stocks collapsed, and many firms went bankrupt. In decades past, this situation would have been a recipe for severe financial distress. However, a significant amount of exposure to telecom debt had been laid off through credit risk mitigation instruments, such as credit default swaps, collateralized debt obligations, and credit-linked notes. This appears to have reduced telecom loan concentrations and the stress on banks and other financial institutions. In addition, such instruments, more generally, appear to have effectively spread losses from recent defaults by Enron, Global Crossing, Railtrack, and Swissair in recent months. In particular, the still relatively small, but rapidly growing, credit derivatives market has to date functioned well, with payouts proceeding smoothly for the most part. Obviously, this market is still too new to have been tested in a widespread credit down-cycle. But so far, so good. The markets for more traditional derivatives, such as interest rate swaps and foreign exchange forwards and swaps, grew rapidly over the past several years. According to the latest tabulation of the Bank for International Settlements, the aggregate worldwide notional value of the over-the-counter derivatives market grew to an awesome $100 trillion by the end of June 2001, though it has apparently slowed somewhat since then. Gross credit exposure was at that time estimated at $1 trillion, after taking account of legally enforceable netting agreements. Potential credit losses on these instruments were further mitigated through the growing use of collateral agreements. Such agreements provided substantial protection to Enron's counterparties, for example. Beyond the major advances in asset securitization and the expanded development of derivative instruments, we have witnessed a large number of unheralded advances in finance facilitated by our enhanced computer and telecommunications capabilities. In recent years, for example, the switch to electronic trading for interbank spot foreign exchange transactions has markedly reduced the trading volumes required to maintain an effective market. Various types of electronic communication and trading systems have been developed for OTC derivatives. To be sure, OTC derivatives dealers have been slow to take advantage of these systems, but sooner or later market forces are likely to compel them to do so. * * * In summary, because of increased access to real-time information and, more arguably, extensive deregulation and innovation in financial and product markets, economic imbalances are more likely to be readily contained. As a consequence, cyclical episodes overall should be less severe than they otherwise would be. If this is indeed the situation--and it must be considered speculative until more evidence is gathered--the implied reduction in economic volatility, other things being equal, would lower risk and equity premiums. Other things, however, may not be wholly equal. The very technologies that appear to be the main cause of our apparent increased flexibility and resilience may also be imparting different forms of vulnerability that could intensify or be intensified by a business cycle. From one perspective, the ever-increasing proportion of our GDP that represents conceptual, as distinct from physical, value added may actually have lessened cyclical volatility. In particular, the fact that concepts cannot be held as inventories means a greater share of GDP is not subject to a type of dynamic that amplifies cyclical swings. But an economy in which concepts form an important share of valuation has its own vulnerabilities. As the recent events surrounding Enron have highlighted, a firm is inherently fragile if its value added emanates more from conceptual than from physical assets. A physical asset, whether an office building or an automotive assembly plant, has the capability of producing goods even if the reputation of its managers falls under a cloud. The rapidity of Enron's decline is an effective illustration of the vulnerability of a firm whose market value rests largely on capitalized reputation. The physical assets of such a firm compose a small proportion of its asset base. Trust and reputation can vanish overnight. A factory in such a context cannot. The implications of such a loss of confidence for the macroeconomy depend importantly on how freely the conceptual capital of the fading firm can be replaced by a competitor or a new entrant into the industry. Even if entry is relatively free, macroeconomic risks can emerge if problems at one firm tend to make investors and counterparties uncertain about other firms that they see as potentially similarly situated. The difficulty of valuing firms that deal primarily with concepts and the growing size and importance of these firms may make our economy more susceptible to this type of contagion. Another, more conventional determinant of stability will be the economy's degree of leverage--the extent to which debt rather than equity is financing the level of capital. The proper degree of leverage in a firm, or in an economy as a whole, is an inherently elusive figure that almost certainly changes from time to time. Clearly, firms find some leverage advantageous in enhancing returns on equity, and thus moderate leverage undoubtedly boosts the capital stock and the level of output. A sophisticated financial system, with its substantial array of instruments to unbundle risks, will tend toward a higher degree of leverage at any given level of perceived underlying economic risk. But the greater the degree of leverage in an economy, the greater its vulnerability to unexpected shortfalls in demand and to other miscalculations. Although the fears regarding business leverage have been confined mostly to specific sectors in recent years, concerns over potential systemic problems resulting from the vast expansion of derivatives have reemerged with the difficulties of Enron. To be sure, firms like Enron, and Long-Term Capital Management before it, were major players in the derivatives markets. But their problems were readily traceable to an old-fashioned excess of debt, however acquired, as well as to opaque accounting of that leverage and lax counterparty scrutiny. Swaps and other derivatives have been remarkably free of default throughout their short history, including over the past eighteen months. Of course, latent problems may exist in any market that expands as rapidly as these markets have. Regulators and supervisors are particularly sensitive to this possibility. Derivatives have provided greater flexibility to our financial system. But their very complexity could leave counterparties vulnerable to significant risk that they do not currently recognize, and hence these instruments potentially expose the overall system if mistakes are large. In that regard, concerns have been raised about potential counterparty risks in the large interest rate hedging efforts of government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs) in support of their secondary mortgage market operations. Presumably, counterparties can manage this risk effectively through the use of credit limits, netting, and collateral agreements. The broader risks for financial markets and the economy result from the perception of government support for these corporations and the resulting implicit subsidization of GSEs. Subsidies, by intent, distort the normal balance of markets. In this case, the perception of government support may induce the counterparties of GSEs to apply less vigorously some of the risk controls that they apply to manage their over-the-counter derivatives exposures. More generally, we need to be careful not to allow subsidies to unduly disturb an efficient financial structure that has so clearly contributed to increased economic stability. Dramatic changes in our financial structure have required governments to ensure that their regulatory regimes are appropriate to the current configuration of markets and institutions. In the judgment of the Federal Reserve, the Commodity Futures Modernization Act of 2000 struck the right balance in regulating derivatives in the United States, as did Gramm-Leach-Bliley in finance generally. Our international banking and financial system is regulated primarily by counterparties whose due diligence is fundamental to the containment of risk, including systemic risk. Government regulators can exercise only broad oversight. We at the Federal Reserve, for example, can never bring to bear the detailed market and counterparty surveillance that private-sector players exercise. We rely on you to be, in effect, the front-line regulators. Increased government regulation can cause unrealistic expectations regarding the extent to which risk can be reduced by regulators. Such actions can create moral hazard and may prove counterproductive. We trust that the Basel II Capital Accord, when final, will be sensitive to these concerns. * * * The surge in risk hedging in recent years is a symptom of a much broader issue of change in both domestic and international finance that is a manifestation of changes in the real economy. As the pace of technological change alters the conduct of business in ways we will never fully anticipate, we must foster the ability of our ever-expanding international banking and financial system to meet the challenge of that change. The flexibility of our industry and workforce to reinvent themselves when the need arises forms the basis for increasing standards of living. This "creative destruction," in turn, requires an effective and flexible financial system. The world's bankers are in an excellent position to develop and nurture such a system.
Joint Press Release Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Office of the Comptroller of the Currency Office of Thrift Supervision For Immediate Release April 23, 2002 Agencies Outline Risks of Parallel-Owned Banking Organizations The federal bank and thrift regulatory agencies today issued guidance that reviews the risks of parallel-owned banking organizations. The guidance sets forth an approach for supervising those risks. A parallel-owned banking organization consists of a U.S. depository institution and a foreign bank that are both controlled directly or indirectly by one person or group of persons who are closely associated in their business dealings or act in concert. It does not include an organization controlled by a company subject to the Bank Holding Company Act or the Savings and Loan Holding Company Act or where one institution is a subsidiary of the other. Control may exist if a person or group of persons control 10 percent or more of any class of voting shares of the depository institutions. Today's guidance describes various risks that may be increased because of the structure of parallel-owned banking organizations, including engaging in transactions that prefer the foreign bank member of the group over the U.S. depository institution. The agencies will address these risks by coordinating their supervision of the U.S. operations of parallel-owned banking organizations. Enhanced communication and cooperation with foreign bank supervisors is also important to this process. When an applicant proposes to acquire or establish a U.S. depository institution that will be part of a parallel-owned banking organization, the application will be reviewed on a case-by-case basis. In appropriate circumstances, special conditions may be imposed in a regulatory decision, including restrictions on the ability of the U.S. depository institution to engage in transactions with its foreign affiliates. In cases where a parallel-owned banking organization is formed in a way that does not require review by the banking agencies, today's guidance recommends that a U.S. depository institution inform the appropriate federal banking agency prior to becoming part of a parallel-owned banking organization. Media Contacts: Federal Reserve David Skidmore (202) 452-2955 OCC: Bob Garsson (202) 874-5770 FDIC David Barr (202) 898-6992 OTS Sam Eskenazi (202) 906-6677
Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan Federal deposit insurance reform Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate April 23, 2002 Chairman Sarbanes, Senator Gramm, it is a pleasure to appear before this Committee to present the views of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System on deposit insurance reform. I will be addressing general reform issues, as proposed by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) in the spring of 2001, rather than any specific bill. Consequently, I will be expressing the broad views of the Federal Reserve Board on the issues associated with modifications of deposit insurance. At the outset, I should note that last year's FDIC report highlighted the significant issues and developed an integrated framework for addressing them. In broad terms, while the Board opposes any increase in coverage, we support the framework for other reform issues that the FDIC report constructed. Benefits and Costs of Deposit Insurance Deposit insurance was adopted in this country as part of the legislative framework for limiting the impact of the Great Depression on the public. In the environment of the record number of bank failures of the time, deposit insurance in this country was designed mainly to protect the unsophisticated depositor with limited financial assets from the loss of their modest savings. References were made to the "rent money" and the initial 1934 limit placed on deposit insurance was $2,500, promptly doubled to $5,000, a level maintained for the next sixteen years. I should note that the $5,000 of insurance coverage in 1934, consistent with the original intent of Congress, is equal to less than $60,000 today, based on the Personal Consumption Deflator in the GDP accounts. Despite its initial quite limited intent, the Congress over the intervening decades has raised the maximum amount of coverage five times to its current $100,000 level. The last increase, in 1980, was a more than doubling of the cap level and was clearly designed to let depository institutions, particularly thrifts, offer an insured deposit free of the then prevailing interest rate ceilings on such instruments, which applied only to deposits below $100,000. Insured deposits of exactly $100,000 thus became fully insured instruments in 1980, but were not subject to an interest rate ceiling. The efforts of thrifts to use $100,000 CDs to stem their liquidity outflows resulting from public withdrawals of smaller below-market-rate insured deposits led first to an earnings squeeze and an associated loss of capital and then to a high risk investment strategy that led to failure after failure. Depositors acquiring the new larger denomination insured deposits were aware of the plight of the thrifts but unconcerned about the risk because the principal amount of their $100,000 deposits was fully insured by the United States government. In this way, the 1980 increase in the deposit insurance cap to $100,000 exacerbated the fundamental thrift problem associated with concentration on long-term assets in a high and rising interest rate environment. Indeed, it significantly increased the taxpayer cost of the bail out of the bankrupt thrift deposit insurance fund. Not withstanding this problematic episode, it is clear that deposit insurance has played a key--at times even critical--role in achieving the stability in banking and financial markets that has characterized the past almost seventy years. Deposit insurance, combined with other components of our banking safety net (the Federal Reserve's discount window and payment system guarantees) has meant that periods of financial stress are no longer characterized by depositor runs on banks and thrifts. Quite the opposite: Asset holders now seek out deposits--both insured and uninsured--as safe havens when they have strong doubts about other financial assets. Looking beyond the contribution of deposit insurance to overall financial stability, we should not minimize the security it has brought to millions of households and small businesses. Deposit insurance has provided a safe and secure place for those households and small businesses with relatively modest amounts of financial assets to hold their transaction and other balances. These benefits of deposit insurance, as significant as they are, have not come without cost. The very same process that has ended deposit runs has made insured depositors--as in the 1980s with insolvent, risky thrifts--largely indifferent to the risks taken by their depository institutions because their funds are not at risk if their institution is unable to meet its obligations. As a result, the market discipline to control risks that insured depositors would otherwise have imposed on banks and thrifts has been weakened. Relieved of that discipline, banks and thrifts naturally feel less inhibited from taking on more risk than they would otherwise assume. No other type of private financial institution is able to attract funds from the public without regard to the risk it takes with its creditors' resources. This incentive to take excessive risks is the so-called moral hazard problem of deposit insurance, the inducement to take risk at the expense of the insurer. Thus, two offsetting implications of deposit insurance must be kept in mind. On the one hand, it appears fairly unambiguous that deposit insurance has contributed to the prevention of bank runs that could have destabilized the financial structure in the short-run. On the other, there are growing concerns that even the current levels of deposit insurance have created such underwriting imbalances at insured depository institutions that future large systemic risks have arguably risen. Indeed, the reduced market discipline and increased moral hazard, have intensified the need for government supervision to protect the interests of taxpayers and, in essence, substitute for the reduced market discipline. Deposit insurance and other components of the safety net also enable banks and thrifts to attract more resources, at lower costs, than would otherwise be the case. In short, insured banks and thrifts receive a subsidy in the form of a government guarantee that allows them both to attract deposits at lower interest rates than would be necessary without deposit insurance, and to take more risk without the fear of losing their deposit funding. Put another way, deposit insurance misallocates resources by breaking the link between risks and rewards for a select set of market competitors. From the very beginning, deposit insurance has involved a tradeoff. On the one hand, deposit insurance contributes to overall short-term financial stability and the protection of small depositors. On the other hand, deposit insurance induces higher risk-taking, resulting in a misallocation of resources and larger long-term financial imbalances that increase the need for government supervision to protect the taxpayers' interests. Deposit insurance reforms must balance these tradeoffs. Moreover, any reforms should be aimed primarily at protecting the interest of the economy overall, and not just the profits or market shares of particular businesses. The Federal Reserve Board believes that deposit insurance reforms should be designed to preserve the benefits of heightened financial stability and the protection of small depositors without at the same time further increasing moral hazard or reducing market discipline. In addition, we urge that the implementing details be kept as straightforward as possible to minimize the risk of unintended consequences that comes with complexity. Recommendations for Reform The FDIC has made five broad recommendations. 1. Merging BIF and SAIF . The Board supports the FDIC's proposal to merge the BIF and SAIF funds. Because the charters and operations of banks and thrifts have become so similar, it makes no sense to continue the separate funds. Separate funds reflect the past, but neither the present nor the future. Merging the funds would diversify their risks, reduce administrative expenses, and widen the fund base behind an increasingly concentrated banking system. Most importantly, the federally guaranteed insurance coverage provided to the two sets of institutions are identical, and thus the premiums need to be identical as well. Under current arrangements, the premiums could differ significantly if one of the funds fell below the designated reserve ratio of 1.25 percent of insured deposits and the other fund did not. Should that occur, depository institutions would be induced to switch charter to obtain insurance from the fund with the lower premium. This could distort our depository structure. The federal government should not sell an identical service, like deposit insurance, at different prices. 2. Statutory Restrictions on Premiums . Current law requires the FDIC to impose higher premiums on riskier banks and thrifts but prevents it from imposing any premium on well-capitalized and highly-rated institutions whenever the corresponding fund's reserves exceed 1.25 percent of insured deposits. The Board endorses the FDIC recommendations that would eliminate the statutory restrictions on risk-based pricing and allow a premium to be imposed on every insured depository institution, no matter how well capitalized and well rated it may be or how high the fund's reserves. The current statutory requirement that free deposit insurance be provided to well-capitalized and well-rated banks when FDIC reserves exceed a predetermined ratio maximizes the subsidy provided to these institutions and is inconsistent with efforts to avoid inducing moral hazard. Put differently, the current rule requires the government to give away its valuable guarantee when fund reserves meet some ceiling level. This free guarantee is of value to banks and thrifts even when they themselves are in sound financial condition and when macroeconomic times are good. At the end of last year, 92 percent of banks and thrifts were paying no premium. Included in this group were banks that have never paid any premium for their, in some cases substantial, coverage and fast-growing entities whose past premiums were extraordinarily small relative to their current coverage. We believe that these anomalies were never intended by the framers of the Deposit Insurance Fund Act of 1996 and should be addressed by the Congress. The Congress did intend that the FDIC impose risk-based premiums, but the 1996 act limits the ability of the FDIC to impose risk-based premiums on well-capitalized and well-rated banks. And these two variables--capital strength and examiner overall rating-- do not capture all the risk that banks and thrifts could create for the insurer. The Board believes the FDIC should be free to establish risk categories based on any well-researched economic variables and to impose premiums commensurate with these risk classifications. Although a robust risk-based premium system would be technically difficult to design, a closer link between insurance premiums and individual bank or thrift risk would reduce moral hazard and the distortions in resource allocation that accompany deposit insurance. We note, however, that significant benefits in this regard are likely to require a substantial range of premiums but that the FDIC has concluded in its report that premiums for the riskiest banks would probably need to be capped in order to avoid inducing failure at these weaker institutions. We believe that capping premiums may end up costing the insurance fund more in the long run should these weak institutions fail anyway, with the delay increasing the ultimate cost of resolution. The Board has concluded, therefore, that if a cap is required, it should be set quite high so that risk-based premiums can be as effective as possible in deterring excessive risk-taking. In that way we could begin to simulate the deposit insurance pricing that the market would apply and reduce the associated subsidy in deposit insurance. Nonetheless, we should not delude ourselves that even a wider range in the risk-based premium structure would eliminate the need for a government back-up to the deposit insurance fund, that is, eliminate the government subsidy in deposit insurance. To eliminate the subsidy in deposit insurance--to make deposit insurance a real insurance system--the FDIC average insurance premium would have to be set high enough to cover fully the very small probabilities of very large losses, such as during the Great Depression, and thus the perceived costs of systemic risk. In contrast to life or automobile casualty insurance, each individual insured loss in banking is not independent of other losses. Banking is subject to deposit run contagion, creating a far larger extreme loss tail on the probability distributions from which real insurance premiums would have to be calculated. Indeed, pricing deposit insurance risks to fully fund potential losses--pricing to eliminate subsidies--would require premiums that would discourage most depository institutions from offering broad coverage. Since the Congress has determined that there should be broad coverage, the subsidy in deposit insurance cannot be fully eliminated, although we can and should eliminate as much of the subsidy as we can. Parenthetically, the difficulties of raising risk-based premiums explain why there is no private insurer substitute for deposit insurance from the government. No private insurer would ever be able to match the actual FDIC premium and cover its risks. A private insurer confronted with the possibility, remote as it may be, of losses that could bankrupt the insuring entity would need to set especially high premiums to protect itself, premiums that few, if any, depository institutions would find attractive. And, if premiums were fully priced by the government or the private sector, the issuing entities would likely lower their offering rates, reducing the amount of insured deposits demanded, and consequently the amount outstanding would decline. 3. Designated Reserve Ratios and Premiums . The current law establishes a designated reserve ratio for BIF and SAIF of 1.25 percent. If that ratio is exceeded, the statute requires that premiums on well-capitalized and well-rated institutions must be discontinued. If the ratio declines below 1.25 percent, the FDIC must develop a set of premiums to restore the reserve ratio to 1.25 percent; if it appears that the fund ratio cannot be restored to its statutorily designated level within twelve months, the law requires that a premium of at least 23 basis points be imposed on all insured entities. These requirements are clearly procyclical, lowering or eliminating fees in good times when bank credit is readily available and deposit insurance fund reserves should be built up, and abruptly increasing fees sharply in times of weakness when bank credit availability is under pressure and deposit fund resources are drawn down to cover the resolution of failed banks. The FDIC recommends that surcharges or rebates should be used to bring the fund back to the target reserve ratio gradually. The FDIC also recommends the possibility of a target range for the designated reserve ratio, over which the premiums may remain constant, rather than a fixed target reserve ratio and abruptly changing premiums. We support such increased flexibility and smoothing of premiums. Indeed, we recommend that the FDIC's suggested target reserve range be widened in order to reduce the need to change premiums abruptly. Any floor or ceiling, regardless of its level, could require that premiums be increased at exactly the time when banks and thrifts could be under stress and, similarly, that premiums be reduced at the time that depositories are in the best position to fund an increase in reserves. Building a larger fund in good times and permitting it to decline when necessary are prerequisites to less variability in the premium. This approach stands in favorable contrast to the present system that is designed to stabilize the designated reserve ratios of the funds at the cost of, perhaps wide, premium instability. In addition to widening the range for the designated reserve ratio, the Board would recommend that the FDIC be given the latitude temporarily to relax floor or ceiling ratios on the basis of current and anticipated banking conditions and expected needs for resources to resolve failing institutions. In short, on stability grounds we prefer less hard-wiring of the rules under which the FDIC operates and more management flexibility for the Board of the FDIC, operating under broad guidelines from the Congress. 4. Rebates . Since its early days, the FDIC has rebated "excess" premiums whenever it felt its reserves were adequate. This procedure was replaced in the1996 law by the requirement that no premium be imposed on well-capitalized and highly rated banks and thrifts when the fund reaches its designated reserve ratio. The FDIC proposals would re-impose a minimum premium on all banks and thrifts and a more risk-sensitive premium structure. These provisions would be coupled with rebates for the stronger entities when the fund approaches what we recommend be a higher upper end of a target range than the FDIC has suggested, and surcharges when the Fund trends below what we suggest be a lower end of a target range. The FDIC also recommends that the rebates not be uniform for the stronger entities. Rather, the FDIC argues that rebates should be smaller for those banks that have paid premiums for only short periods or that have in the past paid premiums that are not commensurate with their present size and hence FDIC exposure. The devil, of course, is in the details. But this latter proposal makes considerable sense, and the Board endorses it. More than 900 banks--some now quite large--have never paid a premium, and without this modification they would continue to pay virtually nothing, net of rebates, as long as their strong capital and high supervisory ratings were maintained. Such an approach is both competitively inequitable and contributes to moral hazard. It should be addressed. 5. Indexing Insured-Deposit Coverage Ceilings . The FDIC recommends that the current $100,000 ceiling on insured deposits be indexed. The Board does not support this recommendation and believes that the current ceiling should be maintained. In the Board's judgment, it is unlikely that increased coverage, even by indexing, would add measurably to the stability of the banking system today. Macroeconomic policy and other elements of the safety net, combined with the current, still-significant level of deposit insurance, continue to be an important bulwark against bank runs. Thus, the problem that increased coverage is designed to solve must be related to either the individual depositor, the party originally intended to be protected, or to the individual bank or thrift. Clearly, both groups would prefer higher coverage if it cost them nothing. But Congress needs to be clear about the nature of a specific problem for which increased coverage would be the solution. Depositors . Our surveys of consumer finances suggest that most depositors have balances well below the current insurance limit of $100,000 and those that do have larger balances have apparently been adept at achieving the level of deposit insurance coverage they desire by opening multiple insured accounts. Such spreading of asset holdings is perfectly consistent with the counsel always given to investors to diversify their assets--whether stocks, bonds, or mutual funds--across different issuers. The cost of diversifying for insured deposits is surely no greater than doing so for other assets. An individual bank would clearly prefer that the depositor maintain all of his or her funds at that bank, and would prefer to eliminate the need for depositor diversification by being able to offer higher deposit insurance coverage. Nonetheless, the depositor appears to have no great difficulty--should he or she want insured deposits--in finding multiple sources of fully insured accounts. In addition, the singular characteristic of postwar household financial asset holdings has been the increasing diversity of portfolio choices. The share of household financial assets in bank deposits has been declining steadily since World War II as households have taken advantage of innovative attractive financial instruments with market rates of return. There has been no break in that trend that seems related to past increases in insurance ceilings. Indeed, the most dramatic substitution out of deposits in recent years has been from both insured and uninsured deposits to equities and mutual funds holding equities, bonds, and money market assets. It is difficult to believe that a change in ceilings during the 1990s would have made any measurable difference in that shift. Indeed, the data indicate that the weakness in stock prices in recent quarters has been marked by increased flows into bank and thrift deposits. Depository Institutions . Does the problem to be solved by increased deposit insurance coverage concern the individual depository institution? If so, the problem would seem disproportionately a small bank issue since insured deposits are a much larger proportion of total funding at small banks than at large banks. But smaller banks appear to be doing well. Since the mid-1990s, adjusted for the effects of mergers, assets of the smaller banks, those below the largest 1,000, have grown at an average annual rate of 13.9 percent, almost twice the pace of the largest 1,000 U.S. banks. Uninsured deposits at these smaller institutions have also grown more rapidly than at larger banks--at average annual rates of 22 percent at the small banks versus 11 percent at the large banks, both on the same merger-adjusted basis. Clearly, small banks have a demonstrated skill and ability to compete for uninsured deposits. To be sure, uninsured deposits are more expensive than insured deposits, and bank costs would decline and profits rise if their currently uninsured liabilities received a government guarantee. But that is the issue of whether subsidizing bank profits through deposit insurance serves a national purpose. I might add that throughout the 1990s, small banks' return on equity was well maintained. Indeed, the attractiveness of banking is evidenced by the fact that more than 1,350 banks were chartered during the past decade. Some small banks argue that they need enhanced deposit insurance coverage to equalize their competition with large banks because depositors prefer to put their uninsured funds in an institution considered too big to fail. As I have noted, however, small banks have more than held their own in the market for uninsured deposits. In addition, the Board rejects the notion that any bank is too big to fail. In 1991, Congress made it clear that the systemic-risk exception to the FDIC's least-cost resolution of a failing bank should be invoked only under the most unusual circumstances. Moreover, the resolution rules under the systemic-risk exception do not require that uninsured depositors and other creditors, much less stockholders, be made whole. Consistent with this view, the market clearly believes that large institutions are not too big for uninsured creditors to take at least some loss. Spreads on large bank subordinated debt are wider than spreads on similar debt of large and highly rated nonbank financial institutions. Indeed, there are no AAA-rated U.S. banking organizations. To be sure, failure to index deposit insurance ceilings has eroded the real purchasing power value of those ceilings. But there is no evidence of any detrimental effect on depositors or depositary institutions, with the possible exception of a small reduction in those profits that accrue from deposit guarantee subsidies that lower the cost of insured deposits. The current deposit insurance ceiling appears more than adequate to achieve the positive benefits of deposit insurance that I mentioned earlier in my statement, even if its real value were to erode further. Another argument often raised by smaller banks regarding the need for increased deposit insurance coverage is their inability to match the competition from those large securities firms and bank holding companies with multiple bank affiliates, offering multiple insured accounts through one organization. The Board agrees that such offerings are a misuse of deposit insurance. But, raising the coverage limit for each account is not a remedy since it would also increase the aggregate amount of insurance coverage that large multi-bank organizations would be able to offer. The disparity would remain. Conclusion Several aspects of the deposit insurance system need reform. The Board supports, with some modifications, all of the recommendations the FDIC made in the spring of 2001 except indexing the current $100,000 ceiling. The thrust of our proposed modifications would call for a wider permissible range for the size of the fund relative to insured liabilities, reduced variation of the insurance premium as the relative size of the fund changes with banking and economic conditions, and a positive premium net of rebates. There may come a time when the Board finds that households and businesses with modest resources are having difficulty in placing their funds in safe vehicles and/or that there is reason to be concerned that the level of deposit coverage could endanger financial stability. Should either of those events occur, the Board would call our concerns to the attention of the Congress and support adjustments to the ceiling by indexing or other methods. But today, in our judgment, neither financial stability, nor depositors, nor depositories are being disadvantaged by the current ceiling. Raising the ceiling now would extend the safety net, increase the government subsidy to banking, expand moral hazard, and reduce the incentive for market discipline, without providing any real evident public benefits. With no clear public benefit to increasing deposit insurance, the Board sees no reason to increase the scope of the safety net. Indeed, the Board believes that as our financial system has become ever more complex and exceptionally responsive to the vagaries of economic change, structural distortions induced by government guarantees have risen. We have no way of ascertaining at exactly what point subsidies provoke systemic risk. Nonetheless, prudence suggests that we be exceptionally deliberate when expanding government financial guarantees.
Testimony of Vice Chairman Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. Recent economic developments and the availability of credit to small businesses Before the Small Business Committee, U.S. House of Representatives April 24, 2002
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the issuance of a consent Order of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty against the Community Bank of Granbury, Granbury, Texas, a state member bank. Community Bank of Granbury, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order in connection with its alleged violations of the Board's Regulations implementing the National Flood Insurance Act. The Order requires the Community Bank of Granbury to pay a civil money penalty of $10,000, which will be remitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency for deposit into the National Flood Mitigation Fund. A copy of the Order is attached.
Remarks by Governor Mark W. Olson Before the Bank Administration Institute, Phoenix, Arizona April 30, 2002 Risk Management in a Changing Economic Environment It is a pleasure to appear at this year's Bank Administration Institute's Audit, Compliance, and Electronic Security Conference. The BAI has historically been the repository for thoughtful leadership on a wide range of management, operations, and system-related issues. This is an appropriate forum for sharing the Fed's perspective on certain risk-management issues as they are being addressed by the financial services industries. To put my comments in perspective, let me first identify four key environmental factors that have changed in the financial services industry and have required the industry to improve both its monitoring and its management of risk exposures. The four major environmental factors affecting financial services are the following: industry consolidation, increased competition, technological changes, and management focus on shareholder value. These factors, of course, are not the only ones affecting your industry, but their combined influence has clearly altered your management challenges. All of you are familiar with these factors so we have no need for elaborate description, but let me touch on a few ways in which these factors have affected risk management--starting with consolidation. Twenty years ago, America's largest bank was Citicorp, with assets of around $120 billion. Though Citicorp had a major international banking presence, its domestic banking operation was contained largely in the State of New York. Its major national credit card operation was its most significant departure from traditional banking lines. In contrast, today's Citigroup has $1 trillion in assets and is a highly diversified financial services provider operating not only throughout the United States but also internationally. Citigroup's expanded scope is by no means unique. Rather, it is typical of the bank and nonbank consolidation that has taken place. Today, thirteen financial holding companies hold more than $100 billion in assets. Though we still have more than 6,000 separate banking organizations in this country, our largest organizations now have nationwide presence and offer a broad array of financial products. Let's move on to competition. Despite the consolidation that has taken place, the financial services industry remains highly competitive. Not only do banks face intra-industry competition, but they also face competition from nonbank financial service providers. As of all of you know, virtually every financial product offered by the banking industry is also offered--either identically or by a close substitute--outside the regulated financial services industry. Let me touch on several ways that technology has changed the banking industry. First, technological advances from the past decade have allowed real-time access to credit information and public records. This ability to mine data allows providers of financial products to identify target markets with minimal geographic restraint. It has fostered development of monoline-credit-card and mortgage lenders that have become major market participants in a very short time. Second, technology has allowed organizations to separate the various business functions, such as product marketing, credit review and administration, and asset funding, and to locate each of these functions based on separate criteria, such as the availability of labor or the tax environment. Third, technology has helped institutions monitor and manage risk by hedging exposure to credit risk and interest rate risk or by selling certain assets in secondary markets. The fourth environmental factor is the virtually unanimous corporate goal of maximizing shareholder value. The motivation for this goal is obvious. The stock market has accorded a price-earnings premium to financial institutions that consistently outperform their competitors. This premium translates into highly receptive capital markets and enhanced compensation to employees through stock options and provides the institution with a strong currency with which to pursue mergers or acquisitions. Thus far I have mentioned only the positive aspects of each of these environmental factors, but each also has potential negatives. The consolidation that has created these giant institutions has also created many new risk-management challenges. Enhanced competition has brought increased pressure on interest-rate spreads and, when combined with the continual pressure for earnings performance, can encourage either imprudent risk-taking or a push for aggressive accounting treatment. Sophisticated technology can at times be its own risk as a system failure or software error can have extremely negative consequences. In light of all the increased exposures to risk, how does the Federal Reserve System approach the subject of risk management, and what expectations do Fed examiners have when they evaluate an institution's risk management? First, supervisors look for whether banking organizations are following the four fundamental elements of a sound risk-management process: active board and senior-management oversight, adequate risk-management policies and limits, appropriate risk measurement and reporting systems, and comprehensive internal controls. Of course, supervisors expect the details within each element of the risk-management process to vary among institutions, depending on the nature and complexity of the risk undertaken by the bank. There is no "one size fits all" approach to risk management, which is still a partnership between science and art. Supervisors look at the individual pieces and the way they fit together both for each of the institution's business lines and for the firm as a whole. Supervisors also endeavor to look for outliers in the organization, particularly operations that appear to be outgrowing the original control structure. Providing some illustrations of how supervisors view the key elements of the risk-management process may be instructive. The critical importance of the first fundamental element, active oversight by the board and senior management, has become quite clear recently. In past decades, the directors at times seemed content to concern themselves with only summary information regarding management's strategy and financial performance. In recent years, expectations for corporate governance have been raised, and the fallout from Enron and other corporate mishaps have further intensified scrutiny in this area. Recent difficulty in the accounting for special purpose entities (SPEs) is an example of an area where an active board can significantly help ensure that an institution understands, discloses, and manages risk appropriately. Directors should be asking the following question: Is management's accounting for material or its innovative transactions in sync with the substance of these transactions? For example, if assets are to be shed from the balance sheet by selling them to a special purpose entity, are both the risks and the rewards being transferred to a third party? If the answer is no, then a prudent director would require that the assets remain on the balance sheet (such as in the case of a "nonqualifying"(SPE), or that the accounting be supplemented with enough disclosure to inform investors of the ongoing risks these assets continue to present to the institution. Recent experience also highlights the potential benefits of the board's audit committee meeting with external auditors without management and aggressively seeking assurances that risks associated with off-balance-sheet and special purpose entities are clearly represented. Stimulated by recent events, a sea change is occurring and investors, creditors, ratings agencies, and regulators expect far more transparency than was expected even one year ago. The importance of the second fundamental element, adequate risk management policies and limits, is well illustrated by what supervisors are seeing in merchant banking activities. In particular, the volatile nature and difficult valuation issues confronted by risk managers of merchant banking operations call for more formal procedures. Since the passage of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act in 1999, many financial holding companies are either entering or expanding merchant banking activities. In particular, examiners have been encouraging banking organizations to expand formal valuation policies and documentation. Without these policies, risks may not be estimated in a consistent and timely fashion and communicated to the board and shareholders. Such estimation and communication are, of course, of paramount importance in the current environment, where venture capital earnings of more than $7.7 billion at the largest banks in 2000 turned into a loss of more than $4.5 billion in 2001. Policies and procedures that promote timely, consistent, and accurate valuations of risk help institutions to identify problems earlier than otherwise would be the case. They also help focus attention on any changes in strategies or limits that might be needed to avoid similar problems in the future. The importance of the third fundamental element, appropriate risk measurement and reporting systems, is well illustrated by the challenges presented by securitization activities. In some cases, securitizations are simple off-balance-sheet financings, where much of the risk of the underlying assets is retained. In other cases, a small portion of the risk is retained, and in still other cases, such as most residential-mortgage securitizations, virtually all the risk is transferred. We expect institutions engaged in this activity to have advanced measurement and information systems to define the underlying risk related to these transactions, including their effect on the institution's overall credit-, liquidity-, and market-risk profile. We also expect institutions to estimate the economic capital needs arising from their securitizations and ensure that they are factored into their own evaluation of capital needs. Finally, we expect institutions to have adequate reporting systems that allow them to disclose to the marketplace and regulators the nature of these exposures. As many of you know, the Federal Reserve has long advocated better disclosure, particularly regarding more-complex risks, in both the domestic and the international arenas. In fact, it is one of the key requirements in the proposed revisions to the Basel Accord. The test now will be to see if recent events will provide motivation or if the markets will require organizations to more aggressively and creatively educate the marketplace about their true underlying exposures. Recognizing the heightened need for disclosure of securitization transactions, the banking agencies, starting in 2001, required banks and their holding companies to disclose the type and amount of assets securitized, the risk exposure retained, and the charge-offs and delinquency status of the underlying assets. We are incorporating these items into our supervisory monitoring screens, and we assume market analysts are also making use of these public data for their own analysis of banking risk. Clearly, more can and should be done by banking organizations to demystify and clarify the risks they are taking. Other areas being discussed include disclosures on the risk profile of bank credit portfolios by internal risk ratings. The first three elements of risk management that I have discussed are fundamental to bank safety and soundness, but without the fourth element--internal controls--none of the other elements can be effective. For that reason, an evaluation of internal controls has always been a fundamental part of bank supervision. It is a key to improving the odds that problems are found early and addressed before the bank insurance fund or taxpayer dollars are at risk. In response to a rising trend of unexpected weaknesses in control found at banks, supervisors are seeking to ensure that risk-focused supervision is striking the right balance between reviewing risk-management processes and performing procedures to validate whether the procedures are working as advertised. Supervisors need to place more emphasis on determining whether the strength and effectiveness of those controls are tested by an independent third party other than supervisors and if they are, how frequently. In particular, as part of our risk-focused supervision, we have endeavored to use the work of internal auditors when it is deemed to be reliable. However, it is becoming clearer that we must bring a new level of skepticism to bear in this area for some institutions. In that regard, supervisors must return to the fundamentals of risk-focused supervision and require substantive verification procedures to confirm the effectiveness and reliability of internal audit, before placing substantial reliance on its findings. In the past, supervisors have taken some comfort in the fact that external accountants have also been looking at an institution's internal controls. As you know, for many banks the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act (FDICIA), Section 112, requires that the external auditor attest to management's assertions regarding the adequacy of internal controls over financial reporting. Recent events among certain banks that have had material financial consequences have caused us to question the usefulness of these attestations. In certain instances, we have been asking external accountants for their FDICIA 112 work papers for banking organizations that we have found to have had significant control weaknesses. We are looking into that work to formulate some views on whether this area needs improvements and what actions might be most effective. In conclusion, the past decade of consolidation and financial innovation has placed increasing pressure on the accounting and internal control systems of banks and corporations, revealing pockets of weaknesses. While policymakers grapple with possible remedies, bankers and their supervisors can do their part by returning to the fundamentals. These include becoming more engaged in understanding the substance behind transactions and maintaining a healthy skepticism. I am confident that the combined efforts of policymakers, bankers, and regulators will restore the confidence of the public and investors and will better prepare us to weather future cyclical downturns.