For immediate release
Remarks by Governor Edward M. Gramlich Financial literacy At the Financial Literacy Teacher Training Workshop, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois May 2, 2002 I am pleased to be here to address financial literacy, an issue that is very important to the Federal Reserve. We have a long history of involvement in economic education activities and have always considered them to be integral to our mission. Historically, many of our programs have centered on promoting an understanding of economics and, in some cases, technical training in monetary policy. In the past few years, however, the Federal Reserve has increased its focus on financial literacy. Our Public Affairs and Community Affairs officers have embarked on a national initiative to highlight the importance of financial literacy education and increase the visibility of local programs. The reasons are obvious. There is a strong link between financial literacy and our other economic objectives. All markets function best when participants are educated. If housing markets are working well, communities thrive. Additionally, our consumer protection responsibilities underscore the need for increased consumer education. As Chairman Greenspan stated in recent Senate testimony on this subject, "An informed borrower is simply less vulnerable to fraud and abuse." Emergence of Financial Literacy as an Issue Why has financial literacy become such an important topic? It is hard to believe that consumers are inherently less informed than they were several years ago. Rather, we find the explanation on the other side of the market: that the demands of the new financial services marketplace have created a greater need for financial literacy training. This need is not confined to people of any particular income or educational level. Americans of every income and educational background want additional tools and training to address the complexities of personal finance. There are several reasons behind this phenomenon. First, the plethora of products now available in the marketplace force people to make complex decisions on products--even those for the simplest everyday transactions. Years ago, the average person had two basic banking products, a checking account and a passbook saving account. These were easy to open and maintain. Now, consumers may be offered six to twelve banking products--products with fees that pay interest; those with no fees but also no interest; those with no fees but with limits on the number of transactions each month; those with overdraft protection; and so forth. All these new features may improve potential consumer welfare, but they also increase the complexity of decisionmaking. This product complexity also applies to savings instruments, which now include money market accounts, certificates of deposit, and other products with differing maturities and yields, some of which may not be covered by deposit insurance. Again, potential consumer welfare has increased, but so has complexity. Another major change in the marketplace relates to consumers' increased involvement with asset-building products. More people than ever before have stock portfolios and mutual funds and make their own long-term investment decisions. According to the Federal Reserve's Survey of Consumer Finances, from 1989 to 1998, the number of families with either direct or indirect stock holdings rose by 54 percent. Years ago, many people spent their entire careers in one job and then upon retirement received social security and, if they were lucky, a company pension. Generally, post-employment income streams were sufficient for retirement living. Now, most people do not rely on social security income alone to support them in their post-employment years. Most company pension programs include 401(k) or defined-contribution plans, for which individuals must evaluate several options for investment and make decisions that will affect the financial outcome for the rest of their lives. Additionally, debate continues about whether to give individuals investment options for their social security contributions. Offering consumer options such as these presumes an educated workforce and potentially exposes a broad array of workers to increased economic risk in making financial decisions. Demographic shifts in our population also point to the heightened need for financial literacy. Aging baby boomers are becoming increasingly more responsible for their own retirement income security. Young people are nearing financial independence in many cases with limited education and with few role models and experiences to help them prepare for it. Young adults are emerging from college with degree in hand but with thousands of dollars in debt, not only student loans but also for credit cards and other liabilities. And new immigrant populations must learn how to manage many aspects of their adopted country's marketplace. The needs of all these groups argue for increased financial education. Protection for consumers against fraud and abuse is another concern that underscores the need for education. With the proliferation of subprime housing markets and risk-based pricing, consumers today have increased opportunities for taking out home equity loans. In most cases this development has been positive, increasing credit access for low- and moderate-income borrowers. However, some lenders have used unscrupulous practices and products to prey upon vulnerable populations. Consumers with a basic knowledge of lending programs, of the credit process, and of their rights, may be better able to protect themselves against bad credit situations. Consumer education alone may not be the sole answer to predatory lending, but it is certainly an essential part of the solution. Basic Principles I would like to now discuss some principles, based on early research or program experience, that might be considered as we develop financial literacy training. Financial literacy training seems to work best when tied to a specific goal. Successful programs do not just inform participants but can actually foster changes in behavior. We know that people are more likely to modify behavior when the training has a focus or reward for example, when the outcome of the training is home ownership, savings for a college education, or the accumulation of assets in an Individual Retirement Account. A recent study showed that households with an identifiable "reason to save" are seven times more likely to save than those households without a tangible goal. For most people, the attainment of financial literacy is a cumulative, lifelong process, not an event tied to a particular course of study. Most people knowledgeable about financial matters learned the foundations of money management early in life. Although few states, or even school districts, have formal financial literacy standards or curricula, information about handling money, budgeting, and savings built into math, social studies, and even literature courses raises awareness and promotes good habits. Curricula that foster critical thinking and analysis and use simulation, case studies, and other interactive techniques have the greatest success in fostering awareness and promoting improved understanding of financial principles. While not a perfect substitute for classroom instruction, Internet-based activities and practical exercises can be effective for adults and children alike. It is never too early, or too late, to get started. Financial literacy training is particularly necessary in certain communities. Finding ways to reach very low income, minority, and immigrant communities will continue to be important. Often language or cultural differences have implications for delivery systems and the production of materials. The Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, for example, has worked with the Fannie Mae Foundation and the First Nations Development Corporation to develop a culturally sensitive financial literacy curriculum for tribes to address needs in Indian country, where issues of trust land and collateral exist. Some financial institutions are grappling with Islamic lending, as our nation's growing Muslim communities have religious prohibitions on paying interest or finance charges. Partnerships with financial services providers can be effective. Financial education alone will not serve these communities unless financial institutions have products that also address the cultural issues. Financial institutions can work creatively with community organizations to develop products and services for financially literate populations. Forming partnerships with community organizations that can facilitate outreach to communities that are prey to unscrupulous lenders can be an especially challenging task. For example, the Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation (NRC), through its national NeighborWorks network of grass-roots community organizations, carries out extensive outreach activities targeting potential predatory lending victims. NRC has developed remediation programs for those who have become embroiled in bad credit situations. Reaching homeowners before they assume a home equity loan is critical. Thus, in addition to very active home ownership counseling programs, NRC encourages constituents to bring loan documents into their offices before they sign contractual agreements. This way, a counselor can review the documents and ensure they contain nothing unfair or deceptive and that the terms are affordable for the homeowner. The NRC programs also show consumers how they can get alternative sources of funds on better terms. Financial educators have often partnered with community development and housing organizations with good results, but the future may dictate that collaborations expand to include nontraditional partners. By working with financial institutions, faith-based organizations, social service groups, youth clubs, and mentoring programs, educators are better able to reach consumers who otherwise would not be aware of available services. It is often important for educators to work with organizations that have already established contacts and relationships with the community. For example, evaluations from one New York State program show that the low-income audience preferred learning from a "trusted source," such as a key community leader or a peer, rather than from "outsiders" or formal education programs. The workplace is a natural point of entry for improving financial literacy. It is especially good for reaching single parents and people working several jobs. Many people just do not have enough time in the day to attend classes after work or even on the weekends. Bringing this training to the workplace and providing time for attendance can be a win/win situation for the employee and employer. A financially prepared worker is a more productive worker: A 1999 study concluded that financial health is positively correlated with worker productivity and physical health. At the Federal Reserve Board, we have taken the opportunity to use the workplace for literacy training. Over the past year, we have offered three lunch-and-learn programs for our employees. The topics included homeownership training for potential first-time homebuyers, managing credit, and basic budgeting. We also offered seminars on retirement savings which incorporated information about our benefits structure. All the programs were well attended and highly rated. New technology can be used to promote financial literacy. The use of technology for financial literacy presents both a challenge and an opportunity. The rapid development of electronic delivery systems has resulted in sophisticated interactive programs, which allow users to construct budgets and enter their personal data. The Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas and Chicago have used such technology to develop interactive web-based programs on financial literacy and money management. With the proliferation of home computers, the use of technology will continue to offer options for consumers to increase their knowledge of financial services and products. The flip side of this opportunity is the challenge of reaching those who lack the technological access or capability to participate in these efforts. We need alternative methods of disseminating information to those living on the other side of the digital divide. For our efforts to succeed, we must have more research on how people absorb financial education. Survey research shows that the primary way people learn about financial topics is "through experience." This finding could tie into my earlier assertion that a concrete goal facilitates behavioral change. It could also mean that those respondents who had experienced trouble with credit card debt, mortgage delinquencies, or other financial problems "learned" while working to mitigate the problem. When asked about learning preferences, two-thirds of the respondents said they prefer to learn via the media (brochures, television, radio, magazines, or newspapers). One concern about this finding is whether consumers have the critical thinking skills to separate the infomercials and advertising from sound financial information. Half of the survey participants said that informational seminars held in the community or formal courses at a community school would be "effective for [me] to learn about money management." Interestingly, among Hispanics, the first preference for learning was the Internet. The survey also showed that consumers who are financially knowledgeable are more likely to behave in financially responsible ways. These consumers shop for financial products and services. They pay their bills on time. They do more financial planning. They have an emergency fund and a recordkeeping system. They save more--and more regularly. These results suggest the need for more research and information on the efficacy of financial literacy programs--what works and what does not work. Recognizing this need, the Federal Reserve has requested research on the effectiveness of financial literacy programs in the call for papers for its Community Affairs research conference next March. Many new studies are forthcoming. Especially useful will be longitudinal studies that follow financial literacy graduates for several years to see how the information was used, or not used, to improve the quality of life. * * * * * * It is obvious that a rapid stream of financial innovations will be a feature of the new information-oriented economy. We must provide a conducive atmosphere for these innovations. But we must also work to keep average people literate about the innovations--so people can use innovations, not be confused by them. Notes Arthur B. Kennickell, Martha Starr-McCluer, and Brian J. Surette, "Recent Changes in U.S. Family Finances: Results from the 1998 Survey of Consumer Finances," Federal Reserve Bulletin , vol. 86 (January 2000), pp. 1-29. Jeanne M. Hogarth and Chris E. Anguelov, "Can the Poor Save?" Proceedings of Association for Financial Counseling and Planning Education (2001). Jeanne Hogarth, Josephine Swanson, and Jan Baker Segelken, "Building an Understanding of Credit Services," Cornell Cooperative Extension (1994). E. Thomas Garman, Jinhee Kim, Constance Y. Kratzer, Bruce H. Brunson, and So-Hyun Joo, "Workplace Financial Education Improves Financial Wellness," Association for Financial Counseling and Planning Education , vol. 10 (1) (1999). Jeanne M. Hogarth and Marianne A. Hilgert, "Financial Knowledge, Experience and Learning Preferences: Preliminary Results from a New Survey on Financial Literacy," Consumer Interest Annual , vol. 48 (2002). Hogarth and Hilgert, "Financial Knowledge." Hogarth and Hilgert, "Financial Knowledge."
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan At the 2002 Financial Markets Conference of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Sea Island, Georgia (via satellite) May 3, 2002 Stock Options and Related Matters I asked Jack Guynn and Bob Eisenbeis what issues you would like me to address this morning. They suggested that events associated with the failure of Enron have refocused attention on a number of accounting issues. In an economy as large, diverse, and complex as ours, sound corporate governance-- including the accurate measurement of corporate performance--is essential if our nation's resources are to be directed to their most efficient uses. There can be little doubt that, on the whole, both, as employed in the United States in recent decades, have been of very high quality. We simply could not have achieved our level of economic performance if capital were allocated on the basis of grossly inaccurate information. But the very complexity and dynamism of our system requires that we constantly evaluate the tools employed for measuring corporate performance to ensure that they adapt appropriately to the evolving financial and economic environment. In that regard, the increasing use of stock option grants to employees has raised new challenges for our accounting system. Such options are important to the venture capital industry, and many in high-tech industries have counselled against making any changes to current practices. They argue that the use of options is an exceptionally valuable compensation mechanism; that recognizing an expense associated with these grants would reduce the use of options, harming high-tech companies; that the effect of options on fully diluted earnings per share is already recognized; and that we cannot measure the costs of options with sufficient accuracy to justify their recognition on financial statements. These are important concerns. This morning, I would like to address them and other related issues. The seemingly narrow accounting matter of option expensing is, in fact, critically important for the accurate representation of corporate performance. And accurate accounting, in turn, is central to the functioning of free-market capitalism--the system that has brought such a high level of prosperity to our country. Capitalism expands wealth primarily through creative destruction--the process by which the cash flow from obsolescent, low-return capital is invested in high-return, cutting-edge technologies. But for that process to function, markets need reliable data to gauge the return on assets. Measures of profitability, however, can only be approximate. Although most pretax profits reflect cash receipts less cash costs, a significant part of profits results from changes in the valuation of items on the balance sheet. The values of almost all assets are based on their ability to produce future income. But an appropriate assessment of asset value depends critically on a forecast of forthcoming events, which by their nature are uncertain. A bank, for example, books interest paid on a loan as current revenue. However, if the borrower subsequently defaults, that presumed interest payment would, in retrospect, be seen as a partial return of principal and not as income. We seek to cope with this uncertainty by constructing loan-loss reserves, but the adequacy of those reserves is also subject to a forecast. Similarly, depreciation charges against income, based on book values, are very crude approximations of the decline in the economic value of physical plant and equipment. The actual decline will not be known until the asset is retired or changes ownership. Another example is the projection of future investment returns on defined-benefit pension plans, which markedly affects corporate pension contributions and, hence, pre-tax profits. Thus, how one chooses to evaluate the future income potential of the balance sheet has a significant effect on current reported earnings. The estimation of earnings is difficult enough without introducing biases into the calculation. I fear that the failure to expense stock option grants has introduced a significant distortion in reported earnings--and one that has grown with the increasing prevalence of this form of compensation. As I noted at the outset, some view the current treatment of option grants as having been a major aid in raising capital to finance the rapid exploitation of advanced technologies. While the vital contribution of new technology to the growth of our economy is evident to all, not all new ideas create value on net. Not all new ideas should be financed. In recent years, substantial capital arguably was wasted on a number of enterprises whose prospects appeared more promising than they turned out to be. This waste is an inevitable byproduct of the risk-taking that generates the growth in our economy. However, the amount of waste becomes unnecessarily large when the earnings reports that help investors allocate investment are inaccurate. Stock-option grants, properly constructed, can be highly effective in aligning the interests of corporate officers with those of shareholders. Such an alignment is an essential condition for maximizing the long-term market value of the firm. Regrettably, some current issuance practices have not created the alignment of incentives that encourages desired corporate behavior. One problem is that stock options, as currently structured, often provide only a loose link between compensation and successful management. A company's share price, and hence the value of related options, is heavily influenced by economy-wide forces--that is, by changes in interest rates, inflation, and myriad other forces wholly unrelated to the success or failure of a particular corporate strategy. There have been more than a few dismaying examples of CEOs who nearly drove their companies to the wall and presided over a significant fall in the price of the companies' stock relative to that of their competitors and the stock market overall. They, nonetheless, reaped large rewards because the strong performance of the stock market as a whole dragged the prices of the forlorn companies' stocks along with it. Stock or options policy should require that rewards reflect the success or failure of managements' decisions. Grants of stock or options in lieu of cash could be used more effectively by tying such grants through time to some measure of the firm's performance relative to a carefully chosen benchmark. Many corporations do tie the value of stock and option grants to relative performance, but most do not. To be sure, an untied option grant can be thought of as an option whose value moves with the performance of the corporation relative to the competition, coupled with a call option on, for example, the S&P 500 stock index. It can be argued that the latter is merely another form of compensation that helps firms retain valued employees. I am sure that is right, but does a compensation system tied to the overall stock market serve a company well? * * * Let me now turn to option accounting. A stock option is a unilateral grant of value from existing shareholders to an employee. It is a transfer through the corporation of part of the market capitalization owned by existing shareholders. The grant is made to acquire the services of the employee, and presumably has a value equivalent to the cash or other compensation that would have been required to obtain those services--what economists call the opportunity cost of employing those services. That value is obviously a function of when, and under what conditions, the option can be exercised. To assess the cash equivalent of the option, only the market value of the option at the time of the grant matters. Subsequent changes in the value of the option are not relevant to the exchange of labor services for value received, just as future changes in the purchasing power of cash received for services rendered do not affect the firm's compensation costs. The accurate measurement of input costs is essential for determining whether the corporation earned a profit from its current activities. That determination was relatively straightforward when all receipts were cash and all expenses were cash costs. But, changes in balance-sheet valuations based on fragile forecasts have become a more important element in determining whether a particular corporate strategy was successful. And, as a consequence, cost estimation has become ever more problematic. But the principle of measuring profit as the value of output less the value of input is not altered by the complexity of measurement. To assume that option grants are not an expense is to assume that the real resources that contributed to the creation of the value of the output were free. Surely the existing shareholders who granted options to employees do not consider the potential dilution of their share in the market capitalization of their corporation as having no cost to them. The particular instrument that is used to transfer value in return for labor services is irrelevant. Its value is not. Abstracting from tax considerations, one must assume that the value is the same for the employer irrespective of the nature of the instrument that conveys it--which could be cash or its value equivalent in the form of stock, free rent, a college annuity for one's children, or an option grant. The ability of options to substitute for cash obviously rests on an expectation by an employee that the price of the company's stock will rise. Expectations of stock price movements, in turn, appear to be significantly influenced by recent stock price behavior. Thus, there is little surprise that stock options gained considerable favor as a form of compensation with the steep rise in stock prices in the late 1990s. Similarly, one might reasonably expect that in an environment with slower stock price gains, option grants would no longer be so favorably viewed by employees as a substitute for cash. As a consequence, more cash or its equivalent might then be required to fund labor services. One may argue that, because option grants are fully disclosed and their effect on earnings can, with some effort, be estimated reasonably well, financial markets in their collective wisdom see through the nature of any bookkeeping transactions. Hence, how expenses and profits are reported is of no significance, because nothing in the real world is altered. Cash flows, for example, are unaffected. The upshot of this reasoning is that stock prices should be unaffected by whether option grants are expensed or not. Clearly, most high-tech executives believe otherwise. How else does one explain their vociferous negative reaction to expensing if its only effect were to change the book profit reported to shareholders? I fear they may be right. Indeed, most American businesspeople must believe expensing is more than bookkeeping. Current accounting rules encourage firms to expense option grants. However, only two of the S&P 500 firms reportedly chose to do so in the year 2000. If expensing does indeed matter, at least some of the unsustainable euphoria that surrounded dot-com investing at its peak may have been exacerbated by questionable reported earnings. The measure of diluted earnings per share currently reported by corporations partially reflects the number of shares that employees could obtain with vested but, as yet, unexercised options. Some have maintained that this is all that is required to capture the effects of option grants. Clearly, this adjustment corrects only the denominator of the earnings per share ratio. It is the estimation of the numerator that the accounting dispute is all about. Some have argued against option expensing on the grounds that the Black-Scholes formula, the prevailing means of estimating option expense, is approximate. It is. But, as I indicated earlier, so is a good deal of all other earnings estimation. Moreover, every corporation already implicitly reports an estimate of option expense on its income statement. That number for most companies, of course, is exactly zero. Are option grants truly without value? As I noted earlier, critics of option expensing have also argued that expensing will make raising capital more difficult. But we need to remember that expensing is only a bookkeeping transaction. To repeat, nothing real is changed in the actual operations or cash flow of the corporation. If investors are dissuaded by lower reported earnings as a result of expensing, it means only that they were less informed than they should have been about the true input cost of creating corporate revenues. Capital employed on the basis of misinformation is likely to be capital misused. Critics of expensing also argue that the availability of options enables corporations to attract more-productive employees. I am sure that is true. But option expensing in no way precludes the issuance of options. To be sure, lower reported earnings as a result of expensing, should it temper stock price increases, could inhibit option issuance. But, again, that inhibition would be appropriate because it would reflect the correction of misinformation. It is no more valid, in my judgment, to assume that option grant expense is zero than to arbitrarily assume depreciation charges are zero. Both assumptions, excluding interest, increase reported pretax earnings. Both imply that the inputs that produce valued corporate outputs are free. * * * One issue that has complicated the discussion of option expensing is the different way it is handled for tax accounting. Under tax law, when options are exercised, the value realized by an employee--that is, the difference between the share price and the strike price--is a deductible compensation expense for the company. The amount of this compensation for tax purposes reflects a rise in the price of the stock after the option grant. Any such price changes are of no relevance in judging the cost of purchasing labor services, though they do affect the tax liability and possibly the after-tax earnings reported to shareholders of the firm that granted the option. How capital gains and losses associated with these transactions should be reflected in reported earnings is a separate issue. * * * I want to emphasize that expensing in no way inhibits the legal authority to issue options. Yes, if investors take currently reported earnings as real, expensing will reduce a corporation's perceived earnings and conceivably its stock price. Employees, accordingly, will consider options less valuable and presumably fewer will be issued. But confusing markets is neither helpful nor permanent. If underlying corporate input costs are real, they cannot be obscured indefinitely. As I indicated earlier, the continued popularity among employees of option grants as a substitute for cash compensation requires a persistent expected uptrend in a company's stock price. Should compensation shift more to cash, the trend in reported earnings growth would decline relative to an earnings trend in which options have always been expensed. Such a shift presumably would make option expensing more attractive to the corporation. * * * With an accounting system that is, or should be, measuring the success or failure of individual corporate strategies, the evolution of accounting rules is essential as the nature of our economy changes. As the measurement needs change, rules must change with them. This does not lend itself to hard-wired legislation, which makes flexibility of rule-making difficult. We would be best served, in my judgment, by leaving issues such as option grant expense to regulatory bodies and the private sector. There is a legitimate question as to whether markets see through the current nonexpensing of options. If they do, moving to an explicit recognition of option expense in reported earnings will be a nonevent. The format of reports to shareholders will change somewhat, but little more will be involved. Making an estimate of option expense requires no significant additional burden to the company. If, however, markets do not fully see through the failure to expense real factor inputs, market values are distorted and real capital resources are being diverted from their most efficient employment. This would be an issue of national concern. Clearly then, the greater risk is to leave the current accounting treatment in place. If markets have seen through the accounting, required expensing of option grants will have no effect on the nation's capital allocation. If, however, expensing does affect market values, a continuation of current accounting practice could be costly to capital efficiency. Some very notable developments in our corporate sector in recent years, most strikingly evident in the collapse of Enron, have unearthed deficiencies in corporate governance. These are being addressed through market repricing and regulatory initiatives. Despite evident shortcomings that have emerged from time to time, as I noted at the outset, we should not lose sight of the fact that these arrangements over the decades have effectively promoted the allocation of the nation's savings to its most productive uses. Generally speaking, the structure of business incentives, reporting, and accountability has served us well. I am confident that we will make the changes needed to ensure that these structures continue to serve us well in the future. Notes On topics such as nonfinancial corporate governance and accounting, which are not in the Federal Reserve Board's jurisdiction, I am obviously speaking for myself. Expensing stock options is required to record the economic cost of labor services purchased with option grants. But like all such balance-sheet-related costs (depreciation, for example), their final accounting disposition can often take years. The reason is that future movements in the price of the underlying stock will create capital gains or losses in the stock option between the time of grant and expiration. Such changes do not alter the economic cost, but depending on how the corporation chooses to hedge option grants, these changes can affect the net worth of the corporation. The issue does not arise with grants of stock because all capital gains and losses after issuance accrue to the employee. In addition, this issue would not arise with option grants if the corporation fully hedged its exposure to post-grant capital gains and losses. The corporation could do this, in principle, by purchasing a call option on its stock that was identical in all respects to the granted option and then selling that call option at the same time that the employee exercises his or her option. Of course, the call options needed to execute this hedge are difficult to arrange. Given this difficulty, many corporations partially hedge their position by repurchasing their shares in the open market, which leaves them exposed to some post-grant gains and losses. And, to be sure, many other corporations choose not to hedge their option grants at all. But these are accounting issues that are unrelated to the economic cost of an option at time of grant. They are among the myriad balance-sheet valuation adjustments that endeavor to address the ongoing impact of market valuation changes on all assets and liabilities. Some firms report different tax liabilities to the Internal Revenue Service and shareholders.
No content found
Joint Press Release Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Securities and Exchange Commission For Immediate Release May 9, 2002 Federal Reserve and SEC Publish White Paper on Potential Structural Change in the Settlement of Government Securities The Federal Reserve Board and Securities and Exchange Commission today announced release of a "white paper" discussing possible structural changes in the settlement of government securities and requested public comment on it. The paper, to be published May 13 in the Federal Register, was developed with a goal of identifying issues and questions that need to be further explored. In releasing the paper, the staffs of the agencies emphasized they have not concluded that any of the approaches discussed represent an improvement over current arrangements or that structural change is necessary. Following the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks, the agencies held discussions with market participants concerning vulnerabilities in the settlement of government securities. Market participants were interested in exploring structural changes in the provision of settlement services for government securities, including the concept of establishing a utility to conduct settlement. The paper identifies possible approaches for creating a utility and possible assessment criteria for evaluating the various approaches. Comments are requested by August 12, 2002.
Remarks by Vice Chairman Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. At the Conference on Bank Structure and Competition, Chicago, Illinois May 9, 2002 Implications of 9/11 for the Financial Services Sector Good morning. It's been seven months since the attacks on the World Trade Center. Today, I would like to discuss my thoughts on business resumption planning after 9/11 and some implications for the financial services sector. Financial services firms in and near the World Trade Center were severely affected by the 9/11 attacks. The industry experienced an unprecedented loss of lives and property, requiring massive, long-term relocations to contingency sites and dedicated efforts to protect and reassure staff. The destruction of telecommunications infrastructure supporting lower Manhattan disrupted the telephone connections for several days between the whole nation and financial markets and intermediaries located in the lower Manhattan financial district. This disruption created bottlenecks in the processing of financial transactions and caused a temporary--but severe--dislocation of liquidity for financial institutions. The primary markets closed temporarily, to facilitate disaster-recovery efforts and to ensure fair and orderly markets, until telecommunications could be restored. Despite the shock, long-term devastation, and disruption of public infrastructure and commercial activities in the world's financial center, the U.S. financial system largely remained open throughout the day and thereafter. Banks and other financial intermediaries stayed open. Key wholesale and retail payments system remained operational, like other financial activities, except to the extent that telecommunications disruptions had a temporary or local effect. Even firms in the World Trade Center were able to resume business from other offices or from contingency sites within hours of the attack. The response of the financial industry and the speed with which it resumed business was extraordinary and can be attributed only to its long-standing commitment to, and extensive preparations for, ensuring continuity of operations in the wake of physical and cyber disruptions. Why did the financial system perform so well, and what can be done to ensure the smooth operation of the financial system if wide-scale disruptions recur? These questions are receiving continued scrutiny within government agencies and among industry members, and are the subject of extremely useful discussions, which I think will result in a more secure and resilient financial system. Preparedness of the Financial Services Sector Financial institutions and markets were able to recover quickly from the 9/11 tragedy for several reasons. First, the financial industry incorporated information technology into its business processes many years ago and since then has encouraged innovations in business process to achieve efficiency and security. As a result, industry participants are extremely knowledgeable about technology and the related operations risk. Second, financial institutions understand that it is in their best business interest to make business continuity planning an executive management issue, requiring top-level involvement and not insignificant investment. Preparations for the century date change gave us a much clearer understanding of the financial system's dependence on technology and on the complexities of managing operations risk. Once institutions understood the considerable business risks that would result if they could not serve customers, they moved the management of Y2K preparations out of the back office and onto the desks of product-line and senior managers. Firms understand that they must manage not only business risks flowing from operational issues but also inherent reputational and legal risks. The century date change provided other benefits as well. In preparing for Y2K, financial institutions modernized and incorporated security products and procedures into their information systems. They also updated and tested contingency plans and backup facilities. We found that because of the staff training and industry testing that occurred around the century date change, employees of financial institutions and within our own agencies were still relatively well-informed about contingency procedures and arrangements, and followed them. Though not perfect, these plans worked well. Third, financial institutions have long understood the need for strong internal controls and physical security. As banks increased reliance on information technology, they naturally incorporated measures to ensure the security of information. Moreover, financial institutions recognized immediately that the increasing role of information system networks and the Internet in the financial markets engendered new risks, and they became leaders in addressing cyberprotection issues. In 1999, industry participants established and funded one of the first information sharing and analysis centers (ISACs). More than forty of our largest banks, securities and insurance firms, investment companies, and financial utilities, representing a significant portion of assets in the financial system, participate in the ISAC. The ISAC maintains an industrywide database of electronic security threats, vulnerabilities, incidents, and solutions. Security specialists analyze reports and distribute to members warnings and information about threats and solutions or mitigation procedures. Financial institutions also actively participate in a number of other information-sharing organizations, such as the Federal Computer Incident Response Center (FedCIRC) and the System Administration, Networking, and Security Institute (SANS). Fourth, supervisory expectations for business continuity planning and disaster recovery are long-standing. In general, the supervisory process focuses on a bank's risk-management and governance process, rather than mandating specific technical or operational standards. As institutions have expanded their use of integrated systems to support business operations, the potential for single points of failure has increased. In response, the banking supervisors have issued more detailed guidance on contingency planning, including managing information technology risk, information security, outsourcing, and network management. Examiners regularly assess the adequacy of business continuity plans. Moreover, the integration of information technology reviews into safety and soundness examinations and our evolving and expanding definition of the elements of operations risk are resulting in a more comprehensive approach to assessing the completeness and adequacy of business resumption plans. Lessons Learned from 9/11 Even when performing well in a crisis, one always has lessons to learn and to incorporate into one's planning. If we are to strengthen the overall resilience of the financial system, institutions will need to develop internal business-resumption standards and define their recovery targets in a fairly consistent manner. Decisions made by an individual institution may affect not only its own safety and soundness but also the safety and soundness of other institutions and, indeed, the very functioning of the financial markets. As a result, we believe that coordinated discussions about sound practices for business continuity involving industry participants and regulators are an important part of our response to the events of 9/11. The Federal Reserve, along with several other financial regulators, met with a number of the larger financial firms in February to discuss how 9/11 has affected their thoughts about business-resumption planning. Our discussion group agreed that the focus of business continuity plans should be the smooth functioning of the financial system, particularly for firms that perform core functions in the wholesale and retail markets. Moreover, the group recognized, more keenly than before 9/11, the inter-dependence of financial system participants, wherever located. The group also agreed that planning assumptions about the scope and duration of operational disruptions need to be broadened. The group came to several other conclusions that I would like to highlight: Business resumption plans need to be expanded to provide for wide-scale and regional events. They also should take into account the loss or inaccessibility of staff. Obvious vulnerabilities are associated with the current geographic concentration of market participants and some of their backup facilities. As a result, geographic diversity for critical operations and backup facilities should be a key consideration of business-resumption plans. Institutions should identify their critical business lines and the systems or business processes that support those lines, including closely related activities that should have the same level of resiliency. They should also consider the extent to which their critical business lines depend on external parties--market utilities, major counterparties, and customers--and how to mitigate the risks that dependence poses for the continuity of operations. We must make certain that business continuity arrangements will be effective and compatible within and across institutions. The industry can accomplish this effectiveness and compatibility only through developing multiple levels of backup, depending on the criticality of the function or business line. Moreover, our discussion group believed that industry participants must engage in robust testing of their contingency plans and backup facilities, internally and with financial utilities. Business-resumption plans should reflect recovery-time objectives for critical functions. Previous assumptions about how long backup facilities may need to be used and their capacity levels should be revised to incorporate the possibility of longer-term disruptions and to accommodate normal or increased volume of transactions--as occurred when the markets reopened on September 17. The financial industry's dependence on telecommunications is well known, and 9/11 provided a vivid demonstration of how disruptions to the nation's critical infrastructure can and will close markets and disrupt payment flow. As you know, to ensure fair and orderly markets, the New York Stock Exchange, although it was fully operational, did not reopen until Monday, September 17, when voice and data links were restored. Although efforts are under way to improve the resilience of the telecommunications infrastructure, overcoming current vulnerabilities is clearly a long-term issue. For the time being, financial institutions should seek greater redundancy of telecommunications services through alternative technologies (Internet, satellite, and wireless) and eliminate potential single points of failure. I understand that, to obtain diversity in routing calls through wire lines, some firms are working with their telecommunications providers to document the routing of their telephone lines to obtain redundancy. However, this information is not always current or necessarily reliable. Moreover, because of the highly competitive nature of the telecommunications industry, competing providers have an incentive to concentrate and share facilities such as "switching hotels." That concentration may prove difficult to unwind without some fundamental change in the economics of the telecom market. Implications for the Financial Institutions Although, in practice, expectations for recovery times may differ depending on the scenario, some critical functions, including the safeguarding and transferring of funds and financial assets, are so vital to the domestic and global financial system that they arguably should continue with minimal, if any, disruption, even in the most severe regional disaster. Obviously, all institutions need to plan to continue serving customers in a major disruption, and supervisory standards have required them to do so for many years. However, it is increasingly evident that the operational resilience of the largest institutions in key markets should reflect their systemic impact across the financial sector. Expectations should be highest for institutions whose activity can significantly affect others, such as major clearing and settlement entities and institutions that act as financial "utilities" in some of their functions. Our conversations with financial institutions and disaster-recovery experts indicate that some institutions are not just revamping emergency response and contingency plans to address vulnerabilities experienced during 9/11; they are considering some fairly significant changes in their operations. For example, the traditional business-resumption model calls for having a backup for an active operating site, but maintaining an effective one is difficult. During 9/11, some firms found that their backup sites were not always accessible or that their backup systems did not have the up-to-date hardware and software versions in use at the active site. Some firms had only so-called "warm or cold" backup sites that required installation of hardware or software, which was not possible under the circumstances. Financial utilities, counterparties, and customers reported some difficulties in establishing communications because backup information had not been shared or was not current. Moreover, assumptions that key personnel could be relocated proved wrong. A variation of that business-resumption model includes shifting operations to the backup site on a regular basis. Doing so avoids the systems issues of the traditional model, but it still requires the movement of personnel. Some institutions are moving toward a split-operations model in which two or more active sites provide backup for one another, and one site can absorb some or all of the critical work of the other for an extended time. Instituting this model may be easiest for institutions that have nationwide or global operations. The strategy offers the potential for an almost immediate resumption of business and addresses all the key vulnerabilities of the traditional model. At the same time, the split-operations model can involve significant costs in that it requires maintaining excess capacity at each site and involves additional operating complexity to ensure a smooth shift of transaction and supporting data from one site to the other. I see this model as best suited for certain types of business activities that require as close to real-time information as possible, although I recognize that it dilutes internal synergy, which is particularly critical for trading operations. As a result, firms need to balance all the competing factors in determining how to achieve an appropriately high degree of resilience for particular operations. Some functions may require more than one level of backup (for example, an active site with secondary hot and tertiary cold back up sites). At this point, activities that need real-time backup, such as the transferral of transaction information from a front office, are constrained geographically by existing technology. But the technology is rapidly evolving and, over time, will significantly expand the range of business-continuity strategies and change their relative costs and benefits. The extensive interdependence among participants requires better coordination in identifying best practices and sharing information. Various trade associations (the Securities Industry Association, Banking Industry Technology Secretariat, and the New York-based Payment Risk Committee) have created industry-specific business-resumption work groups, and they are starting to meet. I trust that these coordination efforts will include the development of a plan for coordinated testing of backup sites by firms across the financial sector similar to the testing that took place in preparation for Y2K. Initiatives by the Federal Reserve and Bank Supervisors to Facilitate Financial System Resiliency At the Federal Reserve, we are into evaluating and strengthening our business-resumption plans. As you may know, we were forced to evacuate the Federal Reserve Bank of New York for several days, and we relocated staff and operations to several backup sites. We are expanding our plans to ensure that critical central bank operations, supervisory functions, and financial products and services offices have sufficient redundancy in facilities and staff. One step that may be of particular interest is our plan to insure that if a Reserve Bank cannot operate, another Reserve Bank will be able to step in quickly to meet the discount needs of banks from the affected district. As policymakers, we are evaluating our authority and flexibility in responding to situations that temporarily affect a bank's financial condition. I believe that our central bank tools were flexible and effective in providing the liquidity necessary to stabilize the markets in the days immediately after 9/11. We bought a record number of repurchase agreements, injecting approximately $81 billion into the government securities markets. We also loaned approximately $46 billion from the discount window--typical levels are around $100 million. And, to address the collateral needs of foreign financial institutions doing business in the United States and to meet the demand for dollars abroad, we executed a series of agreements to do currency swaps, if needed, with the European Central Bank, the Bank of England, and the Bank of Canada totaling $90 billion. The market reacted positively to the statements that we issued inviting banks to discuss with their regulators temporary balance-sheet issues arising from the market disruptions and encouraging banks to work with customers affected by 9/11. The agencies also are busy at all levels updating emergency communication protocols and reviewing and improving strategies for communicating with financial institutions directly and with the public in times of crisis, when effective communication is particularly necessary. As we saw during 9/11, that being prepared and able to provide accurate and timely information to the public is critical to maintaining public confidence in the financial system. Supervisors, in encouraging banks and other market participants to strengthen business-resumption plans, still have much to learn from financial institutions and experts in business-continuity planning. We have much less experience in modeling and predicting these operational risks than we have for understanding credit or market risk, and some threats may be too idiosyncratic to be modeled at all. Nevertheless, we are continuing our efforts to learn how financial institutions are applying the lessons they learned during 9/11 to their own business-resumption plans and are encouraging awareness and participation by senior management. Our supervisory plans for the rest of the year and for 2003 are being revised to emphasize business resumption, particularly for large banking organizations. We are talking to institutions about the robustness of their contingency plans and encouraging them to ensure that the planning process includes participation from all relevant areas of their organization and includes expanded scenarios that take into account the effects that might flow from sudden, external events. But, we are stopping short of imposing detailed regulatory standards. As best practices emerge to address the new paradigm, we may find it appropriate to expand supervisory guidance so as to obtain the appropriate level of overall resilience for the financial system. I expect we will come to some conclusion about the need for additional guidance over the next few months. However, I feel strongly that any such guidance should resist taking an overly prescriptive approach. Business resumption planning is not a "one size fits all" task. We want to encourage the industry to take advantage of rapidly evolving technologies and alternatives. In short, regulators need to balance competing issues. We have an important ongoing interest in the safety and soundness of individual institutions as well as in systemic financial stability. But we also recognize that, even though the largest nationally and internationally active institutions have a key role to play in financial stability, they also participate in a competitive marketplace. Thus, we need to be careful not to place undue burden on a handful of institutions. I expect that the marketplace will create its own incentives for institutions to invest in business resumption, as customers begin to demand assurances that their financial institutions can indeed continue to provide services if a regional or widespread operational disruption occurs. Conclusion Although these issues are complicated, we cannot afford to ignore the lessons learned from 9/11. As consensus emerges, we will have to expand our dialogue and encourage foreign financial systems, counterparties, and customers to seek levels of resilience necessary for the smooth operation of global financial markets. We have seen a sincere willingness on the part of industry participants to discuss business-resumption issues frankly and openly. I hope that industry members will incorporate best practices as appropriate to their particular business activities and in light of their role in the financial markets. We may have to prod a bit, but I am confident that, in the end, we will achieve an even higher degree of resilience for our financial system, which will be effective in responding to the panoply of imaginable--and even some unimaginable--events.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the issuance of a Cease and Desist Order against Pedro Cabrera, a former employee of Banco Mercantil, C.A., S.A.C.A., New York Agency, New York, New York. A copy of the Order is attached.
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan At the Conference on Bank Structure and Competition, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois May 10, 2002 Cyclicality and Banking Regulation My congratulations to Mike Moskow and his colleagues for once again designing and implementing an excellent and topical program, with some very interesting papers. The theme of the conference--Financial Market Behavior and Appropriate Regulation Over the Business Cycle--could not be more relevant for a group of central and commercial bankers, not to mention our academic friends. To be sure, there are those that believe that a regulation should be considered totally independently of either current business conditions or the regulation's implications for financial markets. This position is predicated on the view that the reason for the regulation--in the case of financial markets, usually prudential behavior, consumer protection, or community reinvestment--is an end in itself and should require that macro policymakers adjust to the regulation. Indeed, some of what we do is that. But our emphasis today is the need to be sensitive to the market and cyclical implications of the regulations we adopt. The conference theme does not imply cyclical effects or market responses should dominate the decision about applying a rule that may be needed for other purposes. Rather, our assignment at this conference is to consider, as part of the policymaking and evaluation process, the joint implications of our regulatory--and, I should add, our supervisory--policies both for their intended purposes and for financial markets and cyclical stability. Cyclicality in Financial Markets and Intermediation Financial markets and intermediaries are part of the macroeconomic cyclical process, and thus new rules involving these markets and institutions need to be evaluated in that context. This is an important reason, in my judgment, why central banks in general, and the Federal Reserve in particular, should remain in the bank regulatory business. It is evident that regulatory rules can add to ongoing macroeconomic and asset- quality cyclicality. Rules are constraints or limits that require responses as those limits are approached. Sometimes those limits--say capital constraints--may induce tighter lending standards or shrinking balance sheets for a number of institutions at the same time, engendering significant real business-cycle effects. We must, therefore, be aware of the implications beyond the original intent of a rule and consider its associated tradeoffs. Government programs, too, often have unintended business-cycle effects. The safety net--particularly deposit insurance and access to the discount window--clearly has an impact beyond the stability it brings by containing the deposit runs that once led to financial implosion. It induces intermediaries to take on more risk with less capital, creating what is arguably the largest problem facing modern bank supervisors--wide swings in credit quality. Even without government rules, however, cyclicality still would exist in financial markets, the real economy, and in the actions of financial intermediaries. Cyclical financial volatility, for example, was significant from the Civil War to World War I, a period that--abstracting from some of the perverse currency rules that came from the Banking Act of 1863--was not characterized by substantial regulation and rulemaking. Moreover, behavioral factors, even if there were no rules or regulations, would still be a formidable force in inducing cyclical changes in both the quantity and the quality of assets acquired and issued in the financial sector. The most basic is human response to risk. The often-repeated pattern in financial markets has been the periodic shift in risk attitudes, initiated by the state of the economy, among lenders and other asset holders. History instructs us that, during recoveries and booms, risk discounts erode as the level of optimism lowers the barriers to prudence. Even those lenders less inclined to reach for more risk-laden proposals are driven to maintain their share of the rising credit flow, if not to increase it. The only way bankers can adhere to lending policies significantly more stringent than those of their competitors is to effectively exit significant areas of banking, pending, in their judgment, the return of sanity to banking practices. Such an approach, however, is not consistent with a viable long-term banking franchise. To the majority of banks, the environment of contagious optimism makes more and more proposals seem bankable. Ever less attention is paid to potential problems as the cautious voices appear curiously quaint and have little quantitative support because all the recent news and facts are favorable. Even the supervisors and policymakers tend to be caught up by the process. Their voices of caution are rarely raised because they, too, find it difficult to make a case for restraint because the quantitative indicators do not support caution until too late in the lending expansion. As cyclical imbalances inevitably develop, the typical pattern has been an evaporation of optimism among lenders and asset holders and a herdlike propensity to seek an increase in risk premiums. As the economy deteriorates, fewer projects seem attractive as more of the previously extended credits become nonperforming. Cautious voices, including those of the supervisors, become prominent, now supported by the increasing evidence of deterioration. In such a situation, the supervisors call for more chargeoffs and higher capital. Credit becomes less available, and risk spreads widen, adding to the pressures for a further business contraction. The persistence of this self-reinforcing cycle is evidence that, despite the obvious advances in risk management over the years, our abilities to peer into the future, regrettably, have not improved all that much. Hindsight clearly underscores the value of countercyclical lending standards that would smooth out fluctuations in net interest earnings and thereby maximize the capitalized value of the bank. A broader recognition by the banking community of how important enhancing risk management is to the long-term value of the bank would effectively align the incentives of lending officers with regulators' desire for reduced cyclicality. At the largest banks especially, the swings in lending policies seem to have become more pronounced over, say, the last twenty years or so as the average quality of their credit portfolios has declined with the increased reliance of high-quality borrowers on money and capital markets rather than banks. Notwithstanding well-diversified portfolios at these larger banks, the loss of their highest-quality borrowers has elevated the aggregate risks in their portfolios. To be sure, borrowers are affected by the business cycle. But though the earnings of high-quality borrowers may fluctuate, even widely fluctuate, with the business cycle, the range of default probabilities tends to be more muted than that for other borrowers. The solvency of borrowers with lower credit ratings is more vulnerable to the business cycle than is that of borrowers with Aaa ratings, whose concern is more with profit erosion during business retrenchments than with solvency. Hence a credit portfolio increasingly composed of lesser-quality credits is bound to have a greater cyclicality in nonperforming loans. The loss of high-quality borrowers thus introduces not only systematic vulnerabilities but also portfolios that are less idiosyncratic and more sensitive to the business cycle. Idiosyncratic risks have always loomed larger in small bank portfolios because their borrowers' well-being reflects such a wide range of factors, especially local and regional developments. In an integrated economy like ours, small bank lenders are affected by national business conditions, just less so than lenders to large firms. Formal Risk Management in Banking The large institutions, with their declining overall asset quality, understandably have pioneered more-formal risk-management techniques designed to capture quantitatively the changing riskiness of exposures and presumably induce more rapid responses to such measures. This is the latest development in a changing balance of power between lending officers and risk-control officers. The lending officers, in a competitive economy, may tend to be more interested in getting business than in evaluating risk. Before the most recent period, risk officers often have not been heard clearly enough and early enough, perhaps because they have not had the quantitative justification for rejecting weak credits until it is too late. The revolution in credit-risk management, a revolution that is still in process I might add, is the growing ability to measure risk. Better ability to quantify risk has begun to give the risk manager new authority in the credit-granting process. It has also given the credit risk manager the ability to make the case for absolute and relative riskiness even during periods of expansion and optimism. Making such a case may not necessarily reduce credit availability at banks for riskier borrowers; it does mean that banks can more knowingly choose their risk profiles and price that risk accordingly. Supervisors using such techniques--leveraging off the banks' measures of risk--can also better evaluate the risk taken by banks relative to the banks' control systems and capital positions, and respond accordingly. And evident increasing transparency will let uninsured creditors, especially subordinated debenture holders, also leverage off the banks' improved risk measures, bringing to bear additional market discipline and hence enhanced risk oversight by counterparty. Perhaps more critically, better risk management and the associated quantification have the real potential for reducing the wide attitudinal swings that are associated with the historical cyclical pattern in bank credit availability to which I referred earlier. Formal procedures for quantifying credit risk as an integral part of the operational loan process imply--and in the long run, virtually ensure--a process for recognizing, pricing, and managing risk. Risk quantification should lead to tighter controls and assigned responsibilities. The risk effects of lending officers' decisions can be recognized in a more timely fashion, thus reducing the cyclical attitudinal swings in banking. I would like to emphasize, however, that all risk-management strategies rest on uncertain forecasts and that the models underlying the frontier approaches depend on key assumptions that rest on fragmentary or indirect evidence. Covariance matrices, for example, are backward looking and their use presumes that historical relationships among risk drivers will continue into the future. Similarly, the distributions of credit default and loss probability are notoriously difficult to estimate and validate, especially given relatively short data histories, and so tend to be guided as much by judgmental assumptions as by empirical analysis. Nonetheless, with all their limitations, formal risk-management models are essential in providing a consistent analytic framework for collecting, organizing, and summarizing information about individual risk exposures so that bank managers--and bank examiners--can assess the institution's overall risk profile in a rational and comprehensive manner. To be sure, even the most sophisticated risk models will never be a complete substitute for experienced judgment since there are too many idiosyncratic lending anomalies that pervade all asset portfolios. But risk models are an effective, perhaps an essential, means to organize and enhance judgment. Supervisors are endeavoring to make this analytic framework the basis of a new more risk-sensitive Basel Capital Accord. The important goal may be less the resultant improvement in capital requirements than the predicate necessity for the formal risk-management techniques that Basel II would impose on a relatively small number of increasingly large, increasingly complex, and increasingly opaque banking organizations. The sad fact is that the adoption of best-practice risk-management techniques has been slower than desired. The slowness is understandable because change is expensive and disruptive. Time will be needed to develop and implement the new techniques. Some institutions have started; some have a longer way to go. What is needed is a way to incorporate advances in quantitatively based risk management more generally into the operations of our large complex banking organizations. These banks need to be induced to create and use internal risk classifications in their banking book for establishing their minimum capital requirements. To ensure that minimum standards are used, the supervisor should be required to validate the conceptual and empirical basis of each bank's risk-classification and risk-management system. One of those tests could be the use of the system by the bank in making internal management decisions--pricing, reserving, and controls, for example. We should not try to establish separate regulatory and management systems, but one unified system in which supervisors and the managers are looking at the same thing. A weak or misused classification system would destroy any such process. As critics correctly have noted, such an approach has the potential to create procyclical swings in the minimum required capital of banks as the risk classifications of credits migrate up and down in conjunction with the state of the economy. I think this is an example of what I referred to at the outset: Regulations in banking will have their own cyclical responses as events move banks toward and away from minimums. But that also would be the case for self-imposed management guidelines in an unregulated world. Let me emphasize that the basic cause of procyclical bank lending is less the result of rules--regulatory or self imposed--and more our difficulty in predicting the future. No lender starts out to make loans that default. Risk management does not enable us to perceive unfolding events with any greater clarity. But it creates an analytical structure and enforces reference to past events and, in so doing, eliminates consideration of or suggests higher pricing for loans with a low probability of repayment. Enhanced risk management, by increasing our ability to focus better on probabilities, will tend to flatten cyclical lending patterns. Indeed, though we are not going to eliminate cyclically correlated changes in attitudes of human beings, I am impressed by the effect that facts, historical relationships, and quantification can have on reducing such swings. First, relative to what we have today, Basel II is endeavoring to reduce cyclical reserving and write-offs that traditionally have come with the late recognition of excess risk taken earlier. Second, the supervisory leg of Basel II is being structured to supplement market pressures in urging banks to build capital considerably over minimum levels in expansions as a buffer that can be drawn down in adversity and still maintain adequate capital. Finally, negotiators in Basel continue to fine-tune the proposed Accord in ways that promise to damp cyclical swings in capital requirements relative to what was implied by last year's proposal. Conclusion To sum up, I think it is worth saying again that, as high-quality borrowers deserted banks for the commercial paper and direct debt markets, banks have tended to move in ways that, at a minimum, reinforce the business cycle. But technology, innovations, and increasingly efficient capital markets have reduced that contribution to the overall macroeconomic cycle. New developments in risk management hold the promise of further reductions, and they may already have delivered a downpayment on that hope. Basel II reinforces the expectation of less procyclical contribution from banking by trying to accelerate the adoption of more-formal, quantitative risk-management techniques. Another important benefit that will accompany any success in reducing the cyclicality in credit quality in banking is the reduction in the degree of volatility in bank earnings that will increase the long-term capitalized value of banks. This is just another way of saying that better risk management in banking is in the long-term interest of everyone: bank management, bank regulators, the public, and the stockholders of banks.
Remarks by Vice Chairman Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. At Webster University, St. Louis, Missouri May 11, 2002 Thoughts on Success in Life President Meyers, distinguished trustees and faculty, and honored guests, I am pleased to be at Webster University today and to join in congratulating this group of accomplished graduates. I also congratulate the family and friends of these graduates for the part they played in the graduates' achievements. I would like to talk with you today about success--and failure. Success is the usual topic of commencement addresses. But, frankly, failure is as much a part of the human condition as success. It may be more interesting, and inevitably each of us will experience failure at some point in our lives. I believe that long-term success ultimately emerges from three factors: lifelong learning, dreams and aspirations, and a healthy response to the rough patches in life, the failures. Let's examine lifelong learning and education in general. Obviously, education for school-age children and young adults is a must. Economic studies have long shown a positive correlation between years of schooling completed and compensation earned. You are now educated young adults. However, I hope that you recognize that your success is not guaranteed, even with a college degree, without lifelong learning. Education plays an ongoing role in economic achievement. To participate in today's workforce, and certainly tomorrow's, we all need to maintain our skills at the highest level and continue our education, through both on-the-job training and formal classroom training. Many Americans are doing just that. Surveys conducted by the Department of Education indicate that participation in adult education programs has expanded over the past decade, with 46 percent of adults questioned saying that they participated in an adult education program in 1999. This trend toward lifetime learning also shows up in enrollment statistics. Today, nearly 20 percent of the students in U.S. institutions of higher education are 35 years of age or older, up from less than 15 percent in 1985. The link between education and economic success is well documented. During the 1990s we were fortunate to have experienced the longest uninterrupted economic expansion in the history of the United States. By late 2000, the unemployment rate was the lowest it had been in more than thirty years. The expansion benefited all segments of the population, including minority groups. In fact, the unemployment rate for blacks dropped to less than 7-1/2 percent in late 2000; it had not fallen meaningfully below 9 percent between 1972, when minority unemployment statistics were first collected, and mid-1998. But, despite the improvement, blacks still lagged in terms of labor-market outcomes. Their unemployment rate was still nearly twice the national average. Over the past year, as all of you know, some of the record gains of the 1990s have been retraced. The unemployment rate for blacks once again hit double-digits in December and remained near or above 10 percent during the first four months of this year. The overall jobless rate has climbed to its highest level since August 1994. You can tell from these numbers that minority unemployment rates tend to run higher than the national average throughout the economic cycle. Economists have determined that this disparity has various causes. Differences in educational levels, work experience, and closeness to available jobs are among the top reasons for the inequity between minorities and white, non-Hispanics in the labor market. Clearly, the issue of educational achievement and economic achievement are intertwined. Let me now turn to the question of dreams and aspirations. The United States is a country of great civic dreams. The greatest dreamer of the past two generations may well have been Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. His dreams, though not fully met, still matter to us all. We have had other great national dreams, some fulfilled, some not. The dream of sending men to the moon has clearly been fulfilled. The dream of ending poverty has not. These national dreams have been important to our collective history; our personal lives, too, can be guided, in part, by dreams, aspirations, and hopes. Many of our dreams may never be fulfilled, but all of them can guide us and encourage us to put forth our best in all our endeavors. Even if our personal dreams are not fulfilled, it is still important, in the words of Benjamin Franklin, to "resolve to perform what you ought. Perform without fail what you resolve." Permit me to share with you how my path through life has been influenced by dreams. When I was born in 1951, Washington was still very much a segregated city; but by the time I became an adolescent the civil rights movement was starting to make headway. I could see that blacks were slowly moving into positions of power and influence. In 1966, President Lyndon Johnson nominated an economist serving in the government, Andrew Brimmer, to be the first black Governor of the Federal Reserve. This was front-page news in the Washington Post. The articles about Brimmer described his considerable academic achievements, including a Ph.D. in economics from Harvard, and his public service. They also described the important role of the Federal Reserve in setting monetary policy to help our economy achieve low inflation and maximum sustainable economic growth. I cannot claim that as a boy I understood the full meaning of those words, as perhaps some of you do not today. But I became absolutely fascinated with economics and with this institution, the Federal Reserve, which seemed to play such a pivotal role in the economic well-being of our nation. I was fortunate enough to see my interest become a reality when, in 1997, I became the third black person to be sworn in as a Governor of the Federal Reserve and, in 1999, became the first black person to become Vice Chairman of the Federal Reserve System. So I know personally the importance of dreams and aspirations and encourage all of you, whatever your age, to keep dreaming. Now to the hard part--failure. It is easy to love learning and fun to dream, but dealing with life's curve balls is the real challenge. Even the most successful among us will experience failure. Abraham Lincoln, in 1856, compared himself with Stephen Douglas as follows: "Twenty-two years ago Judge Douglas and I first became acquainted. We were both young then; he a trifle younger than I. Even then, we were both ambitious; I, perhaps, quite as much so as he. With me, the race of ambition has been a failure-a flat failure; with him it has been one of splendid success. His name fills the nation; and is not unknown, even in foreign lands." Obviously, today we know that Lincoln's name is the far better known and much better respected of the two, but Lincoln could not have realized that in 1856. Indeed, though Lincoln was a financially and socially successful lawyer, by 1856 his life also had known, and was to know, failure. Lincoln lost far more elections than most of us realize, including coming in eighth in a field of thirteen in his first run for public office, and he failed at the first business that he owned, a general store in New Salem, Illinois. Yet, Lincoln's most famous biographer, David Donald, notes that his many setbacks in life ultimately did not deter him. Donald tells us that Lincoln had a pragmatism--a recognition that, if one approach does not work, another might--and a fatalism. Both helped to buffer the many reverses that he experienced and enabled him to continue a strenuous and ambitious life. It was not the absence of failure in Lincoln's life but rather his response to failure that mattered in his achieving success. So why is failure so important, indeed vital, to a successful life? Since we will all know adversity, the thing that differentiates us in this regard, as with Lincoln, is our ability to respond to bad fortune. Here I borrow liberally from another commencement address that I heard recently. First, if treated as an incentive to greater exertion, failure can be the source of later success. Soichiro Honda, the founder of Honda Motor Company, once said, "Success is 99 percent failure." Second, failures are great teachers. If you never fail, you never learn, and if you never learn, you never grow. There is a well-known story of a bank president who was asked the secret of his success. "Right decisions," he replied. "How do you get to know how to make right decisions?" came the follow-up question. "Experience," was the answer. "Well, how do you get experience?" asked his interrogator. "Wrong decisions," he replied. Third, failure lets you know who your true friends are. Oprah Winfrey once remarked, "Lots of people want to ride with you in the limo, but what you want is someone who will take the bus with you when the limo breaks down." Finally, failure teaches empathy for others. Without that, we are prone to the arrogant notion that we are self-sufficient and superior, when in fact we are just lucky. Do be careful with regard to failure, of course. As Thomas Huxley noted, "There is the greatest practical benefit in making a few failures early in life." But he did not suggest much more than that. Let me conclude by saying that my hope for you is a lifelong love of learning, exciting and inspiring dreams, and a fair number of moderate failures. By experiencing all, I hope that you will experience success. Congratulations and good luck.
Remarks by Vice Chairman Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. Before the National Council on Economic Education, Washington, D.C. May 13, 2002 Reflections on Financial Literacy I am delighted to welcome the National Council on Economic Education and the Minneapolis Federal Reserve Bank to Washington. I want to commend your partnership and the important discussion you have organized for tomorrow. I also want to commend both institutions for their excellent leadership. In Gary Stern, President of the Minneapolis Fed and Chair of the NCEE, you have one of the most thoughtful, committed, and capable public servants I know. Gary is also one of the world's best economic educators and is deeply committed to making economic and financial education a priority in this country. I decided to take advantage of your presence tonight to speak about the benefits of economic and financial education and about why such education matters to the Federal Reserve. I also want to spend a few moments examining the importance of focus and clarity in our goals and expectations. The Benefits of Education I know that I could speak for much longer than you care to listen about why the understanding of economics and finance is crucial for individuals in a market economy. Knowledgeable and astute consumers promote competition among providers, which benefits us all. Personal financial security enhances individual well-being. Increasing national savings allows us to invest more productively for tomorrow. And, at a more fundamental level, our social fabric and national image are intimately connected to our material aspirations. The United States cannot be the land of opportunity unless all of our citizens have both the tools and the ability to use them to improve their lives and livelihoods. As you may know, I have been trained both as a lawyer and an economist. I think the point can fairly be made that the most critical underpinnings of our society are the Constitution and our market structures. From my perspective, however, the education that we provide our citizens about the rule of law differs dramatically from what we provide about the functioning of markets. By the time I graduated from junior high school I had read the Constitution; not until much later did I study how prices are set in a market economy. This imbalance can and will be addressed by your work and that of many others. Fortunately, as my Federal Reserve Board colleague Ned Gramlich pointed out recently, changes in our financial system--including the increasing complexity and diversity of product offerings--have created consumer demand for improved education. The Work of the Federal Reserve The Federal Reserve has a special interest in economic and financial education and has for many years conducted teacher training and worked with partners like NCEE, Jump Start, and others to encourage programs aimed particularly at students, educators, and consumers. In part, these activities arise from the role the Federal Reserve plays in implementing the nation's consumer-protection laws. In part, they arise from the effective roles the Reserve Banks play in their Districts as good public citizens. And, in part, they arise from the knowledge that our mandate to promote economic growth and stable prices requires public understanding and approval of the policies we implement. Many Federal Reserve educational programs date from the period in which the Fed's efforts to fight inflation inspired an intense political and economic debate about monetary policy. The institution rightly joined in the debate and, among other things, decided to develop a nationwide public information program to increase the understanding of the functions, responsibilities, and policies of the Federal Reserve System. The designers of the program had the modest goal of offering information to the public so as to provide "a fair and sound basis" for judging the System's work, which seems quite modest by today's standard of "hype" and "hard sell." Today, Reserve Banks and the Board continue to offer products and support to teachers and others who want to understand the Fed as an institution, but we also work very hard in the fields of consumer education and financial literacy training. For example, the Federal Reserve System is an active partner in the "America Saves" program developed by the Consumer Federation of America. The project was piloted in Cleveland, with the Cleveland Federal Reserve Bank being an active partner. In Chicago, the Federal Reserve Bank recently spearheaded a coalition of financial institutions and community partners to host an entire week of events to encourage financial education, connecting consumers directly to important resources in their community. The Philadelphia Fed is working with community groups and bankers to target financial literacy for adults. The Dallas Fed has developed a workbook on building wealth that banks are using with their customers and nonprofit organizations are using with their members. Currently, staff members from public information and community affairs offices throughout the System are working together to highlight the importance of financial education, increase consumer awareness of local educational opportunities, and encourage research into the most effective educational approaches to educating the public. I am very proud of the System's commitment to economic and financial education and of the support we provide to educators like you. Let me make one additional point about the Fed's interest in economic and financial education. As Chairman Greenspan has said, "educated consumers are simply less vulnerable to fraud and abuse." And when millions of educated consumers make good personal financial choices, our economy is strengthened in fundamental ways. A strong and flexible economy means that resources are directed to the areas of greatest need, productivity and innovation are supported, and the ability to withstand shocks is enhanced. Goals and Expectations As policymakers and educators who believe deeply in the power and effectiveness of economic education, we must be clear about our goals and expectations. Such clarity helps us allocate our resources appropriately, target the areas of greatest need, and ensure a sustainable commitment to the most-effective educational initiatives. Let me make a point that is self-evident. We certainly expect that economic and financial literacy can keep people from making uninformed decisions. But it cannot keep them from making bad decisions. Additionally, education will not always overcome circumstances. Unemployment happens to even the most financially literate, as do medical emergencies. Thus, though successful financial education programs will help individuals minimize or avoid the worst consequences of financial setbacks, education will not necessarily reduce the frequency of financial emergencies. Also, education will not overcome human nature. Procrastination, for example, can heavily affect financial outcomes, and education may not overcome the tendency to put off financial changes. In a study of defined contribution plans by James Choi and others, one-third of self-reported undersavers said they intended to increase their savings rate in the next few months, but almost none actually made a change in their 401(k) savings rate. This finding amply demonstrates the value of bringing a variety of disciplines to bear in creating effective programs. Clearly, neoclassical economics, with its strong assumptions about rational decisionmaking, provides a helpful theoretical framework, but we will also need to rely on other models and frameworks to help us better understand how people process information and make decisions. The work of economists such as Richard Thaler on the benefits of "low-willpower" techniques to increase savings is an example in this regard. Education is not likely to work if presented in a one-size-fits-all package, and it often works best when employed in conjunction with other targeted initiatives. This is particularly true for low- and moderate-income consumers. Research at the Board by Jeanne Hogarth and Chris Anguelov using data from the 1998 Survey of Consumer Finances indicates that 60 to 70 percent of households at the poverty level can be classified as current or usual savers. This finding should encourage those who are focusing their educational programs on the importance of savings because it reinforces the view that almost all households are able to accumulate assets. But as the researchers note, education is only one variable affecting savings. Income, age, assets, access to health insurance, and a host of other variables are at work. Education is important, but so are things like a steady job, good health, an economy growing at a sustainable rate, and the availability of tailored financial products to enhance financial well-being. Sometimes our efforts will prove frustrating or appear to be failing, and in these cases we need to do everything we can to understand the failure and learn from it. Recently, the Jump-Start Coalition for Personal Financial Literacy released results of its third study of financial literacy among high-school students. Surprisingly, despite the increasing availability of literacy programs, the results indicated a declining level of understanding of basic financial concepts among surveyed high-school seniors. Such findings make the case for more research into desired competencies, learning styles and preferences, and program effectiveness. Finally, we know that education will not be successful in an environment in which credibility and trust are lacking or in situations in which the self-interest of the educator are undisclosed. Transparency is as critical in the education market as it is in others. Conclusion In sum, I believe that increased education about how our markets function, about economic and financial concepts, and about ways to build financial security is crucial to our individual and national well-being. At the same time that we encourage interest and participation in educational programs, we also need to be clear about our goals and expectations. We must continuously encourage research to identify programs that work, and we must use what we learn to develop improved approaches.
Joint Press Release Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Maryland Commissioner of Financial Regulation Central Bank of Ireland For Release at 9 a.m. EDT May 16, 2002 The Federal Reserve Board, the Maryland Commissioner of Financial Regulation, and the Central Bank of Ireland today jointly announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Allied Irish Banks, p.l.c., Dublin, Ireland, Allfirst Financial Inc., Baltimore, Maryland, and Allfirst Bank, Baltimore, Maryland. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
For immediate release The Board of Governors on Friday requested public comment on a proposal to revise the Federal Reserve's discount window programs, which provide credit to help depository institutions meet temporary liquidity needs. Adoption of the proposal would not entail a change in the stance of monetary policy. The Federal Open Market Committee's target for the federal funds rate would not change as a result of this proposal and the level of market rates more generally would be unaffected. The Board is proposing the establishment of a new type of discount window credit, to be called primary credit. It would replace adjustment credit, which currently is extended at a below-market rate. Primary credit would be available for very short terms as a backup source of liquidity to depository institutions that are in generally sound financial condition. It would be extended at a rate that would be above the usual level of short-term market interest rates, including the federal funds rate. The primary credit program would be broadly similar to mechanisms used by many other major central banks. The interest rate for primary credit would be set through a procedure identical to that currently used for the basic discount rate. Under the proposal, the interest rate on primary credit would initially be set at 100 basis points above the target federal funds rate. Thereafter, Reserve Banks would set the rate, subject to review and determination by the Board of Governors. By restricting eligibility to generally sound institutions and by eliminating the incentive for institutions to borrow to exploit the positive spread of money market rates over the discount rate, the primary credit program should considerably reduce the need for the Federal Reserve to review the funding situations of borrowers. The Federal Reserve expects that, as a result of this reduced administration, institutions' willingness to use the window when money markets tighten should increase, limiting potential volatility in the federal funds rate. Another element of the proposal is the establishment of a secondary credit program in place of the existing extended credit program. Secondary credit would be available in appropriate circumstances to depository institutions that do not qualify for primary credit. Secondary credit would be extended at an interest rate 50 basis points above the primary discount rate. The proposal also contains certain minor technical changes to the Board's Regulation A that are independent of the primary and secondary credit proposals. Comments are due ninety days after publication in the Federal Register, expected soon.
Remarks by Governor Mark W. Olson At the Small Business Development Conference, Cleveland, Ohio May 17, 2002 Financing Options for Small Business I am pleased to participate in today's small business development conference. These meetings provide excellent opportunities for information-sharing and networking, connecting entrepreneurs with the ideas and the resources that help foster the concepts that generate new business growth. It is well-known that small business plays a substantial role in our overall economy. In 2000, there were nearly 5.6 million companies with fewer than 500 employees--the U.S. Small Business Administration's (SBA) definition of a small business--and these companies represented 99.7 percent of all businesses. In addition, small businesses employ, collectively, more than half the private-sector workforce and generate about three-fourths of net new jobs each year. These firms also generate more than half the sales revenues of all U.S. firms. The percentages for Ohio are similar to the national ones, with small businesses representing 98 percent of all businesses and employing more than 49 percent of the state's workforce. Data from the SBA's Office of Advocacy indicate that in 2000 Ohio was ranked twelfth in the country for the increase in the number of self-employed individuals, which is the genesis of employer small businesses. These data clearly demonstrate the importance of supporting small business development. And, of course, access to capital and credit is one of the most critical elements to the success of these enterprises. Improving the flow of capital to small businesses has been a priority in public policy and private industry for decades, with market forces and technological advances constantly presenting new opportunities for accomplishing this goal. One constant in this quest is the value of good information-- both that which small business owners have and that which they provide. From my experiences as a banker, I would like to share my perspective on small business access to sources of capital that may help entrepreneurs in their decisions regarding capital and credit for their business. What Small Businesses Should Know to Gain Access to Capital and Credit As today's conference underscores, small businesses can seek funding from numerous sources. Federal, state and local governments offer various financing vehicles for new and emerging businesses, just as banking, public-private partnerships, and community-based organizations provide capital to firms that qualify for their funding programs. For the entrepreneur seeking financial support for a venture, the most important thing to know is which of these funders is the most appropriate to approach, given the nature of the request, the stage of the business, and most important, the expectations--and appetite for risk--of the capital provider. Start-up Funding and Small Companies--Microenterprise Lenders Newer and small ventures often require sums that are, relatively speaking, quite modest, but are, nonetheless, critical to getting the business established. At this stage, such an endeavor is characterized as a microenterprise, which the Association for Enterprise Opportunity (AEO) defines as a sole proprietorship, partnership, or family business that has fewer than five employees, that is generally too small to obtain commercial banking services, and that requires $35,000 or less in start-up capital. Typically, these businesses are funded through the use of the owner's personal assets or credit resources, family, and friends. However, with the growing interest in supporting microenterprise development, increasingly more sources are providing funding for business start-ups. This is particularly the case as microenterprise formation has become associated with creating asset-building opportunities for lower-income families and promoting community economic development in disadvantaged neighborhoods. Financial support for microentrepreneurs can come from a mix of providers. An AEO-sponsored study cites foundations as the most significant source of capital for microentrepreneurs, followed by the federal government--namely the SBA, the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), and the U.S. Treasury's Community Development Financial Institutions Fund. Besides these agencies, many state and local governments have established microenterprise loan programs, often in collaboration with financial institutions, to further support the success of new small businesses. Entrepreneurs at this stage of the business life cycle are more likely to obtain funding to establish their firm from these sources. Training and technical assistance in business administration are as important as financing to the viability of microenterprises. These companies often need guidance on the principles of operating a business, such as developing a business plan, implementing accounting and financial-reporting systems, and creating marketing strategies. These essential elements of business management are vital to the growth of an enterprise because they demonstrate a firm's organizational capacity and position it for future development and financing opportunities. As a result, microenterprise lenders typically offer extensive training and individual counseling in conjunction with their credit programs. With the mission to serve and promote microenterprises, these organizations have the expertise and the capacity to connect very small businesses with the resources they need. And though the technical assistance that these programs offer is time- intensive and costly, it is consistent with the organization's objectives and tolerance for the level of business and credit risk that is inherent in newer, undercapitalized firms. Patient Capital--Venture Capitalists and Angel Investors Depending on the entrepreneur and the business, another source of funding for new and developing businesses may be equity partners, often known as venture capitalists and angel investors. This type of financing represents the opposite end of the funding spectrum from microlenders and is provided by professionals who invest alongside management in young, rapidly growing companies that show the potential for significant growth. With an ownership interest, these investors have a stake in the success of the business, and with the acceptance of a higher level of risk comes the expectation of a higher return. Not only do they provide capital, they also are generally active in the management of the business, participating in management decisions such as the development of new products or services and business strategies. With extensive experience, these investors bring considerable business acumen to an enterprise; they are valuable resources in managing its expansion and have a long-term orientation when evaluating a firm's potential. However, despite this longer-term focus, these investors also have a definite exit strategy. They expect, at some point, to sell their share of the business. Equity partners, be they corporations, foundations, pension funds, government, or individuals, are a source of patient capital that can be critical to the growth of a business. Equity provides a buffer during cyclical or periodic downturns in a firm's cash flow and serves as leverage for other types of financing, such as bank credit. Venture capital funds often specialize in providing capital to businesses that fit their investment profile, as defined by a point in the business life cycle, by an industry, or by a mission. Other organizations for equity financing may include government-affiliated investment programs that help start-up companies through state, local, or federal programs, such as the SBA's Small Business Investment Company (SBIC) program. Also, venture capital funds with a social mission support small business and economic development in distressed and disadvantaged communities. Through community-development venture capital funds and the SBA's Small Business New Markets Venture Capital program, equity investment is available to firms that offer the promise of creating jobs and improving the economic prospects of lower-income urban and rural areas. Entrepreneurs seeking equity funding to support their firms' growth and development should identify investors whose investment objectives are consistent with their businesses' needs, characteristics, and role in the local economy. One resource to aid business owners in conducting this research is the Angel Capital Electronic Network, or ACE-Net, an Internet-based database that matches businesses with investors. Business Operations Financing--Bank Creditors When considering bank financing, it is helpful to first understand how banks as lenders differ from investors. Unlike the venture capital business, banks are lending their depositors money and therefore operate on a much lower risk tolerance. Because bankers have a very low tolerance for error, they conduct careful analyses of a business's financial strength and ability to service the debt from its operations and cash flow. Banks can lend money to either purchase business assets, or to provide ongoing funding for business operations. In either case, banks carefully analyze the capacity of the business to generate the funds to repay the loan. Therefore, typically, banks rely on at least two years of financial statements and the business's track record of meeting its obligations to evaluate credit worthiness and debt-service capability. Bankers also recognize the need to provide financial planning assistance and specific financial management guidance but do not assume the same day-to-day management involvement as would a venture capital investor. That being said, banks remain an important source of funding for small businesses. The Federal Reserve's 1998 Survey of Small Business Finances indicates that 39 percent of small businesses surveyed used a credit line, loan, or capital lease from a commercial bank. From the perspective of banks, small business lending represents a considerable portion of their assets. As reported in a study by the SBA's Office of Advocacy, loans of less than $1 million represented 34 percent of commercial banks' total business lending in June 2000. Further, in 2000, 42 percent of all business loan originations made by financial institutions subject to the Community Reinvestment Act were to firms with revenues of less than $1 million. The Roles of Information and Relationships in Small Business Funding Although very different, each of these providers of small business capital faces a similar challenge--how to obtain quality information on the financial and managerial capacity of the enterprise. A problem facing all small business lenders or investors is the difficulty in gathering data that is certified or easily verifiable. Because very little public information on small businesses is typically available, capital providers must collect proprietary data from the small business owner. As a result, strong relationships between entrepreneurs and their capital providers are critical to ensure access to and continuity in funding. In fact, studies have demonstrated that the quality of these relationships can affect the availability and price of credit to small firms. Given this situation, entrepreneurs must take great care in managing their relationships with their funders as well as their reputations for honoring commitments. Although obtaining information to assess creditworthiness can be challenging, technology has increased, as in every other aspect of business, the quantity and quality of data that are available. Access to credit history reports and public records provide would-be funders with information about the past performance of small business owners in meeting obligations and expenses and offer insight into other financial and legal issues that the firm may have experienced. In addition, credit-scoring technology utilizes these data as a means for computing and assigning a risk value to a small business, which can serve as a bright line test for whether or not the enterprise qualifies for a loan. These points illustrate the importance to a small business of being mindful of its reputation from the outset. If there is a single most important ingredient for business success, it is establishing a reputation for integrity and consistency in meeting your business obligations. That's why one of the three C's of credit is character. This point may appear intuitive, but establishing a good character can be more challenging than it seems. Market conditions and economic fluctuations are powerful forces over which an entrepreneur has no control. Sometimes, despite careful planning, a firm may become vulnerable to a financial crisis. At these times, a strong relationship with its funder is most critical. Through an open dialogue, a capital provider can better understand the scope of the situation and respond actively, such as by restructuring repayment terms or providing information resources and referrals to help the business regain financial health. Another aspect of reputation management and relationship building involves knowing the resources for technical assistance available to small businesses during a time of difficulty or transition. Just as with funding, a wide variety of federal, state, and local organizations exist for the express purpose of advising small businesses. Depending on their focus, these groups offer entrepreneurs a myriad of services, including support in evaluating proposals, developing a business plan, designing marketing strategies, and managing growth. At the federal level, the SBA works with universities and communities to cosponsor Small Business Development Centers (SBDCs) and offers SCORE, the Service Corps of Retired Executives, which shares its expertise with small businesses at no charge. These organizations provide small businesses with valuable resources for obtaining education and information that can foster growth and development. Here in Cleveland, the community-based group Working for Empowerment through Community Organizing (WECO) offers business-planning clinics, technical assistance classes, and one-on-one counseling in partnership with the SBDC at Cuyahoga County Community College. This training complements WECO's recently launched microloan program, which is capitalized by area banks and the state of Ohio. The Federal Reserve recognizes the importance of creating infrastructures that support information resources and networks. Consistent with its economic growth objectives, the Federal Reserve seeks to promote small business development, particularly in underserved markets, through its Community Affairs Offices (CAOs). The CAOs throughout the country provide technical assistance, host workshops and conferences such as this one, publish newsletters and reports, and sponsor research to help generate knowledge among market players. I'll just mention a few examples of initiatives that are consistent with this goal as they relate to small business development. Here in Ohio, the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland's Community Affairs Office has provided significant leadership in supporting microenterprise development. It has produced an educational curriculum and a video to aid organizations that provide training to microenterprises. Recently, the office has helped create Microenterprise Organizations of Ohio, a statewide resource and referral network for very small businesses, and has supported the strategic objectives of WECO by serving on its microenterprise advisory board. There are other examples around the country, such as the Georgia Avenue Business Resource Center in Washington, D.C. In Chicago, the Small Enterprise Capital Access Partnership (SECAP) is a partnership that involves a group of players in the small business arena. The Federal Reserve Bank of Boston sponsors regular training workshops for microenterprise support organizations to help these groups obtain the tools they need to assist entrepreneurs in building sustainable businesses. The Federal Reserve has also helped small businesses through its research efforts. Fed studies have focused on trends in the demand and use of financial services by small businesses, fostering a better understanding of the issues involved with access to credit and capital. Every five years, the Federal Reserve conducts the Survey of Small Business Finances for the express purpose of measuring the use of transaction and credit products by small firms. This comprehensive set of data serves as the basis for additional research. In addition, in 1999 the Federal Reserve System Community Affairs and Research Offices sponsored a research conference dedicated solely to exploring small business access to capital and credit. By facilitating the delivery of information and development of networks to promote relationships between entrepreneurs and capital providers in these and other ways, the Federal Reserve seeks to help these parties understand each other's needs. In doing so, a small business can better manage its reputation and foster the working relationships that can open the doors to funding now and in the future. Let me conclude by repeating the fundamental point made in my first paragraph. Small business produces about three-fourths of all new jobs generated in this country. As each of you pursues dreams of business ownership, you also contribute to the economic health of your community and your country. My congratulations to Congresswoman Stephanie Tubbs Jones for recognizing the important role of small business and for sponsoring this conference today.
Testimony of Louise L. Roseman Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems The golden dollar coin Before the Subcommittee on Treasury and General Government of the Committee on Appropriations, U.S. Senate May 17, 2002 Thank you for this opportunity to report on the Federal Reserve System's activities supporting the golden dollar coin. Before I discuss the Federal Reserve's experience with the golden dollar coin, it may be helpful to describe briefly the Federal Reserve's role in coin distribution. One of the Federal Reserve's responsibilities is to ensure that enough currency and coin are available to meet the public's needs. In that role, the Federal Reserve provides cash services to over 11,000 of the 20,000 banks, savings and loans, and credit unions in the United States. The depository institutions that choose not to obtain their cash directly from the Federal Reserve obtain cash services through correspondent banks. As of March 31, 2002, coin in circulation represented $32 billion, or about five percent of the total $642 billion of U.S. currency and coin in circulation. The U.S. Mint is responsible for manufacturing an adequate volume of coin to meet the public's demand for transactions. It determines annual coin production and monitors Reserve Bank inventories to identify trends in coin demand. The Reserve Banks order coin on a monthly basis and the Mint pays to transport the coin from its production facilities to Reserve Bank offices. In addition, the Reserve Banks use more than one hundred coin terminals to handle nearly eighty percent of the Reserve Banks' coin volume. These coin terminals are operated by armored carriers, acting for the Federal Reserve, and help create an efficient coin distribution system by reducing duplicative processing and transportation between Reserve Banks and their customers. The Reserve Banks primarily act as wholesalers by providing coin to depository institutions in minimum quantities of two thousand pieces or more, depending on the denomination. Independent of their role as Federal Reserve coin terminal operators, armored carriers often provide coin in smaller increments and also provide wrapped coin for a fee to depository institutions and retail customers. Depository institutions order coin from the Reserve Banks to meet their customers' demand. Reserve Banks normally fill these orders from their inventories by first paying out circulated coin, and once the inventory of previously circulated coin is depleted, using new coin to meet demand. Golden Dollar Demand The Federal Reserve and the Mint worked together to meet high public demand for the golden dollar during the first months following its early 2000 introduction. To support the introduction, Reserve Banks changed their normal practice of first paying out circulated dollars and paid only golden dollars from January 2000 through December 2001. Net payments of dollar coins to depository institutions peaked at nearly $95 million in March 2000. Demand remained strong throughout 2000 but declined to an average monthly net payment of $16 million during 2001. The Reserve Banks returned to their normal practice of first paying out circulated coin in January 2002, reflecting their general practice of treating all designs of circulating coin as interchangeable to satisfy requirements for the public's transactions. They have continued to accommodate, however, the request of any depository institution for golden dollars only. Reserve Banks will continue filling requests for golden dollars until their inventories of new coin are depleted, which could be within months. Most major dollar coin customers, such as transit authorities and the U.S. Postal Service, have been satisfied by shipments of commingled golden dollars and Susan B. Anthony dollars. at the end of my testimony illustrates the Reserve Banks' dollar coin payments and receipts since 1976; shows net payments since 1998. Because legislation requires that the golden dollar and the Susan B. Anthony dollar have similar metallic properties and the same diameter, and because the Reserve Banks and armored carriers do not have processing equipment to distinguish between the two, excess coins returned to Reserve Banks cannot be mechanically segregated between golden dollars and Susan B. Anthony dollars. As the public continues to return its excess dollar coins, the Reserve Banks are accumulating considerable amounts of commingled inventory. At the end of April, Reserve Banks had sufficient inventories to fulfill all dollar coin orders for more than a year, assuming demand stays at its current level, without taking into consideration future dollar coin deposits that will be returned to the Federal Reserve from the banking industry. This inventory consists of approximately seventy percent commingled dollar coins and thirty percent new golden dollars that have not yet been paid out to depository institutions. Normally Reserve Banks strive to maintain about thirty days of payable inventory of coins of all denominations. Because Reserve Banks are holding such a large inventory of dollar coins, they have ordered no new golden dollars since January 2002, but will begin ordering new coin again when their inventories reach levels they would typically hold. I appreciate the opportunity to discuss these issues with you and would be happy to answer your questions.
No content found
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today the approval of the application of Banca Comerciala Romana S.A., Bucharest, Romania, to establish a representative office in New York, New York. Attached is the Order relating to this action.
Remarks by Governor Mark W. Olson At the 107th Annual Convention of the Maryland Bankers Association, Palm Beach, Florida May 21, 2002 A Look at the Banking Industry in 2002 Thank you very much for the invitation to speak on banking issues at your annual convention. Roughly a decade ago, my wife and I were privileged to be your guests, at another convention, and I am delighted to be with you again. In analyzing the banking industry, I will start with 1991, for three reasons. First, starting with that year gives me a decade of data for analysis. Second, 1991 was the final year of the last cycle of major credit weakness. Third, in that year the Congress passed the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act (FDICIA), which imposed explicit capital standards and mandated specific regulatory actions for banks deemed to be less than well capitalized. To begin, the condition of the banking industry, including the Maryland banks, is sound. Capital, earnings, and asset quality have improved for banks of all sizes from the smallest segment (less than $50 million) to the largest (more than $10 billion). As much as banking has changed in the last decade, any analysis of the industry suggests that banks of all sizes can continue to prosper. The continued flow of new applications and approvals for bank charters supports this fundamental conclusion. From January 1, 2000, through the end of the first quarter of 2002, 385 new bank charters were approved in the United States. Of that number, 375 were de novos. The remaining ten were thrift conversions. However, the differences in how the financial conditions of the various size categories of banks have changed since 1991 are striking. The changes in equity capital positions may be the most noteworthy example. Ten years ago, the equity-to-asset ratios of the smallest banks were, on average, 66 percent higher than those of the largest banks. Since then, the capital ratios of banks of all sizes have improved, but today, doubtlessly inspired by FDICIA's provisions for prompt corrective action, the largest banks have significantly increased their capital ratios, and the smallest banks are only 30 percent higher. Over the ten years, most banks experienced some diminution of interest-rate margin, but the most notable change has been with the very largest and the very smallest banks. The banks in between have had quite consistent net interest margins for the period. Efforts to improve earnings on equity have also been quite different according to bank size. The largest banks have most aggressively worked to improve their efficiency ratios and expand their sources of non-interest revenue. Not surprisingly, these banks have experienced the most improvement in their returns on equity. The changes in return on assets among various size categories offer a somewhat different twist. All else being equal, increases in capital will result in improved return-on-assets ratios. Indeed, the banks with the most significant increases in capital are also the banks that realized the largest improvement in return on assets. Despite the consolidation in the banking industry, more than 8,000 separate banks remain, and for every three bank charters that have disappeared through consolidation, one new de novo charter has been approved. This history of multiple charters and great numbers of banks is unique to the United States among the developed nations of the world and is an important part of our financial heritage. Current Regulatory Issues Though our approach to supervision needs to accommodate banks of differing size, complexity, and strategic direction, most banks face similar regulatory and supervisory issues. We have just concluded more than ten years of economic prosperity, followed by slightly more than one year of recession--a recession that is now behind us. At this point in the economic cycle, whatever weaknesses have crept into our risk- management systems are most likely to come to light. Because of the decade of prosperity, many of our loan officers have not experienced an economic downturn. Our credit-scoring models are based on credit histories that reflect only prosperity. Commercial business and real estate loans that were approved during the period of economic expansion may now be affected by changed circumstances. All of these factors provoke concerns about credit quality. Indeed, we are noticing some deterioration of asset quality among banks of all sizes. Nonaccrual and nonperforming loans increased steadily every quarter last year. This deterioration deserves attention, but it is not expected to reach the dimension of the asset-quality issues of the late 1980s and early 1990s. Better credit-administration procedures and a significantly milder recession are key reasons for stronger asset quality today than that of a dozen years ago. Changes in bank activities over the past decade, however, have created new risk- management issues. Increased use of off-balance-sheet activities has allowed banks to reduce risk exposures, and for that reason these sophisticated activities constitute important improvements to risk management. But they can also involve complex transactions that may require expanded risk-management capabilities. They also require tight controls and careful attention to the accounting issues to ensure that their income-recognition and risk- transfer intent is reflected in the institutions' financial reporting. Though the Federal Reserve has not noticed widespread abuse in this area, we have uncovered instances in which the financial reporting has not reflected the substance of the transaction, and we have asked that it be corrected. As in the past, we continue to ask banks to focus on the quality of their internal controls. This issue is of particular concern when the scope of a banking activity has outstripped the controls for monitoring that particular risk exposure. In the past decade, banks of all sizes have been able, largely because of technological advances, to obtain easier access to secondary markets and change their risk profiles by using newly developed financial instruments. These new opportunities, however, exert new pressures on internal controls. They require that institutions maintain the professional expertise necessary both to manage the risk exposures inherent in the new activities and to implement the requisite controls to adequately limit the new risk exposures. In the past few years we have seen less-familiar risks assume new prominence. Banking is more than managing credit and market risk. As recent highly publicized experiences have demonstrated, managing operational and legal risk and maintaining an institution's integrity are critical issues. In the case of Enron, a loss of market confidence in its financial reporting led to a loss of counterparty and investor confidence, which very quickly led to insurmountable liquidity problems, and the company collapsed. A Look to the Future I last spoke to the Maryland Bankers Association about a decade ago. The title of my presentation was "Banking in the Nineties." In that talk, I attempted to look into the future and suggest what management issues awaited the industry. I included a caveat that I believed that no one could have predicted the changes of the previous ten years and that a look into the future would therefore need to be very general. Though I offer the same caveat today, I would like to suggest several issues that I believe will be important to bank management and therefore to your industry's regulators in the years ahead. First, a brief look at the past ten years. In the past decade, virtually all the barriers to interstate ownership and interstate branching have disappeared. The Glass-Steagall Act, which for more than fifty years separated the banking and securities industries, has been significantly dismantled. It is important to note that the most significant changes occurred in the marketplace and that the passage of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act in 1999 largely changed federal banking statute to comport with what had already occurred in the marketplace. Also, as expected, advances in technology led to more efficient operations and to improved product delivery both at retail branch offices and through online banking. Technological change has also allowed the growth of nonbank competitors, many of which operate in a significantly less-regulated environment. As a thirty-five-year veteran of the banking industry, I believe that bank consolidation still represents the greatest change. It is still not intuitive to me that Bank of America is headquartered in North Carolina rather than California, that Bank One is in Chicago and not Columbus, or that when we mention JPMorgan Chase we are talking about a single institution. That my mother-in-law in Pelican Rapids, Minnesota, now banks locally with Wells Fargo Bank, which for most of its history had been a quintessential California institution, is even more of an eye opener. When reviewing changes of this magnitude we may tend to assume that the pace of change may now slow. I suspect that quite the opposite is true. The forces that drove many of the changes of the past decade seem likely to drive change in the future--and perhaps at an accelerated rate. The major driver of future change will undoubtedly continue to be technological changes. With all the changes in technology to this point, experts tell us we are nowhere near the limits of technological improvement. As new options become available, decisions regarding the use of technology may be the most critical decision that bank management will make. That banks first identify a business strategy and then make technology decisions to support that strategy has become increasingly critical. The range of choices is not limited to large institutions. Even the smallest institutions can offer real-time online account access to their customers and can have access to data on customer profitability, which allows them to better develop and price their products. Greater technological sophistication has two other important ramifications for banks. First, it allows your nonbank competitors to improve both the speed to market and the quality of their financial products. Second, it continues to concern customers who more and more ask for assurances about the privacy of their financial information. Privacy issues continue to be topics for potential state and federal legislation. Though the banking industry is rightfully concerned about the effects of these legislative initiatives, it must remember that privacy is a political issue because it reflects the genuine concern of bank customers. Providing the assurance of financial privacy is a vital part of managing technological change in the banking industry. Another significant driver of change will be the opportunity for the banking industry to use the "financial in nature" or "complementary" opportunities for product development provided in the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act. As markets changed in past years, the banking industry was limited in its ability to adjust to those changes. As the industry becomes accustomed to the new provisions, we can realistically expect individual institutions to develop financial products or business lines based on core competencies or on market opportunities that would not have been available before the passage of the recent legislation. Role of the Umbrella Regulator Changes in the market and the adoption of Gramm-Leach-Bliley have brought an enhanced role and have expanded the Federal Reserve's role as an umbrella regulator. In that role, the Fed, along with the Treasury, will evaluate requests for new product approval. Also, the Fed will work actively with the other federal and state regulators to ensure that the concept of functional regulation, which is a critical pillar of GLB, works well. Additionally, we will continue to monitor institutions for safety and soundness and for their use of risk-management tools consistent with the business operations and risk exposures inherent in a bank's business models. We must all work hard to meet the high expectations that the industry holds for itself and that the public expects of institutions entrusted with access to the payment system and to deposit insurance. We will also continue to work through the Basel II negotiations to ensure that the largest U.S. banks are not disadvantaged in competing with banks abroad and that capital standards are implemented with sufficient rigor and consistency. Neither the banking regulators nor the Congress should isolate the banking industry, or any segment of it, from the competitive forces of the marketplace. Nor can the regulators in all cases protect unwary bankers from themselves when they take imprudent risks or operate with inadequate controls. The combination of sound management by bankers and appropriate supervision by regulators will help ensure an atmosphere of safety, integrity, and service that will allow all segments of the industry to serve their important role in the nation's economy.
Testimony of Mark W. Olson The European Union's Financial Services Action Plan Before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives May 22, 2002
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the notice by JPMorgan Chase Bank, New York, New York, to establish a branch at the Newport Center, 575 Washington Boulevard, Jersey City, New Jersey. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
Remarks by Governor Mark W. Olson At the Annual Meeting and Conference of the Conference of State Bank Supervisors, Salt Lake City, Utah May 31, 2002 The Dual Banking System and the Current Condition of the Banking Industry Thank you for this opportunity to speak at your annual meeting and conference. It is an especial privilege to appear before you, both as a former head of a state-chartered bank and hence subject to state bank regulation and as a current federal regulator and partner with you in the supervision of state-chartered banks that choose to join the Federal Reserve System. As some of you may know, I grew up in Fergus Falls, Minnesota, and my career includes twelve years as president of Security State Bank, the institution my father, Walter Olson, helped establish in 1956. You may not know that my grandfather, Ole Olson, helped found the State Bank of Hawley, Minnesota, in 1892. Both still exist as state-chartered community banks. Now, like you, I view the industry from the perspective of a regulator but also as one who has had some direct industry experience. I have two related topics this afternoon: first, the historic and continuing significance of the dual federal-state banking system and, second, the health of and prospects for community banks. Importance of the Dual Banking System This audience appreciates as much as any the significance of the uniquely American dual banking system. Our country's founders established a federal system of government, dividing power and responsibilities between the state governments and the central government. Perhaps less well known to the public is that, since the Civil War, our banking system has developed along similar lines. State banks were, of course, first. But the dynamic tension between centralization and decentralization in U.S. banking is as old as the debate between Thomas Jefferson and Alexander Hamilton over the First Bank of the United States. For a time, after the demise of the Second Bank of the United States in 1836, the forces of state banking were in ascendance. Then, with the passage of the National Bank Act of 1863, nationally chartered banks arrived on the scene. At the time, with the tax on state bank notes, some thought state banks would fade away. Instead, they innovated--by emphasizing demand deposits--and prospered. In typically American fashion, the compromise that has been worked out over time is to have it both ways. We have nationally chartered banks supervised by the federal government and state-chartered banks supervised by both state and federal regulators. The Federal Reserve System itself also reflects this American preference for dispersal of authority. In 1913 the Congress, fearful of central authority, attempted to create a set of regional central banks. Today the twelve Reserve Banks, with the Board of Governors in Washington, provide the regional representation and authority so dear to the American psyche. Over the years, the dual banking system has provided many innovations. Forced to find a substitute for the issuance of state bank notes that were taxed out of the market by the National Bank Act of 1863, state banks pioneered demand deposits. Much more recently, a state-chartered bank invented the NOW account, which was the opening shot in the long campaign to remove national controls from interest rates on deposits. And the 1994 interstate branching statute was essentially the epilogue to the interstate banking movement, which had begun a decade before then through the establishment of regional interstate compacts. If memory serves, forty-nine of the fifty states had passed some form of interstate banking legislation before the federal government acted on this issue. After the 1994 Reigle-Neal Act, the state banking commissioners combined their efforts to provide for the orderly and consistent supervision of state banks with a multistate presence. I believe the results are a tribute both to the resilience of state banking and, not incidentally, to the leadership of the Conference of State Bank Supervisors. Now that interstate banking is a reality, I submit that the dual banking system remains an important factor underlying the strength and flexibility of our financial system. As Chairman Greenspan has reminded us in the past, the freedom of banks to choose their regulator is the key to the protection of banks from the potential for unreasonable regulatory behavior. Some are concerned, of course, that the freedom to choose could lead to a "competition in laxity" among regulatory agencies. To be sure, we must guard against that possibility by ensuring the highest standards of supervision as well as the availability of resources and staffing to implement those standards. But I believe that the ability of banks to choose their regulator has fostered both the continued competitiveness of the industry and vitality of the economic activity it finances. As an aside, let me add that the Federal Reserve, as a central bank responsible for the nation's monetary policy and financial stability, benefits enormously from the insight gleaned from hands-on responsibility for supervising, in partnership with state supervisors, a portion of the banking industry. That is one reason why the Federal Reserve should remain in the bank regulatory business. Condition of the Banking Industry Let me now share some observations on the condition of banks in the United States. In analyzing the banking industry, I will start with 1991, for three reasons. First, starting with that year gives me a decade of data for analysis. Second, 1991 was the final year of the last cycle of major credit weakness. Third, in that year the Congress passed the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act (FDICIA), which imposed explicit capital standards and mandated specific regulatory actions for banks deemed to be less than well capitalized. To begin, the condition of the banking industry, including community banks, is sound. Capital, earnings, and asset quality have improved for banks of all sizes from the smallest segment of the industry (less than $50 million) to the largest (more than $10 billion). As much as banking has changed in the last decade, any analysis of the industry will show that banks of all sizes can continue to prosper. The continued flow of new applications and approvals for bank charters supports this fundamental conclusion. From January 1, 2000, through the end of the first quarter of 2002, 385 new bank charters were approved in the United States. Of that number, 375 were de novos. The remaining ten were thrift conversions. I am sure it is not lost on this group that more than 75 percent of these new banks were state-chartered institutions. Though banks of all sizes are prospering, differences in how the financial conditions of the various size categories of banks have changed since 1991 are striking. The change in equity capital positions may be the most noteworthy example. Ten years ago, the equity-to-asset ratios of the smallest banks were, on average, two-thirds higher than those of the largest banks. Since then, the capital ratios of banks of all sizes have improved. But today, doubtlessly inspired by FDICIA's provisions for prompt corrective action, the largest banks have significantly increased their capital ratios, and the smallest banks' capital ratios are 30 percent higher. Over the past ten years, most banks experienced some diminution of interest-rate margin, but the most notable change has been with the very largest and the very smallest banks. The banks in between have had quite consistent net interest margins for the period. Efforts to improve earnings on equity have also resulted in differences according to bank size. The largest banks have most aggressively worked to improve their efficiency ratios and expand their sources of non-interest revenue. Not surprisingly, these banks have experienced the most improvement in their returns on equity. The smaller banks have had a much more stable return on equity--at relatively high levels, I might add. The changes in return on assets among various size categories offer a somewhat different twist. All else equal, increases in capital will result in improved returns on assets. Indeed, the banks with the most significant increases in capital are also the banks that realized the largest improvement in return on assets. Despite the consolidation in the banking industry, more than 8,000 separate banks remain, and for every three bank charters that have disappeared through consolidation, one new de novo charter has been approved. Our nation's history of multiple charters and our large numbers of banks make us unique among developed nations of the world and contribute an important part to our financial heritage. Role of the Umbrella Regulator Let me close with a few words about the continuation of the dual banking system under the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act of 1999. Changes in the market and the adoption of the act have expanded the Federal Reserve's role as an umbrella regulator of bank and financial holding companies. In that role, the Fed, along with the Treasury, will evaluate requests for new product approval. Also, the Fed will work actively with you, the state bank supervisors, and with the other federal and state regulators to ensure that the concept of functional regulation, which is a critical part of the new law, works well. Additionally, we will continue to monitor institutions for safety and soundness and for their use of risk-management tools that are tailored to the business operations and risk profile of a bank's business activities. The combination of sound management by bankers and appropriate supervision by regulators will help ensure an atmosphere of safety, integrity, and service that will allow all segments of the industry to serve their important role in the nation's economy.