For immediate release Susan Schmidt Bies and Mark W. Olson were formally sworn in as members of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System at a ceremony Thursday in the atrium of the Board's main building in Washington. Friends, family, and Board employees attended the ceremony, which was presided over by Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan. Governor Bies and Governor Olson assumed their posts on December 7 following confirmation by the Senate on December 6. President Bush nominated Governor Bies to a vacant seat last held by Susan M. Phillips, whose term expired. Governor Bies' term expires January 31, 2012. Governor Olson was nominated to the seat vacated by the resignation of Alice M. Rivlin on July 16, 1999. The term expires January 31, 2010. Biographies of Governor Bies and Governor Olson are available on the Board's website:
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application of Wesbanco, Inc. to acquire American Bancorporation ("Bancorp"), both in Wheeling, West Virginia, and indirectly to acquire Bancorp's subsidiary bank, Wheeling National Bank, St. Clairsville, Ohio. The Board also approved the related applications of Wesbanco Bank, Wheeling, West Virginia, to merge with Wheeling National Bank and to establish branches at the sites of Wheeling National Bank's branches in West Virginia, Ohio, and Pennsylvania. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
Joint Press Release Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Office of the Comptroller of the Currency For Immediate Release January 8, 2002 Agencies Adopt Final Rules Concerning the Regulatory Capital Treatment of Nonfinancial Equity Investments The Federal Reserve Board, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency today announced the adoption of final rules governing the regulatory capital treatment of equity investments in nonfinancial companies held by banks, bank holding companies and financial holding companies. The agencies' final rules are substantially similar to the revised proposed rules jointly issued for public comment last year. The final rules will become effective on April 1, 2002. The new capital requirements apply symmetrically to equity investments made by banks and their holding companies in nonfinancial companies under the legal authorities specified in the final rules. Among others, these include the merchant banking authority granted by the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act and the authority to invest in small business investment companies (SBICs) granted by the Small Business Investment Act. Covered equity investments will be subject to a series of marginal Tier 1 capital charges, with the size of the charge increasing as the organization's level of concentration in equity investments increases. The highest marginal charge specified in the final rules requires a 25 percent deduction from Tier 1 capital for covered investments that aggregate more than 25 percent of an organization's Tier 1 capital. Equity investments through SBICs will be exempt from the new charges to the extent such investments, in the aggregate, do not exceed 15 percent of the banking organization's Tier 1 capital. The new charges would not apply to individual investments made by banking organizations prior to March 13, 2000. Grandfathered investments made by state banks under section 24(f) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act also are exempted from coverage. The agencies also reiterated their intent to apply heightened supervision to banking organizations as their level of concentration in equity investments increases. Media Contacts: Federal Reserve: Dave Skidmore (202) 452-2955 OCC: Bob Garsson (202) 874-5770 FDIC: David Barr (202) 898-6992
Remarks by Vice Chairman Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. At the Graduate Institute of International Studies, Geneva, Switzerland January 8, 2002 Why Central Banks Should Talk It is my pleasure to address the Graduate Institute of International Studies. I would like to discuss the importance of transparency for central banks--in particular, why they should communicate clearly with markets and the public. I have been closely involved at the Federal Reserve with this interesting topic, and I believe it to be especially relevant for many central banks around the world. Of course, the usual disclaimer applies to my remarks: I will express my own views, and you should not interpret them as the position of the Federal Open Market Committee or of the Board of Governors. As should be especially obvious to you, I intentionally chose the title for my talk today, "Why Central Banks Should Talk," to echo that of the influential pamphlet "How Do Central Banks Talk?," published just last year by the affiliated International Center for Monetary and Banking Studies (ICMB). The authors include my predecessor, Alan Blinder, together with Charles Goodhart, Philipp Hildebrand, David Lipton, and Charles Wyplosz. My presentation--and indeed my thinking in general about this topic--was significantly affected by their insights, even in places where I do not pause to acknowledge their work explicitly. Any discussion of transparency must first define the concept. Most important, transparency relates to a central bank's openness in explaining the rationale behind its specific policy decisions. The rationale for policy actions cannot be fully understood unless the central bank is reasonably clear about its long-run objectives. That is, the monetary authority should be forthcoming about its strategic goals as well as about the short-term tactics that it uses to achieve them. Finally, the central bank needs to describe the economic environment in which it expects its actions to be felt. I will explore three main topics on the subject of central bank transparency. First, I will briefly describe why the recent trend toward greater transparency is desirable. Second, I will discuss the general characteristics of openness in the context of the given goals and organization of central banks. Third, I will address various specific suggestions in a U.S. context for further increasing the transparency of monetary policy. Reasons for Encouraging Transparency Transparency is valuable and desirable for both political and economic reasons. As to the political consideration, it has become increasingly obvious over the years that a central bank needs a substantial insulation from political pressures to execute policy appropriately. Such an independent central bank is less likely to succumb to the short-run temptation to boost output or to finance national budgets at the expense of long-run objectives such as price stability. In part, this follows because independent central bankers can have a more-distant horizon than other policymakers, which is desirable given the lagged effects of monetary policy on output and prices. To be sure, the establishment of the goals of monetary policy should take place within the democratic process, but experience teaches us that outcomes are better when the central bank has discretion to achieve those ends. Thus, the elected representatives of the public should determine the goals of monetary policy, while a central bank should be granted independence to set its instruments. Central bank openness allows the public and its elected representatives to make informed judgments and constructive criticisms about policies made by its central bank and to assess economic outcomes relative to specified long-run objectives. In general, to hold policymakers accountable, the electorate needs to know what they have done and the reasoning behind their key decisions. Such democratic accountability is even more important for central bankers, because the voting populace does not directly elect them. In short, transparency is a quid pro quo for independence. Clarity about policy decisions also can enhance monetary policy's economic effectiveness. Like other central banks, the Federal Reserve controls only a very short-term interest rate on borrowing reserve funds between depositories, the overnight federal funds rate. However, theory and empirical evidence indicate that longer-term interest rates and conditions in other financial markets matter most for the transmission of monetary policy to the economy. Those longer-term rates and other financial asset prices, in turn, reflect expectations of future short-term rates as well as premiums for uncertainty. If the monetary authority can be more open about what it is doing and why and about how it perceives the economic outlook, then market participants can improve their expectations of future short rates, bringing the interest rates and financial prices that matter most for the economy closer into alignment with the intentions of central bankers. Of course, those intentions are subject to uncertainty and to the constant flow of new information. But explaining decisions more fully allows market participants to better anticipate policy responses when unexpected developments take place. By accurately assessing the possible extent of policy reactions even before they occur, financial markets can speed needed economic adjustments. In sum, greater transparency allows policymakers to work with, and not against, the markets. Recent Trends in Transparency In the past and until recent years, central banks around the world operated largely in secrecy, which was mainly unquestioned. "Mystique" encapsulated much of the tradition and wisdom of the way central banks related to the public. But that was the past. The Federal Reserve and other central banks have become considerably more transparent recently. For many years the FOMC published minutes of each meeting that gave the economic background and reasoning behind its policy decisions and the vote along with any dissenting statements. But these minutes were not released until shortly after the next FOMC meeting. Since 1993, the Federal Reserve has altered these practices in several ways. In February 1994, the FOMC began to disclose changes in its operating stance along with a brief rationale, though no formal announcement followed FOMC meetings in which no policy action had been taken. While this step immediately clarified the current stance of monetary policy, the Committee's views about prospective developments, especially its own "bias" or "tilt" concerning likely future policy actions, continued to be published only with a delay, as a part of the minutes after the next meeting. In 1999, the FOMC began to announce its "bias" immediately and subsequently worked toward further refining its disclosure practices. Under current procedures, which were announced in January 2000, the FOMC issues a statement to the public shortly after every meeting. The statement provides not only information and explanation regarding the policy stance adopted at the meeting but also the Committee's view about prospective risks to the outlook. That view is indicated by the Committee's sense of the balance of risks in the foreseeable future vis-�-vis its long-run goals of price stability and sustainable economic growth. Specifically, it indicates whether the Committee believes that the risks are "balanced with respect to prospects for both goals," "weighted mainly toward conditions that may generate heightened inflation pressures," or "weighted mainly toward conditions that may generate economic weakness." By the way, the Committee has made clear that economic weakness is not synonymous with economic contraction. The main risks can be weighted toward economic weakness if growth could fall notably below the economy's potential. I wish to be clear that the balance-of-risks statement does not itself predict the future course of monetary policy but rather provides the FOMC's judgment about the risks going forward. Although this judgment may well have implications for policy should the risks be realized, it is investors who appropriately form their expected path of short-term interest rates from this and other parts of the announcement, along with a variety of other information. It is, to me, particularly important that policy decisions at each meeting of the FOMC be based on incoming data and the evolving outlook after the previous Committee meeting rather than on a commitment about future policy at the previous meeting. The distinction between a central bank's sense of risk in the outlook and its predilection regarding a future movement in the stance of policy is important. The first is appropriate, but the second leaves the erroneous impression that policy decisions are largely based on readings of the economy taken at the previous meeting. These reforms to increase transparency originated from within the Federal Reserve System, as we looked for ways to reduce uncertainty and improve clarity. To be sure, congressional pressure was largely responsible for the release of verbatim transcripts of FOMC meetings, beginning in 1994. But to minimize the effects of such full disclosure on the deliberative process, the FOMC elected to delay the release of the transcripts for five years. More broadly, a critical aspect of our weighing of each incremental step toward greater transparency has been that it not impinge on free and open debate within the FOMC or otherwise detract from the Committee's responsibility to pursue its legislated mandate. During this period, the Federal Reserve's legal mandate has remained the same, and the basic operation of the FOMC has not changed. Also, none of these steps toward enhanced transparency has altered the FOMC's decisions about the appropriate course of policy. This trend toward greater openness is clearly global but it has manifested itself in various ways. To briefly note just a few examples, the Bank of Japan has taken steps toward greater transparency, particularly after the revision of its governing law in 1998. It now issues press releases after all meetings, which are held twice a month. Also, the European Central Bank has incorporated transparency in its policy process and has emphasized the importance of communications. Otmar Issing, the Bank's chief economist and a member of its Executive Board, highlighted this issue with his characterization of communications as the "hidden pillar" of the ECB's monetary policy strategy. In the United Kingdom, the Bank of England Act of 1998 established the operational independence of the Bank and strengthened the transparency measures that had been implemented earlier in the 1990s, when the government formally announced a numerical inflation target. In addition, the Reserve Bank of New Zealand now publishes forecasts for the future path of its short-term interest rate consistent with achieving its objective. Lately, some monetary authorities in emerging-market economies, namely the Bank of Mexico and the Central Bank of Brazil, have announced both a long-run inflation target as well as an explicit "glide path" in the interim toward their respective goals. General Issues Relating to Transparency Greater transparency is a welcome development, but I would now like to note some general caveats. I will then address certain more recent specific suggestions to expand openness further, in many instances with explicit application to the Federal Reserve. First, monetary policy effectiveness must be the top priority. Although I have just argued that transparency can indeed enhance the effectiveness of policy as well as a central bank's independence, transparency is not an overriding end in itself. Transparency should not determine the goals of monetary policy. Directly elected officials should choose monetary policy goals consistent with their view of what will best promote the nation's economic welfare. Transparency then should be designed to be consistent with the superceding purpose of meeting the macroeconomic objectives that the legislature or some other elected official has set. Second, the organization of the central bank matters for the way transparency is carried out. For example, conveying monetary policy decisions and the central bank's views of the economic outlook depends on whether, at one extreme, a single decisionmaker determines policy or, at the other extreme, an "individualist" committee--that is, with each member taking primary responsibility for his or her vote--arrives at the decision. On the one hand, if a sole official determines policy, then the rationale for his or her decisions can readily be summarized. On the other hand, summarizing and communicating the opinions of the disparate participants on a committee are inherently more difficult. And one would not want pressure to come to an easily communicated common view to constrain the expression of individual opinions and to work against the diversity of opinion that is the strength of the committee structure. Third, assuming that elected officials set the goals for monetary policy, the resulting regime affects how and what central banks communicate. For example, transparency with a currency board is less difficult than with a policy group with dual goals. With the former, the central bank or government merely needs to specify the currency to which local money is inflexibly pegged and publish its available reserves on a regular basis. The simplicity of the goal facilitates communication and provides a single focus for policy. However, in a regime with multiple objectives, central bank officials must try to be transparent with respect to more than one objective. In short, as others have noted, more-complicated mandates require more-intricate communication. In that case, clearly summarizing a balancing of the goals would be more difficult in a short announcement, requiring as well other vehicles for describing the basis for policy moves, such as the FOMC minutes and the semi-annual Report on Monetary Policy. Recent Specific Suggestions about Central Bank Transparency I would now like to turn to some recent specific recommendations for improved transparency, in some cases with respect to the Federal Reserve System. These include the quantification of the central bank's objectives, the publication of forecasts, and the earlier release of minutes. First, a central bank, the argument goes, should adopt and explicitly reveal numerical goals for its objectives in order to facilitate holding the monetary authority accountable, to reduce uncertainty, and to anchor private expectations about such things as inflation trends and monetary policy decisions. For example, many countries in recent years have set a single quantitative inflation goal. But, in my view, this approach has potential drawbacks. As I have noted on previous occasions, even in the case of a single inflation goal, the selection of a particular price index to guide policy is difficult, and the appropriate index and inflation value might change over time as the structure of the economy evolves and the pace and nature of technological advances vary. Inflation targets also present problems in the presence of supply shocks, such as large increases in oil prices, that may simultaneously increase the price level and decrease aggregate output. Most inflation-targeting central banks attempt to gain flexibility in such cases by focusing on core inflation, by having relatively wide target ranges, by stipulating "escape clauses" that allow inflation to diverge from the target for a while, or by aiming at inflation well in the future or at an average rate over the business cycle and thus allowing enough time for the effect of such shocks to have died down. Despite such elements of flexibility, an inflation-targeting regime may still not typically attend sufficiently to output variation or financial stability. Furthermore, these elements of flexibility may not foster the credibility of the central bank any better than a system of multiple objectives. The longer the policy timeframe and the wider the band for an inflation-targeting regime, the lower credibility will tend to be. Similarly, the more often a central bank declares emergencies, uses escape clauses, or allows price increases to go unchecked, the less credibility it will engender. For both "flexible" inflation targeters and those central banks with multiple objectives, real credibility for achieving inflation or other goals must flow ultimately from performance, not from predetermined frameworks. Certainly, numerical inflation targets have proven useful for several countries facing difficult situations--for example, providing a nominal anchor when inflation has been high or variable or when the countries are leaving a fixed exchange rate regime. In some cases, quantified inflation targeting has been a means of getting government agreement to allow the central bank to be more independent and to focus more intently on bringing inflation under control. Even so, credibility gains from inflation targeting, aside from those arising from actually achieving low inflation per se, have been hard to identify. Empirical evidence for industrial countries to date generally suggests that focusing policy on attaining an inflation target--or announcing numerically specified targets for multiple objectives, for that matter--does not lessen the short-run tradeoff between employment and inflation. Moreover, quantified objectives evidently are not a necessary condition for desirable economic outcomes. At least in countries that have already achieved reasonable price stability, I submit that the adoption of a numerical inflation target promises little, if any, incremental benefit. When the central bank's mandate includes multiple goals, the quantification of objectives becomes even more problematic. For example, the Federal Reserve's mandate includes the long-run goal of maximum employment as well as price stability. How does one measure maximum sustainable employment? As several economists have noted, estimating the non-accelerating-inflation-rate of unemployment (NAIRU), one possible measure of a full-employment objective, is even more controversial than selecting a target for a specific price index. Associated estimates of an output or employment gap would have an uncomfortably wide confidence interval. Some economists doubt the validity of the concept of NAIRU altogether. Thus, the uncertainty involved with setting such a real-side target and the temptation to hold the central bank accountable for achieving any numerically specified unemployment goal at all times should discourage quantifying an unemployment target for those economies with that goal. In any event, historical evidence suggests that maximum employment is best attained in the long run by ensuring price stability and not by attempting to achieve a pre-announced quantitative employment objective. Of course, the central bank or government could quantify the inflation objective. But, under a dual mandate, quantifying one goal and not the other would present problems. I suspect that, if the inflation goal had a numerical target but employment did not, then a central bank would naturally tend to place more emphasis on the quantified goal at the expense of the non-quantified objective. In such a case, this particular suggestion to improve transparency--numerically pinning down only one objective--would end up driving the regime. The central bank indeed might want to place differing weights on particular goals, but ease of quantification should not be a determinant of those weights. A second suggestion for improved transparency, distinct from quantified objectives, is that central banks should publish the forecasts that inform policy decisions. Historically, the Federal Reserve has recognized the importance of providing the public with background on its assessment of key underlying macroeconomic forces. Twice each year, the Federal Reserve provides to the U.S. Congress an extensive monetary policy report and accompanying testimony, which include the central tendencies of individual FOMC members' forecasts of key economic magnitudes over the next year or two. Going beyond current practice to more frequent publication of further detailed forecasts has disadvantages that need to be recognized. Our understanding of the economy is inherently limited, and therefore central banks should not imply that they have more knowledge than they actually do. Markets might give too much credence to forecasts backed by central bank credibility, which would create noise and distort the signals from the markets back to the central bank. Point-estimate forecasts are especially susceptible to being quickly overcome by new information and becoming soon outdated. Besides, Committee members consult a wide range of forecasts in the process of reaching their monetary policy decisions. As I have already noted, we have succeeded in conveying after each FOMC meeting the main risks to satisfactory economic performance. The balance of risks is not a forecast but does add a forward-looking element to our statements. Another challenge regards whether to release the staff's forecast. Monetary authorities do not necessarily agree with or act upon the forecasts of their staff. Therefore, publication of the staff forecast would give that outlook undue prominence and could potentially be misleading about policy intentions. Also, immediate public scrutiny could impinge upon the willingness of the staff to present forecasts that might prove controversial. A third proposal that has been made is to accelerate the release of the minutes, specifically to publish them before the next FOMC meeting. Currently, the private reaction to the release of the minutes is muted, given that an intervening FOMC meeting and policy decision have occurred. If the release of the minutes, instead, came before the next meeting, then market participants would be more likely to react to two sources of information for each single meeting--first to the statement that immediately followed the policy action and then, some weeks later, to the minutes. The minutes should simply deepen and expand the rationale for a policy decision that was already given in the statement released immediately after the meeting. They might also indicate the existence and strength of contrary views. At the margin, some of this might be additional information. However, there is a risk that even such a marginal expansion of information could receive more weight than it warranted and foster misperceptions about the possible course of policy. Such misperceptions might result from a market misinterpretation of any one element of these minutes, which in turn could lead to an inappropriate reaction to incoming data. Additionally, minutes are not new information about the performance of the economy. I believe that markets and policymakers are both best served if markets focus on, and react to, incoming data and the evolving outlook rather than the printed record of a past meeting released during the intermeeting period having limited, if any, predictive value for the upcoming meeting. Conclusion In conclusion, central bank transparency is obviously beneficial, and I strongly welcome the recent trend across the globe toward greater openness. Transparency supports central bank independence and helps markets formulate policy expectations that are more consistent with the monetary authority's intentions. I am pleased that the Federal Reserve has increased its transparency and am proud that I had the opportunity to contribute to some elements of that improvement. Central banks should continue to thoughtfully consider proposals to increase transparency. Openness is intended to serve two goals--accountability and effectiveness of policy. Any proposal for greater transparency should be judged by how well those objectives are met. Our goal at the Federal Reserve regarding monetary policy transparency is to provide as much information as possible to understand the decisions that we have made. Some recent suggestions--including the quantification of objectives, the publication of forecasts, and the earlier release of minutes--present problems in that they could well detract from our ability to achieve our externally defined goals. While, on balance, I do not support some of the proposals made recently, certainly I believe that the Federal Reserve should be, and is, willing to consider ideas for greater transparency as they arise.
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan At the Ninth Annual Economic Development Summit, The Greenlining Institute, Oakland, California January 10, 2002 Economic Development and Financial Literacy It's a pleasure to participate in your annual summit on economic development. Given the nature of the conference, I would like to focus on a matter of mutual interest--improvements in asset accumulation in traditionally underserved markets of our household and business sectors and the importance of access to the financing and information tools that promote and sustain this progress. In our economy, the three principal means for household asset accumulation are through home ownership, small business ownership, and savings. As important as these are for the individual, they also represent distinct and important benefits to the broader economy and, therefore, play prominent roles in the operation of our financial markets and the priorities of our public policy. The choice to buy a home is a decision to plant a family's roots in a community with all the implicit incentives to make that community thrive. Where home ownership flourishes, it is no surprise to find increased neighborhood stability, more civic-minded residents, better school systems, and reduced crime rates. Just as important is the effect of home ownership on a household's ability to accumulate assets. For most households, home ownership represents a significant financial milestone and is an important vehicle for ongoing savings. The Federal Reserve's 1998 triennial Survey of Consumer Finances indicates that home ownership represented 44 percent of gross assets for families earning $50,000 or less annually. Further, investment in residential property has been generally more stable than other types of investment, and it is perceived to be largely permanent. With these important benefits, an increased rate of home ownership has been chosen by our society as a national priority, with many public- and private-sector resources devoted to achieving this goal. Indeed, measurable progress has been made toward this end, with the overall rate of home ownership reaching 68 percent, a new high, in the third quarter of last year. In assessing the opportunity for home ownership in underserved markets, the Census Bureau reports significant gains. The homeownership rate for blacks and Hispanics, between 1997 and 2001, grew at more than double the pace for the general population. Additionally, the homeownership rate among households earning less than the median income increased more than three times the pace for households with incomes above the median. Small business accounts for about half of private gross domestic product in our economy. It is an important vehicle for significant numbers of minority families to accumulate assets. Recently released data from the Census Bureau, for example, indicate that, between 1992 and 1997, the number of minority-owned businesses grew more than four times as fast as the number of U.S. firms overall, increasing from 2.1 million to about 2.8 million. In addition, the Census Bureau estimates that during this five-year period the number of women-owned businesses increased 16 percent, to 5.4 million enterprises. These data suggest that the increases in small business ownership and equity investment by traditionally underserved populations result, in part, from increased access to appropriate financing to fund the start-up and growth of businesses. It is essential that the opportunity to start an enterprise is open to anyone with a viable business concept. We must continue to seek ways to promote the creation and expansion of viable firms by lowering barriers to funding and financial services. To the extent that market participants discriminate--consciously or, more insidiously, unconsciously--capital does not flow to its most profitable uses, and the distribution of output is distorted. In the end, costs are higher, less real output is produced, and national wealth accumulation is slowed. By removing the non-economic distortions that arise as a result of discrimination, we can generate higher returns to human capital and other productive resources. Investors and lenders need to understand that failure to recognize the profitable opportunities represented by minority enterprises not only harms these firms, it harms the lending institutions as well. Accordingly, we must make further progress in establishing business relationships between the financial services sector and the rapidly growing number of minority- and women-owned businesses. Doing so is crucial since pursuing the obviously worthwhile goal of increasing home ownership in minority communities also increases the debt of homeowners in these communities. Debt cannot indefinitely be pyramided against home equity as the principal or sole asset. Developing non-home equity, largely through small-business ownership, not only enhances home ownership among business owners in minority communities, it more importantly offers a source of risk capital to budding entrepreneurs in that community. Household saving, of course, is a fundamental component for increasing financial capacity and serves as a starting point for the accumulation of future tangible assets, such as homes and businesses. It is also a source of funding for education, which can materially improve future earning capacity. In the 1998 Survey of Consumer Finances, the top three reasons for saving given by respondents were retirement, liquidity, and education. These survey data, once again, exhibit positive trends among lower-income and minority populations. Some progress is being made regarding the ownership of financial assets by families in the bottom quintile of net worth and by those who are nonwhite or Hispanic. In addition, survey respondents in these two categories experienced the largest increases in the ownership of transaction accounts, an important indicator of financial progress because the accounts often serve as the point of entry into the financial services industry. Despite these gains, however, lower-income and minority families continue to represent a large fraction of families that do not possess a checking account or, for that matter, other assets. Sparse holdings of financial assets may, in part, be due to lack of access to savings vehicles such as individual retirement accounts and 401(k) retirement plans. Recognizing this possible link, community organizations have collaborated with their partners in government and the private sector to design innovative mechanisms for saving. One such vehicle is the individual development account, which state and federal government agencies have embraced as a means for facilitating saving for low-income households. Through tax benefits and matching funds, this instrument helps individuals earmark funds to achieve longer-term financial goals, such as purchasing a home, starting a business, or pursuing higher education or job training. Besides providing a structured account that offers a high incentive to save, individual development account programs require participation in financial training to help individuals continue on the path of economic betterment. Structural changes in the financial services industry, in recent years, have heightened competition, encouraging market efficiencies that continue to help drive down costs and to foster the emergence of increasingly diverse and highly specialized organizations. These organizations--which range from firms that offer their services through electronic delivery mechanisms to local partnerships that provide one-on-one counseling and financing arrangements--provide consumers with increased access to various credit and savings instruments. Community-based organizations have contributed in this evolving marketplace by helping to ensure that traditionally underserved populations and geographic areas are able to achieve gains in asset accumulation. And, as in the broader economy, market-driven innovation has advanced community development, enabling community-based organizations to more effectively respond to the needs of the communities and families they serve. Community development organizations working in partnership with financial corporations and governments have created new intermediaries--community development corporations, micro-business loan funds, and multibank and investor loan pools, among them--to provide financial opportunity for lower-income individuals and families. These innovators have succeeded in developing new approaches for engaging disadvantaged participants in the economy in the same manner that any successful organization does--by assessing need, evaluating risks, managing costs, and developing appropriate products. Educational and training programs may be the most critical service offered by community-based organizations to enhance the ability of lower-income households to accumulate assets. Indeed, analysts have shown that a comprehensive understanding of basic principles of budgeting and saving, at the start, increases household wealth in later years. Education can also increase economic opportunity by enabling individuals to overcome their reluctance or inability to take full advantage of technological advances and product innovation. As market forces continue to expand the range of financial services, consumers will have more choice and flexibility in how they manage their finances, and they will seek instruction in the use of the new technologies to help formulate better decisions. Financial education can equip consumers with the fundamental knowledge required to choose among the myriad of products and providers in the financial services industry. It can also help to inculcate individuals with the financial knowledge necessary to create household budgets, initiate savings plans, and make strategic investment decisions. Such financial planning can help families meet near-term obligations and maximize their longer-term well being and is especially valuable for populations that have traditionally been underserved by our financial system. Community-based organizations have an integral role in disseminating information that can assist lower-income families in exploiting financial opportunity. Because of their local focus, these organizations can develop educational and training programs tailored to the markets they serve. Through homeownership counseling programs, they offer families information that is fundamental to obtaining and maintaining mortgage credit. (A recent study conducted by one of the leading purchasers of home mortgages found that homeownership counseling can effectively reduce delinquency rates by as much as a third.) Community organizations are also using financial literacy campaigns to help prevent vulnerable consumers from becoming entangled in financially devastating credit arrangements. The campaigns are important in addressing abusive lending practices that target specific neighborhoods or vulnerable segments of the population and can result in unaffordable payments, equity stripping, and foreclosure. Similarly, training programs for microenterprise development provide information on the fundamentals of starting a business, such as developing a business plan and financial statements, that allow lenders and investors to evaluate risk. Community groups are not alone in the effort to provide life-long financial education. Some school systems have introduced financial management curricula, and some employers have taken up the challenge. At the Federal Reserve Board, for example, our Consumer and Community Affairs staff recently hosted several well-attended educational programs for Federal Reserve employees, providing information on qualifying for a mortgage and managing debt. The Community Affairs and Public Information offices at the twelve Federal Reserve Banks also have joined together, with the strong support of Governor Gramlich, to promote both local and national financial literacy and economic education programs. The Community Affairs Offices help financial institutions, community organizations, and local governments increase economic opportunity in distressed neighborhoods through strategic partnerships. The offices provide information on innovative funding strategies for community economic development. And they seek new ways of measuring the effectiveness of financial literacy programs. In our call for papers for the Community Affairs Research Conference scheduled for the spring of 2003, we have asked for studies that evaluate the effect of such education initiatives. Measurement of the quality and long-term success of these efforts will be particularly useful to the Federal Reserve System as we develop and distribute financial and economic literacy products. In conclusion, I encourage community groups such as those represented here to continue productive partnerships and activities that have yielded much progress in increasing the assets of their constituencies. With your continued commitment and market-driven product innovation, the prospect for increased economic opportunity for traditionally underserved markets remains promising.
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan At the Bay Area Council Conference, San Francisco, California January 11, 2002 The Economy In the period immediately prior to September 11, there were tentative signs that some sectors of the U.S. economy had begun to stabilize, contributing to a hope that the worst of the previous cumulative weakness in world economic activity was nearing an end. That hope was decisively dashed by the tragic events of early September. Adding to the intense forces weighing on asset prices and economic activity before September 11 were new sources of uncertainty and risk that began to press down on global demand for goods and services. In almost all areas of the world, economies weakened further, a cause for increasing uneasiness. The synchronous slowing in activity raised concerns that a self-reinforcing cycle of contraction, fed by perceptions of greater economic risk, could develop. Such an event, though rare, would not be unprecedented in business-cycle history. We had already observed a coincident deceleration in activity among the world economies over the past year, owing apparently, at least in part, to the retrenchment in the high-technology sector. The global nature of most technology industries and the global reach of the capital markets in which the firms in these industries are valued and funded appears to have fostered a greater synchronousness in world activity in this cycle, seemingly broader than has generally been the case. However, before the terrorist attacks, it was far from obvious that this concurrent weakness was becoming self-reinforcing. But, if ever a situation existed in which the fabric of business and consumer confidence, both here and abroad, was vulnerable to being breached, the shock of September 11 was surely it. Indeed, for a short period, in response to that shock, U.S. economic activity did drop dramatically. But, arguably, our economy has not been weakening cumulatively in recent weeks. In fact, indications of stabilization, similar in many respects to those observed in the period immediately preceding September 11, have been appearing with greater frequency. A possible significant contributor to this emergence of stability--if that is what it is--may be the very technologies that have fostered coincident global weakness: those that have substantially improved access of business decisionmakers to real-time information. Thirty years ago, the timeliness of available information varied across companies and industries, often resulting in differences in the speed and magnitude of their responses to changing business conditions. In contrast to the situation that prevails today, businesses did not have real-time data systems that enabled decisionmakers in different enterprises to work from essentially the same set of information. In those earlier years, imbalances were inadvertently allowed to build to such an extent that their inevitable correction engendered significant economic stress. That process of correction and the accompanying economic and financial disruptions too often led to deep and prolonged recessions. Today, businesses have large quantities of data available virtually in real time. As a consequence, they address and resolve economic imbalances more rapidly than in the past. At the same time, firms are largely operating with the same information set, and thus resolution of imbalances induces parallel movements in activity. Contractions initially may be steeper, but because imbalances are more readily contained, cyclical episodes overall should be less severe than would be the case otherwise. In the current situation, inventories, especially among producers and purchasers of high-tech products, did run to excess over the past year, as sales forecasts went badly astray; alas, technology has not allowed us to see into the future any more clearly than we could previously. But, technology did facilitate the quick recognition of the weakening in sales and backup of inventories. This enabled producers to respond forcefully, as evidenced by output adjustments that have resulted in the extraordinary rate of inventory liquidation currently under way. Inventories in many industries have been drawn down to levels at which firms will soon need to taper off their rate of liquidation, if they have not already done so. Indeed, in recent months, there have been fewer reports from industrial purchasing managers that their customers' inventories are too high. Moreover, the relative stability of industrial commodity prices in recent weeks, and especially the recent firmness in the prices of semiconductors, could be hinting at less intense stock drawdowns. A slowing in the rate of inventory liquidation will induce a rise in industrial production if demand for those products is stable or is falling only moderately. That rise in production will, other things being equal, increase household income and spending. The runoff of inventories, even apart from the large reduction in motor vehicle stocks, remained sizable in the fourth quarter. Hence, with production running well below sales, the potential positive effect of the inevitable cessation of inventory liquidation on income and spending could be significant. But that impetus to activity will be short lived unless the demand for goods and services itself starts to rise. On that score, despite a number of encouraging signs of stabilization, it is still premature to conclude that the forces restraining economic activity here and abroad have abated enough to allow a steady recovery to take hold. For that to happen, sustained growth of final demand must kick in before the positive effects of the swing from inventory liquidation to accumulation dissipate. For the household sector, which had been a major stabilizing force through most of last year's slowdown, the outlook for demand is mixed. Low mortgage interest rates and favorable weather have provided considerable support to homebuilding in recent months. Moreover, attractive mortgage rates have bolstered both the sales of existing homes and the realized capital gains that those sales engender. They have also spurred refinancing of existing homes and the associated liquification of increases in house values. These gains have been important to the ongoing extraction of home equity for consumption and home modernization. The recent rise in home mortgage rates, however, is likely to damp housing activity and equity extraction. It is already having an effect on cash-outs from refinancing. Cash-outs rose from an estimated annual rate of about $20 billion in early 2000 to a rate of roughly $75 billion in the third quarter of last year. But the pace of cash-outs has likely dropped noticeably in response to the recent decline in refinancing activity that has followed the backup in mortgage rates since early November. Consumer spending received a considerable spur from the sales of new motor vehicles, which were remarkably strong in October and November owing to major financing incentives. Sales dropped last month when the incentives were scaled back, but have remained surprisingly resilient. Other consumer spending appears to have advanced in recent months, though at a subdued pace. The substantial declines in the prices of natural gas, fuel oil, and gasoline have clearly provided some support to real disposable income and spending. These price declines added more than $50 billion at an annual rate to household purchasing power in the second half of last year. However, a decline in energy prices provides, in effect, only a one-shot boost to consumption, albeit one that is likely to take place over time. To have a more persistent effect on the ongoing growth of total personal consumption expenditures, energy prices would need to continue to decline. Futures prices do not suggest that such a decline is in the immediate offing, but the forecast record of these markets is less than sterling. Although the quantitative magnitude and precise timing of the wealth effect remain uncertain, the steep decline in stock prices since March 2000 has, no doubt, curbed the growth of household spending. Although stock prices recently have retraced a portion of their earlier losses, the restraining effects from the net decline in equity values presumably have not, as yet, fully played out. Future wealth effects will depend importantly on whether corporate earnings improve to the extent currently embedded in share prices. Perhaps most central to the outlook for consumer spending will be developments in the labor market. The pace of layoffs quickened last fall, especially after September 11, and the unemployment rate rose sharply. Over the past month or so, however, initial claims for unemployment insurance have declined markedly, on balance, suggesting some abatement in the rate of job loss. Although this development would be welcome, the unemployment rate may well continue to rise for a time, and job losses can be expected to put something of a damper on consumer spending. However, the extent of that restraint will depend on how much of any rise in unemployment is the result of weakened demand and how much reflects strengthened productivity. In the latter case, average real incomes could rise, at least partially offsetting losses of purchasing power that stem from diminished levels of employment. Finally, economic policies will have an important influence on household spending in the period ahead. No doubt, we will continue to benefit from the tendency of our tax and entitlement systems to buffer cyclical swings in income. Moreover, despite the failure of Congress to enact further tax cuts and spending increases, the continued phase-in of earlier reductions in taxes and the significant expansion of discretionary spending already enacted should provide noticeable short-term stimulus to demand. Some of this stimulus has likely been offset by increases in long-term market interest rates, including those on home mortgages. The recent rise in these rates largely reflects the perception of improved prospects for the U.S. economy. But over the past year, some of the firmness of long-term interest rates probably is the consequence of the fall of projected budget surpluses and the implied less-rapid paydowns of Treasury debt. In our conduct of monetary policy, the Federal Reserve responded to the weakening economy over the past year by markedly lowering our target for the federal funds rate. We accelerated the pace of rate reductions during this period in response to the accelerated pace of economic adjustment. Moreover, the magnitude of policy adjustment and the resulting low level of the federal funds rate responded both to the strength of the forces restraining demand and to the continued subdued pace of underlying inflation. Liquidity, as a consequence, has expanded significantly, and the accompanying lower interest rates have supported spending and held down the cost to households of servicing debts. The dynamics of inventory investment and the balance of factors influencing consumer demand will have important consequences for the economic outlook in coming months. But, the broad contours of the present cycle have been, and will continue to be, driven by the evolution of corporate profits and capital investment. The retrenchment in capital spending over the past year was central to the sharp slowing we experienced in overall activity. The steep rise in high-tech spending that occurred in the early post-Y2K months was clearly not sustainable. The demand for many of the newer technologies was growing rapidly, but capacity was expanding even faster, exerting severe pressure on prices and profits. New orders for equipment and software hesitated in the middle of 2000, and then fell sharply as firms re-evaluated their capital investment programs. Uncertainty about economic prospects boosted risk premiums significantly, and this rise, in turn, propelled required, or hurdle, rates of return to markedly elevated levels. In most cases, businesses required that new investments pay off much more rapidly than they had previously. For much of last year, the resulting decline in investment outlays was fierce and unrelenting. Although the weakness was most pronounced in the technology area, the reductions in capital outlays were broad-based. These cutbacks in capital spending interacted with, and were reinforced by, falling profits and equity prices. Indeed, a striking feature of the current cyclical episode relative to many earlier ones has been the virtual absence of pricing power across much of American business, as increasing globalization and deregulation enhanced competition. In this low-inflation environment, firms have perceived very little capability to pass cost increases on to customers. Growth in hourly labor compensation has slowed in response to deteriorating economic conditions, but even those smaller increases have continued to outstrip gains in output per hour for the corporate sector on a consolidated basis. The result has been that profit margins are still under pressure. Business managers, with little opportunity to raise prices, have moved aggressively to stabilize cash flows by trimming workforces. These efforts have limited the rise in unit costs, attenuated the pressure on profit margins, and ultimately helped to preserve the vast majority of private sector jobs. To the extent that businesses are successful in stabilizing and eventually boosting profits and cash flow, capital spending should begin to recover more noticeably. Such success would likely be accompanied by a decline in elevated risk premiums back to more normal levels and, with real rates of return on high-tech equipment still attractive, should provide an additional spur to new investment. When capital spending eventually recovers, its growth is likely to be less frenetic than that which characterized 1999 and early 2000, when outlays were boosted by the dislocations of Y2K and the extraordinarily low cost of capital faced by many firms. Still, the evidence strongly suggests that new technologies will present ample opportunities to earn enhanced rates of return. Indeed, anecdotal reports from businesses around the country suggest that the exploitation of available networking and other information technologies was only partially completed when the cyclical retrenchment of the past year began. Many business managers are still of the view, according to a recent survey of purchasing managers, that less than half of currently available new, and presumably profitable, supply chain technologies have been put into use. While these opportunities remain abundant, they will now play out against the backdrop of a major uncertainty that we all must deal with these days--the specter of further terrorist incidents on American soil. It simply is not possible to predict whether there will be any such incidents or to forecast their possible consequences for the economy. But we can have little doubt that the tragic events of September 11 have left obvious marks on the economy that will not soon fade even though some of the initial impact of the shock has receded. Importantly, as I suggested shortly after the event, adjustments to new levels of perceived risk will cause a one-time downward shift in the level of productivity. Clearly, businesses will be less comfortable now than they were before September 11 in allowing inventories to shrink to minimal levels in a just-in-time supply chain. Moreover, in some industries, resources will need to be diverted from efficiency-enhancing capital investment to providing security and contingency backup. Fragmentary data for the months following September 11, however, indicate output per hour is holding up well. Temporary labor-shedding may have overwhelmed the effects of added security and redundancy. It is not yet clear whether the negative shock to output per hour from the heightened risks is small, or just delayed. In any event, once these adjustments are completed, the full benefits of more rapid technological advance should show through to the growth of productivity. The central role that is being played by technological advance poses special challenges to forecasters. Few technologies that influence our economic future are truly anticipated much in advance. And even when they are anticipated, their effect on economic growth is difficult to predict, in part because their pace of diffusion and application is so uncertain. The latter consideration is particularly significant to the longer-term rate of growth of productivity. The events of the past decade clearly illustrate those difficulties. Few observers foresaw how microprocessors, integrated circuits, and the mating of laser technology with fiber optics, even well into their development and application, would rejuvenate the American economy. For example, as recently as a decade ago, the outlook was for a continuation of meager gains in output per hour, with the rate of growth barely exceeding one percent per year, if that. Instead, during the last half of the 1990s, we experienced a surge in productivity growth well above the rate of increase experienced in the previous quarter-century. Even as our economy slipped into recession, the growth of output per hour remained positive and, as I indicated earlier, has held up well even in the wake of September 11. Until last year, the hypothesis of an accelerated productivity trend had not been tested in the contracting phase of a business cycle. Recent developments have provided that test, and the early returns certainly look favorable to the hypothesis. In retrospect, our economic structure changed in the mid-1990s. The crucial agent of this remarkable change was the quantum leap in information availability. If the tentative indications that the contraction phase of this business cycle is drawing to a close are ultimately confirmed, we will have experienced a relatively mild downturn. To be sure, a great deal of real economic pain has been felt over the past year and a half. But imbalances have not been allowed to fester. They could have progressively undermined endeavors at stability and prolonged this difficult period. The American economy has had to absorb some extraordinary shocks over the past year and a half. For the economy to have weathered as well as it has a severe deflation of equity asset values followed by an unprecedented blow from terrorists to the foundations of our market systems is impressive. In my judgment, this performance is a testament to the exceptional degree of resilience and flexibility that our economy has gained in recent years, much of which owes to advances not only in information technology, but to the globalization and deregulation of our markets, as well. The adaptability and resourcefulness of our businesses and workers have been especially important in this trying period. There are sound reasons for concluding that the long-run picture remains bright, and even recent signals about the current course of the economy have turned from unremittingly negative through the late fall of last year to a far more mixed set of signals recently. But I would emphasize that we continue to face significant risks in the near term. Profits and investment remain weak and, as I noted, household spending is subject to restraint from the backup in interest rates, possible increases in unemployment, and from the effects of widespread equity asset price deflation over the past two years. But if the recent more favorable developments continue and gather momentum, uncertainties will diminish, risk premiums will fall, and the pace of capital investment increase. Should those gains in investment materialize, they would, doubtless, embody the newest technologies. As we have witnessed so clearly in recent years, advances in technology have enhanced the growth of productivity, which, in turn, has been essential to lifting our standards of living.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the issuance of an Order of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty against Dexia, S.A., Brussels, Belgium; Dexia Bank Belgium, S.A., Brussels, Belgium; and Dexia Credit Local de France, Paris, France. The three related foreign banks, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order for failure to comply with the provisions of the Board's Regulation Y and with the condition imposed in writing in connection with the Board's granting of the banks' request to become financial holding companies requiring them to timely notify the Board if they fall out of compliance with standards for being financial holding companies. The Order requires Dexia, S.A., Dexia Bank Belgium, S.A., and Dexia Credit Local de France to pay a civil money penalty of $50,000. A copy of the Order is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application by Banco Popular de Puerto Rico, Hato Rey, under section 18(c) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act, to acquire certain branches of Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria Puerto Rico, San Juan, both in Puerto Rico. Attached is the Order relating to this action.
Remarks by Vice Chairman Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. Before the Economic Club of Colorado, Denver, Colorado January 16, 2002 Developments in the U.S. Economy: Review and Outlook I am pleased to address the Economic Club of Colorado today. As always, the views I will be expressing are my own and are not necessarily shared by other members of the Board of Governors or of the Federal Open Market Committee. Review of 2001 A confluence of factors shaped economic developments last year, and I would first like to review these factors, to provide a backdrop for assessing our economic prospects in the coming year. A year ago, signs of the recession that eventually unfolded were just beginning to materialize. After several years of booming growth, economic indicators started sending mixed signals. Although consumer sentiment had dropped around the end of 2000, consumers were still spending at a healthy clip. While consumption growth had decelerated somewhat over the previous year, the modest slowing was consistent with the deceleration of aggregate demand necessary to better align supply and demand. Businesses, however, appeared to be struggling. As data for the end of 2000 became available, it became clear that businesses--amid disappointing sales and earnings--had abruptly curtailed the record-setting expansion of investment spending. Of course, some reduction of investment usually accompanies the recognition of a downshift in the economy, as firms bring their capital stocks in line with a revised outlook. But the severity of the adjustment last year appeared to reflect more than the usual reaction. Businesses seemed to be reassessing the profitability of additional fixed capital in a more fundamental way. New capital, especially capital that embodies new technologies, continues to promise efficiency gains, but expectations seemed to have gotten ahead of even the more favorable reality, resulting in an unsustainable buildup of capital and run-up of equity market values. Capital expenditures on high-tech equipment were especially hard hit. Moreover, the sudden drop-off in business demand, coupled with some slowing in the consumer sector, apparently caught producers off guard. And despite rapid cuts in production, inventories piled up on shelves and at warehouses. Early last year, manufacturers took steps to address the unwanted buildup and began liquidating inventories in earnest by slashing production of all types of goods. Against this backdrop, the Federal Open Market Committee reduced the target for the federal funds rate sharply last January to contain the weakness and head off a more serious slackening. This was to be just the first installment of a series of policy easings to counter the weakness in the economy that emerged over the first half of last year. In the business sector, a serious retrenchment in spending and production was under way. In addition to the initial causes of the pullback, the abruptness of the slowing seemed to jar business confidence, leading firms to postpone spending while they reassessed their situations. In this way, the investment downturn became self-reinforcing. At the same time, financial developments, including a stronger dollar, sharply lower equity prices, and tighter lending standards at banks and in security markets, tended to offset some of the influence of the lower federal funds rate. By midyear, investment--and high-tech investment in particular--was posting some of the largest decreases in decades. The weaker job market and lower stock prices also began to weigh on consumers, though to a much lesser extent. With overall sales sagging, inventories remained excessive in many sectors. As the weakness in the economy intensified, policymakers responded. In June, President Bush signed the Economic Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2001 into law. The first installment of the reduction in personal income tax rates went into effect in July. In addition, the act provided tax rebates of $300 to $600 per household that were paid directly to taxpayers. As for monetary policy, between March and June, the FOMC voted to ease monetary policy four more times, bringing the cumulative reduction in the federal funds rate to 275 basis points in the first six months of the year--the most rapid reduction in the funds rate since the early 1980s. Despite both fiscal and monetary efforts to bolster sagging aggregate activity, by late summer, only a few hard signs had surfaced that recovery was at hand. The terrorist attacks on September 11--whose worst effects were felt by those people and their families directly touched by the tragedies--were a blow to our already weakened economy. In the weeks immediately following those events, most forecasters expected the damage to the economy to be extensive. The initial effects on the airlines and the travel industry were severe. Also, a rapid deterioration of business and consumer confidence seemed highly probable. In addition to immediate crisis-related injections of liquidity, the Federal Reserve moved to address the perceived shock to the macroeconomy by lowering the federal funds rate 50 basis points on September 17 and an additional 75 basis points by the end of the year. Over the past few months, we have all been watching closely to see how aggregate activity would unfold in the aftermath of the terrorist attacks. No doubt a great deal of pain has been inflicted on the economy. But, given the magnitude of the shock, the economy has proved more resilient than initially anticipated. While several industries have been hit very hard, the worst-case scenarios spun in late September have not materialized. In particular, households' views of the economy have remained relatively stable, all things considered. In fact, in one of the most recent readings, consumer confidence was not much lower than it had been in August. While spending has surely been buttressed by some temporary factors such as aggressive discounting on motor vehicles and other retail goods, the effect of terrorism on consumer spending has not been as severe as most had feared in late September. To be sure, 2001 was a rough year for the economy--one of the roughest we have faced in a long time. The weak economic outcome despite sizable reductions in the federal funds rate has led some to question the effectiveness of monetary policy. But I believe that monetary policy substantially cushioned the negative forces weighing on the economy. Residential construction has been visibly buoyed by policy easing. Housing activity remained at a high level all year, as lower mortgage rates apparently offset the restraint from declines in employment, smaller gains in income, and lower levels of wealth. Also, although delinquency rates have risen, few restrictions have emerged on the availability of credit to consumers. Indeed, low interest rates have made it attractive to refinance mortgages to reduce mortgage payments, extract some home equity buildup, and pay down more expensive forms of consumer credit. Even businesses, which have been feeling the pinch of lower corporate profits, have benefited from lower interest rates; aggregate interest expense has remained fairly low relative to cash flow, and businesses have moved aggressively to bolster their financial stability by locking in more-assured, longer-term sources of funds. Automakers in particular have been able to offer inexpensive financing to customers because their own funding costs have fallen. In many ways, the mechanism that propagated the weakness last year was quite traditional: A negative demand shock led to an unwanted accumulation of inventories and to an adjustment of production. That, in turn, idled workers and fed back into even weaker demand. But even before the shock of the terrorist attacks, two aspects of last year's slowdown were atypical. First, the main source of the negative hit to demand was a large shock to capital expenditures. In the past fifty years, investment spending has nearly always begun its decline one to four quarters after the peak of the economic cycle, not before it. What started out as a very gradual cooling of an overheated economy became much more serious because of the severe shakeout that hit the high-tech sector. Second, consumer spending on goods and services--which represents about two-thirds of the gross domestic product--held up remarkably well last year. In the past, consumption spending has almost always declined as a recession started. But last year, despite a sharp drop in consumer confidence and a decline in wealth from lower equity values, households kept buying. At this point, it is still too early to classify this recession as mild or severe. In general, economic fluctuations in the past fifteen to twenty years have been tamer than their counterparts in earlier eras. Economists have conjectured that this is caused by improved technologies that allow businesses to monitor their demand more closely and manage their inventories better. Recent developments ought to give us more evidence on this subject. One thing is certain: Because of the unusual, investment-led nature of this recession, we cannot put too much weight on the shape and profile of past recoveries in trying to predict this one. Current Situation and Near-Term Outlook This year, forecasters are predicting an imminent recovery, with first-half growth of more than 1-1/2 percent at an annual rate and second-half growth of almost 4 percent. Financial markets--which have rallied in recent weeks--appear to have priced-in an outlook at least this optimistic. It is too early to know whether either of these forecasts--either the explicit one of economists or the implicit one of financial markets--will come true. Incoming data have shifted from distinctly negative to more mixed of late. Some data provide support for an optimistic view: Declines in payroll employment slowed in December, and initial claims for unemployment insurance remain well below their November peak. In addition, according to recent sentiment surveys, consumers have become more upbeat recently, and consumer spending has continued to advance. Even orders for capital goods have exhibited some encouraging signs over the past couple of months. Other data indicate some downside risks to the outlook. In the past few months, despite some abatement, payrolls continued to decline and the unemployment rate jumped to 5.8 percent, putting a dent in labor income. Moreover, some of the resilience in household spending last quarter was likely due to temporary factors: the zero percent financing available from automakers, the steep discounts at retailers, and warm weather. Additionally, corporate profits remain quite soft. Economists have always had difficulty identifying turning points, so I will not try to predict this one. However, I do think stimulative policies in conjunction with the normal equilibrating dynamics of the economy are likely to promote a rebound before too long. The contours of the upturn are uncertain. However, the turnaround is likely to be characterized by some of the same features as the recession that preceded it. In particular, it is likely to be uneven across industries, with some sectors booming ahead and others continuing to lag. It also seems likely that inventories will represent an important component in the bounceback. As inventory stocks approach desired levels, the mere slowing in the pace of liquidation will provide a boost to GDP growth. And when firms are confident that demand is going to pick up, the accompanying inventory re-stocking needed to meet that demand will lead to further production gains, which will provide a real jump-start to the recovery. An important question is when businesses will determine that they have pared their capital expenditures sufficiently. While the recent data hint that one important investment category, computer equipment, may have bottomed out, an overall recovery will likely be associated with a broader-based rebound. The Longer-Run Outlook One of the main forces that will lead to the recovery from this temporary slowdown is the confidence of businesses and households that, in the long run, the outlook for the U.S. economy is still bright. Despite our current problems, the fundamentals of this economy are strong. Our workforce is well educated and adaptable. In addition, our banking system is healthy and our capital markets, which are flexible and multifaceted, are well equipped to handle shocks. Perhaps the most notable feature of our economy in recent years, however, has been the acceleration we have experienced in productivity. In the second half of the 1990s, output per hour in the nonfarm business sector increased at an annual rate of almost 3 percent per year, well above the pace earlier in the decade. These efficiency gains allowed real GDP to rise 4 percent a year, on average, over the period. With these rapid increases in productivity, business costs were well contained and the rate of price inflation was stable, despite a fall in the unemployment rate to below 4 percent. Of course, over the past year, productivity growth has slowed, increasing 1-1/4 percent at an annual rate over the first three quarters of 2001. This, in itself, is remarkable, given the historical tendency of productivity growth to turn negative when the economy enters recession. I believe that the reason for the good performance at this stage of the cycle is that the improvements in productivity growth that we have witnessed since the mid-1990s have been largely structural and will persist for a time. The fundamental factor leading me to be cautiously optimistic that much of the improvement is likely to be sustained is my outlook for the state of technological advancement in the United States. As Fed economists Dan Sichel and Steve Oliner have shown, one major source of the gains in output per hour were the high and rising levels of business investment, which raised the amount of capital per worker, thereby boosting productivity. Booming investment in the 1990s owed importantly to steep declines in prices of high-tech equipment, which largely reflected rapid technical progress. About half a percentage point of the increase in productivity growth in the 1995-99 period can be attributed to this so-called capital deepening. I believe that technological progress will continue to drive down information technology costs in the coming years. Moreover, businesses have reaffirmed their intentions to improve productivity by substituting cost-saving high-tech capital for labor. While there are certainly risks to the view that improvements in productivity growth will persist, I do not believe the terrorism of last fall is going to permanently harm increases in output per hour (and thus the health of the economy). Most assuredly, in the aftermath of these attacks, many businesses have been forced to redirect resources from efficiency-enhancing investment to meet greater demands for security. Businesses may also have been compelled to increase redundancy to cope with the greater potential for supply disruption. However, these effects will be mainly a one-time hit to the level of productivity. They are not likely to change the trend growth rate of output per hour. Moreover, their effects will be ameliorated as businesses use new technologies and find creative ways to hold down the cost of enhancing security and providing for contingencies. Conclusion Obviously, 2001 was a challenging year. But the American people once again proved to be up to the challenge. The relative strength of the various forces that will shape 2002 are yet to be determined. At the Federal Reserve, we stand ready to do what is necessary to maintain financial stability, as we did on September 11, and to maintain a monetary policy stance that will foster price stability and promote maximum sustainable growth in output.
Remarks by Governor Edward M. Gramlich At the Housing Bureau for Seniors Conference, Ann Arbor, Michigan January 18, 2002 Predatory Lending
For immediate release
Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan The state of the economy Before the Committee on the Budget, U.S. Senate January 24, 2002 Mr. Chairman and members of the committee, in just a few weeks, the Federal Reserve Board will submit its semiannual report on monetary policy to the Congress. That report, and my accompanying testimony, will give our detailed assessment of the outlook for the U.S. economy and the implications of that outlook for monetary policy. This morning, I would like to offer some general comments about the state of the economy before turning to the federal budget. I want to emphasize that I speak for myself and not necessarily for the Federal Reserve. It is clear that the U.S. economy went through a significant cyclical adjustment in 2001 that was exacerbated by the effects of the terrorist attacks on September 11. That adjustment was characterized by sharp reductions in business investment and pronounced liquidations in business inventories and was compounded by the simultaneous economic difficulties of some of our major trading partners. But there have been signs recently that some of the forces that have been restraining the economy over the past year are starting to diminish and that activity is beginning to firm. One key consideration in that assessment is the behavior of inventories. Stocks in many industries have been drawn down to levels at which firms will soon need to taper off their rate of liquidation, if they have not already done so. Any slowing in the rate of inventory liquidation will induce a rise in industrial production if demand for those products is stable or is falling only moderately. That rise in production will, other things being equal, increase household income and spending. The runoff of inventories, even apart from the large reduction in motor vehicle stocks, remained sizable in the fourth quarter. Hence, with production running well below sales, the potential positive effect on income and spending of the inevitable cessation of inventory liquidation could be significant. But that impetus to activity will be short-lived unless sustained growth of final demand kicks in before the positive effects of the swing from inventory liquidation to accumulation dissipate. Most recoveries in the post-World War II period received a boost from a rebound in demand for consumer durables and housing from recession-depressed levels in addition to some abatement of the liquidation of inventories. Through most of last year's slowdown, in contrast to the usual pattern, the household sector was a major stabilizing force. As a consequence, although household spending should continue to trend up, the potential for significant acceleration in activity in this sector is more limited. In fact, there are a number of pluses and minuses in the outlook for household spending. Low mortgage interest rates and favorable weather have provided considerable support to homebuilding in recent months. Moreover, attractive mortgage rates have bolstered both the sales of existing homes and the realized capital gains that those sales engender. They have also spurred refinancing of existing homes and the associated liquification of increases in house values. These gains have been important to the ongoing extraction of home equity for consumption and home modernization. The pace of such extractions likely dropped in response to the decline in refinancing activity that followed the backup in mortgage rates that began in early November. But mortgage rates remain at low levels and should continue to provide support to activity in this sector. Consumer spending received a considerable lift from the sales of new motor vehicles, which were remarkably strong in October and November owing to major financing incentives. Sales have receded some as incentives were scaled back, but they have remained surprisingly resilient. Other consumer spending appears to have advanced at a moderate pace in recent months. The substantial declines in the prices of natural gas, fuel oil, and gasoline have clearly provided some support to real disposable income and spending. To have a more persistent effect on the ongoing growth of total personal consumption expenditures, energy prices would need to continue declining. Futures prices do not suggest that such a decline is in the immediate offing, but the forecast record of these markets is less than sterling. Although the quantitative magnitude and the precise timing of the wealth effect remain uncertain, the steep decline in stock prices since March 2000 has, no doubt, curbed the growth of household spending. Although stock prices recently have retraced a portion of their earlier losses, the restraining effects from the net decline in equity values presumably have not, as yet, fully played out. Future wealth effects will depend importantly on whether corporate earnings improve to the extent currently embedded in share prices. Perhaps most central to the outlook for consumer spending will be developments in the labor market. The pace of layoffs quickened last fall, especially after September 11, and the unemployment rate rose sharply. Over the past month or so, however, initial claims for unemployment insurance have decreased markedly, on balance, suggesting some abatement in the rate of job loss. Although this development would be welcome, the unemployment rate may continue to rise for a time, and job losses could put something of a damper on consumer spending. However, the extent of such restraint will depend on how much of any rise in unemployment is the result of weakened demand and how much reflects strengthened productivity. In the latter case, average real incomes could rise, at least partially offsetting losses of purchasing power that stem from diminished levels of employment. Indeed, fragmentary data suggest that productivity has held up quite well of late. The dynamics of inventory investment and the balance of factors influencing consumer demand will have important consequences for the economic outlook in coming months. But the broad contours of the present cycle have been, and will continue to be, driven by the evolution of corporate profits and capital investment. The retrenchment in capital spending over the past year was central to the sharp slowing we experienced in overall activity. The steep rise in high-tech spending that occurred in the early post-Y2K months was clearly not sustainable. The demand for many of the newer technologies was growing rapidly, but capacity was expanding even faster, exerting severe pressure on prices and profits. New orders for equipment and software hesitated in the middle of 2000 and then fell sharply as firms re-evaluated their capital investment programs. Uncertainty about economic prospects boosted risk premiums significantly, and this rise, in turn, propelled required, or hurdle, rates of return to markedly elevated levels. In most cases, businesses required that new investments pay off much more rapidly than they had previously. For much of last year, the resulting decline in investment outlays was fierce and unrelenting. Although the weakness was most pronounced in the technology area, the reductions in capital outlays were broad-based. These cutbacks in capital spending interacted with, and were reinforced by, falling profits and equity prices. Indeed, a striking feature of the current cyclical episode relative to many earlier ones has been the virtual absence of pricing power across much of American business, as increasing globalization and deregulation have enhanced competition. In this low-inflation environment, firms have perceived very little ability to pass cost increases on to customers. Growth in hourly labor compensation has slowed in response to deteriorating economic conditions, but even those smaller increases have continued to outstrip gains in output per hour for the corporate sector on a consolidated basis. The result has been that profit margins are still under pressure. Business managers, with little opportunity to raise prices, have moved aggressively to stabilize cash flows by trimming workforces. These efforts have limited the rise in unit costs, attenuated the pressure on profit margins, and ultimately helped to preserve the vast majority of private-sector jobs. To the extent that businesses are successful in stabilizing and eventually boosting profits and cash flow, capital spending should begin to recover more noticeably. Such success would likely be accompanied by a decline in elevated risk premiums back to more normal levels and, with real rates of return on high-tech equipment still attractive, should provide an additional spur to new investment. When capital spending fully recovers, its growth is likely to be less frenetic than that which characterized 1999 and early 2000--a period during which outlays were boosted by the dislocations of Y2K and the extraordinarily low cost of capital faced by many firms. Still, the evidence strongly suggests that new technologies will present ample opportunities to earn enhanced rates of return. Indeed, reports from businesses around the country suggest that the exploitation of available networking and other information technologies was only partially completed when the cyclical retrenchment of the past year began. Many business managers are still of the view, according to a recent survey of purchasing managers, that less than half of currently available new, and presumably profitable, supply chain technologies have been put into use. If the recent more-favorable economic developments continue and gather momentum, uncertainties will diminish, risk premiums will fall, and the pace of capital investment embodying these technologies will increase. As we have witnessed so clearly in recent years, the resulting enhanced growth of productivity will lift our standard of living. The economic and financial developments I have described, of course, have important implications for the federal budget and can help explain a significant portion of the shift in the budget situation over the past year. A year ago, the Congressional Budget Office expected the unified surplus to continue to mount if no new policy actions were taken and to cumulate to $5.6 trillion for fiscal years 2002 to 2011. As you know, if today's policies remain in place, CBO is currently forecasting a cumulative surplus over the same ten years that is $4 trillion below what had been anticipated in its baseline a year ago. CBO calculates that the now less favorable economic assumptions--especially in the near term--contribute nearly $1 trillion--after taking account of the associated cost of debt service--to the downward revision in its ten-year surplus projections. In addition, more than $600 billion of the downward revision reflects CBO's view that the ten-year estimates it made a year ago of receipts relative to taxable incomes were too high; the revision was based in part on the recent disappointing tax collections and lowered estimates of realized capital gains in the wake of stock market declines. If CBO had been able to employ what has been learned about recent developments and the long-term outlook in the past year--that is, if it had used its current economic and technical assumptions when it put together its budget projections last January--a still formidable surplus would have emerged. Instead of projecting a $5.6 trillion current-policy surplus, it would have estimated $4 trillion. Of course, legislated tax and spending actions over the past year, as estimated by CBO, have reduced the ten-year surplus by $2.4 trillion. This leaves a current-policy ten-year surplus expectation of $1.6 trillion through fiscal 2011. Despite the erosion in the budget picture over the past year, our underlying fiscal situation today remains considerably stronger than that of a decade ago, when policymakers were struggling to rein in chronic deficits. The shift from a deficit equal to nearly 5 percent of GDP in fiscal 1992 to a surplus equal to 2-1/2 percent of GDP in fiscal 2000 was truly remarkable. Restraint on outlays accounted for about 40 percent of the fiscal reversal over this period, and revenue growth in excess of GDP growth accounted for about 45 percent; the associated declines in debt service accounted for the remainder. The fall in the non-interest outlay share of GDP largely reflected lower defense spending as the Cold War came to an end, but other spending also was fairly well restrained. At least until the past few years, the statutory caps helped to hold nondefense discretionary expenditures in check, and the pay-as-you-go rules forced careful consideration of deficit-expanding initiatives. The extraordinary rise in receipts over the past decade resulted from the exceptional performance of the U.S. economy and the associated rise in the market value of assets, which helped lift receipts from 17-1/2 percent of GDP in fiscal year 1992 to a postwar high of nearly 21 percent of GDP in fiscal 2000. The increase in receipts in the second half of the 1990s was particularly impressive--especially for individual income taxes, which grew about 11 percent per year, on average, between 1995 and 2000. The surge in individual taxes was attributable in part to the strong growth in incomes from production and to the tendency of rising levels of income to shift a greater share of taxable income into higher tax brackets. But individual taxes also received a boost from the enormous rise in the value of financial assets during that period--directly through taxes on higher capital gains realizations and indirectly through the taxes collected from the exercise of stock options, from stock-price-related bonuses to workers in the financial industry, and from withdrawals from capital-gains-augmented IRAs and 401(k) plans. Estimates based in part on data from the Statistics of Income and other sources suggest that such market-related receipts accounted for only about 15 percent of total individual receipts in fiscal 1995; but because they grew about 25 percent per year, on average, between 1995 and 2000, they accounted for more than one-third of the increase in total individual receipts over that period. Receipts that are more directly related to production in the broader economy--that is, those associated with wages and salaries, business and professional incomes, dividends, and interest income--rose 8-1/2 percent per year, on average, between 1995 and 2000, one-third the pace of receipts on stock-market-related taxable incomes. Had equity asset values risen only as fast as nominal GDP between 1995 and 2000--that is, about 6 percent per year--taxes related to stock-price levels would have been approximately $130 billion less in fiscal 2000, even without taking account of the reduced receipts that would have resulted from a presumably less buoyant economy. Recent developments, of course, have reversed part of this fiscal bonanza. Tax cuts, the weakening in economic activity, and the sharp decline in stock prices have reduced individual tax receipts. In addition, taxes on capital gains realizations have become an increasingly important component of corporate receipts in recent years--perhaps as much as one-fourth. Consequently, declines in stock prices have exerted additional downward pressure on corporate receipts, which had already taken a large hit from declining profit margins. Increased funding for defense and homeland security and the higher expenditures on unemployment benefits and other cyclically sensitive programs are also pressing on our current-policy fiscal balances. Such calculations, of course, do not include the additional expenditures that doubtless will be authorized as the year progresses. The current-policy budget outlook prepared by the Congressional Budget Office for the coming decade, though less favorable than a year ago, is still quite positive. CBO remains reasonably sanguine about the economy's growth prospects for the next ten years, and this is reflected in the re-emergence in its current-policy projections of moderate unified budget surpluses by the middle of the decade. If realized, such surpluses, by lowering the publicly held federal debt and freeing up private saving to be channeled into capital investment, would help us prepare for the considerable demographic changes that we face over the longer run. This will clearly be no simple task. As Dr. Crippen emphasized yesterday, the fiscal pressures that will almost surely arise after 2010 will be formidable. Achieving a satisfactory budget posture will depend on ensuring that new initiatives are consistent with our longer-run budgetary objectives. Indeed, as you craft a budget strategy for coming years, you might again want to consider provisions that, in some way, would limit tax and spending initiatives if specified targets for the budget surplus and federal debt were not satisfied. The significant improvement in the budget in the 1990s reflected not only decidedly positive economic forces but also much hard work and many difficult decisions on the part of this committee and others. Similar efforts will be required in the years ahead. Footnotes That projection would have indicated a need for significant accumulation of private assets in federal government accounts by 2009. In the actual CBO estimates of January 2001, that date was two years earlier. In the absence of cuts in taxes or increases in outlays that are programmed and phased in well in advance, the avoidance of sizable private asset accumulation might require taking actions that would essentially eliminate the surplus as the federal debt approached its irreducible minimum. As I argued a year ago, such actions could result in a fiscal policy wholly inconsistent with the state of the economy at that time. For reasons I discussed last January, I believe that cutting taxes is a far preferable way to reduce the surplus over time than to institute new expenditure programs. CBO's projections of a year ago, which implied a substantial shortfall of reducible debt as early as 2007, suggested to me some urgency in phasing down the surplus. If CBO had access to the economic and technical developments of all of 2001 last January, it would have projected a somewhat later date for that shortfall. In the event, of course, a considerable part of the current-policy surplus was used to reduce taxes and to increase spending so that the most recent current-policy projections of the CBO do not anticipate a need for significant nonfederal asset accumulation until well into the next decade. Relatively favorable demographic trends helped to restrain spending on social security and health programs; and although health spending rose very rapidly in the first half of the 1990s, these outlays decelerated markedly in the second half as a result of both legislative actions and the cost-containment efforts in the medical sector. Footnotes That projection would have indicated a need for significant accumulation of private assets in federal government accounts by 2009. In the actual CBO estimates of January 2001, that date was two years earlier. In the absence of cuts in taxes or increases in outlays that are programmed and phased in well in advance, the avoidance of sizable private asset accumulation might require taking actions that would essentially eliminate the surplus as the federal debt approached its irreducible minimum. As I argued a year ago, such actions could result in a fiscal policy wholly inconsistent with the state of the economy at that time. For reasons I discussed last January, I believe that cutting taxes is a far preferable way to reduce the surplus over time than to institute new expenditure programs. CBO's projections of a year ago, which implied a substantial shortfall of reducible debt as early as 2007, suggested to me some urgency in phasing down the surplus. If CBO had access to the economic and technical developments of all of 2001 last January, it would have projected a somewhat later date for that shortfall. In the event, of course, a considerable part of the current-policy surplus was used to reduce taxes and to increase spending so that the most recent current-policy projections of the CBO do not anticipate a need for significant nonfederal asset accumulation until well into the next decade. Relatively favorable demographic trends helped to restrain spending on social security and health programs; and although health spending rose very rapidly in the first half of the 1990s, these outlays decelerated markedly in the second half as a result of both legislative actions and the cost-containment efforts in the medical sector.
Testimony of Richard Spillenkothen Director, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation Antiterrorism initiatives Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate January 29, 2002 Mr. Chairman, I am pleased to appear before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs to discuss the Federal Reserve's work on implementing the USA Patriot Act and our efforts to help law enforcement track terrorist financing activities. The U.S. government's response to the terrorist attacks on September 11th has necessitated unprecedented cooperation among federal bank supervisors, the private sector, law enforcement agencies and the international financial community. Over the past several months, the Federal Reserve has played an important role in many joint activities with bank supervisory and law enforcement authorities and the banking community here in the United States and abroad. As you requested, today I will describe many of the Federal Reserve's efforts - some of which you may appreciate can only be discussed in general terms in order to avoid compromising on-going law enforcement inquiries. At the outset, I will discuss our current robust anti-money laundering program and the ways that we're enhancing it to address terrorist financing. I will then describe how the Federal Reserve is actively involved in the implementation of the Patriot Act; how the Federal Reserve staff has been participating in the work of numerous international organizations; and how we have been providing support and technical assistance to law enforcement. As a preliminary matter, I would like to highlight an important fact about terrorist financing activities that is presenting a major challenge to the Federal Reserve, the other bank supervisory agencies, the banking community, and law enforcement. Terrorist financing activities are unlike traditional money laundering in a very significant respect. Money used to finance terrorism does not always originate from criminal sources. Rather, it may be money derived from legitimate sources that is then used to support crimes. Developing programs that will help identify such funds before they can be used for their horrific purposes is a daunting task, but we are trying to meet this responsibility along with our colleagues at the U.S. Departments of Treasury and Justice, the Securities and Exchange Commission and other U.S. and international regulatory and law enforcement agencies. Fortunately, we have a strong foundation upon which to build. Many of the provisions of the Patriot Act are amendments to the Bank Secrecy Act (BSA), the core of U.S. anti-money laundering efforts. Therefore, I would like to first describe our existing BSA compliance examination program, then explain how we are revising it to address terrorist funding activities and the new provisions of the Patriot Act. The Federal Reserve's Anti-Money Laundering Program The Federal Reserve has a longstanding commitment to combating illicit activity by or through the domestic and foreign banking organizations that it supervises. In 1993, in recognition of the importance of fighting financial crimes such as money laundering, the Board created the Special Investigations Section in its bank supervision division. This Section's functions continue to include overseeing the Reserve Banks' Bank Secrecy Act compliance examination programs, reviewing information developed during the course of examinations, and conducting specialized inquiries to determine whether any of our supervised banking organizations are involved in violations of law. Section staff notifies the appropriate law enforcement agency when apparent violations are detected, and provides support and technical assistance when requested. The Special Investigations Section also conducts financial investigations, provides expertise to the U.S. law enforcement community for investigation and training initiatives, and provides training to various foreign central banks and government agencies. Throughout the Federal Reserve System, the Reserve Banks have designated senior experienced examiners as BSA/Anti-Money Laundering Contacts. During every Federal Reserve examination of a state member bank or U.S. branch or agency of a foreign bank, specially trained examiners review the institution's compliance with the BSA. Examiners also evaluate compliance with regulations that require banks to establish internal control and training procedures and to perform independent testing to assure and monitor compliance with the BSA. Prior to commencing an examination of a state member bank or U.S. branch or agency of a foreign bank, examiners also make use of the BSA database of Currency Transaction Reports (CTRs) and Suspicious Activity Reports (SARs) filed by the particular banking organization in order to check, among other things, whether the bank, branch or agency has adequate systems in place to identify and report currency transactions and suspicious activities in accordance with Treasury's and the Board's rules. When supervised institutions fail to have the appropriate internal controls and procedures for compliance with the BSA as well as for anti-money laundering purposes, the Board may issue formal enforcement actions and assess civil penalties to correct the systemic deficiencies. These actions are public and are available on the Board's web site. In cases of significant BSA violations, relevant examination materials are referred to Treasury for action under its authority to assess fines for BSA violations. When potential money laundering (or other criminal activity) is identified through an examination, or self-disclosure or from information received from law enforcement, a targeted examination may be conducted, and all relevant information is referred to the appropriate law enforcement agency. Federal Reserve examiners are provided with comprehensive training on the latest trends in money laundering. However, even with appropriate training, it is still difficult for the most experienced examiners to detect sophisticated money laundering schemes during the course of an examination. In this regard, I must emphasize that our examiners are not criminal investigators. It is the examiner's primary responsibility to evaluate the effectiveness of the institution's own policies and procedures to identify and manage the risks associated with money laundering. As a federal bank supervisory agency, we view the Federal Reserve's role as complementary to the law enforcement duties of criminal justice agencies. Working with Treasury on the Implementation of the Patriot Act On November 26, 2001, the Board issued a supervisory letter to all domestic and foreign banking organizations under its supervision concerning the Patriot Act. The letter described the provisions of the Act, highlighted those that should receive banking organizations' and Federal Reserve supervisors' immediate attention, and described new rules that would be issued under the Act. As you are aware, the primary responsibility for these regulations rests with Treasury; however, at the request of Treasury staff and consistent with statutory requirements for consultation, the Federal Reserve has been actively assisting that agency. Treasury has established twenty working groups for the different regulatory projects required by the Patriot Act, and Federal Reserve staff is involved in fifteen of these groups. Along with Treasury, Federal Reserve staff started working on those provisions of the Patriot Act that have effective dates in the immediate future. Treasury's recently proposed rules on the prohibition of correspondent accounts with shell banks; the recordkeeping requirements on foreign bank ownership and designation of agents for service of legal process for correspondent accounts; and the broker-dealer suspicious activity reporting requirements all reflect consultation with the Federal Reserve. Further, Treasury is expected to issue more proposed rules shortly, one setting forth minimum standards for financial institutions to verify the identification of their customers and another requiring financial institutions to conduct due diligence to identify suspicious activities involving correspondent and private banking accounts. Board staff is providing material assistance to Treasury in the drafting of both of these regulations. Patriot Act Examination Enhancements As Patriot Act effective dates have approached and proposed rules have been issued, the Federal Reserve has been making certain that banking organizations are aware of the new requirements and have been taking reasonable steps to comply. We're doing this through the bank examination process - a process that is being significantly enhanced throughout the Federal Reserve System. At the Board, we have established a Patriot Act Working Group comprised of senior, experienced Bank Secrecy Act/Anti-Money Laundering examiners from throughout the Federal Reserve. This Working Group, which is charged with overseeing the System's implementation of the new law, is drafting new examination procedures and developing a new training curriculum for examiners who conduct Bank Secrecy Act and anti-money laundering examinations. We have also increased the staff of the Board's bank supervision division to include several senior examiners from our Reserve Banks to draw upon their field experiences. These new Special Examiners will lead the Working Group; coordinate the System-wide adoption and consistent application of the new examination procedures and training program; and consult with the other federal supervisors on common issues. Cooperation with the Private Sector The Federal Reserve believes that banking organizations and their employees are the first and strongest line of defense against financial crimes and, in particular, money laundering. A banking organization's best protection against criminal activities is its own policies and procedures designed to identify and understand with whom it is conducting business and to identify suspicious activity. While many of our banks have robust compliance procedures in place, clearly, the recent events underscore the absolute need for banking organizations to conduct effective enhanced due diligence. We are working with law enforcement and the industry to see whether there are any specific indicators of terrorist-related money laundering that may be distinguishable from money laundering involving corruption or drugs. This effort will be crucial not only for law enforcement to identify suspects but also for supervisors to determine if there is a way in the future for potential suspicious activity related to terrorism to be detected proactively. Another example of industry cooperation is our work with the New York Clearing House (NYCH), which is comprised of representatives from some of the leading U.S. and international financial institutions. On October 11, 2001, senior executives from the NYCH member institutions, and senior level representatives from the Federal Reserve, law enforcement, Treasury and Justice and other federal bank supervisors met for the first time to plan how to work together to identify and intercept the flow of funds to and from terrorists and their organizations. Under the auspices of the NYCH and in cooperation with the Federal Reserve and the other bank regulators, working groups have been established to: review account opening and monitoring procedures; develop a database for financial institutions to share information about suspicious activity with law enforcement and each other; determine patterns of terrorism financing; broaden international cooperation on information sharing; and ensure that a useful flow of information between law enforcement and financial institutions continues. Federal Reserve staff participates in all of these groups. Since the issuance of our supervisory letter in November to Federal Reserve-supervised financial institutions, Board and Reserve Bank staffs have reached out to the banking industry, fielding numerous written and telephone inquiries and participating in many seminars, conferences and meetings with banking organizations and their representatives. Federal Reserve staff welcomes the opportunity to assist the industry in responding to new challenges, and we believe that a strong relationship with our supervised organizations can only further our collective goals. Banks and other financial institutions have raised many questions about how they ensure that they are not doing business with shell banks and ensure that they have all necessary ownership information about the foreign banks with whom they are doing business. Working with Treasury, the NYCH, and the Federal Reserve and other bank regulatory agency staff, banks have begun using the "certification process" provided for by Treasury's regulations and have been searching for correspondent accounts with shell banks through deposit accounts as well as other business lines. Through our contacts with banking organizations examined by the Reserve Banks we have learned that several correspondent accounts with shell banks have been closed by U.S. banks. Financial institutions supervised by the Federal Reserve have also raised questions about the application of the requirement to determine ownership of foreign correspondent banks. Treasury has specifically requested comments on this provision in connection with its proposed regulations. In the meantime, we believe that banks are making their best efforts to comply. We are encouraged that banking organizations have taken steps to prepare for compliance with the Patriot Act, and we have seen an increase in the number of banks that have improved existing systems or implemented new or more sophisticated systems to monitor funds transfers and identify suspicious activity. International Initiatives The international supervisory community plays an important role in ensuring that banking organizations make every effort to stop illicit activity. The Federal Reserve's foreign initiatives include bilateral as well as multilateral efforts. Over the years, we have provided extensive training and technical assistance on anti-money laundering procedures to foreign law enforcement officials and central bank supervisory personnel in dozens of foreign countries including Russia, Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic, and a number of the Baltic states, as well as Brazil, Ecuador, Argentina and other countries in Africa, and the Middle and Far East. With respect to multilateral organizations, Board staff participates in the Financial Action Task Force (FATF). The FATF, established in 1989 at the G-7 Economic Summit, develops and promotes policies to combat money laundering. The FATF has working groups that are reviewing some of the same issues addressed by the Patriot Act such as minimum standards for customer identification and due diligence requirements for correspondent banking as well as other practices susceptible to money laundering. The FATF held an extraordinary plenary session in October in response to the terrorist attacks and adopted eight special recommendations regarding terrorist financing. To implement the new recommendations, FATF members agreed to draft guidance for financial institutions on the techniques and mechanisms used in the financing of terrorism and to provide technical assistance to non-members to assist them in complying with the special recommendations. Board staff is involved in all of these projects. Another important international initiative to which the Federal Reserve contributes is the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. The Basel Committee is comprised of representatives of central banks and supervisory agencies from a dozen countries. The Committee does not possess any supervisory authority but formulates broad supervisory standards, guidelines and recommendations for best practices. On October 4th, the Basel Committee issued minimum standards for customer due diligence for banks. In issuing these standards, the Chairman of the Committee, William J. McDonough, President of the New York Reserve Bank, reiterated that due diligence is an essential element of banks' risk management systems, the importance of which has been underscored by the recent terrorist attacks. Another organization working on anti-terrorist financing initiatives is the Wolfsberg Group. It is comprised of representatives from several large multi-national financial institutions. This Group held a meeting on terrorism financing in early January and invited government and banking experts to discuss these issues. Board staff attended and gave a presentation on U.S. initiatives taken since September 11th. The Group intends to issue a paper identifying "best practices" on the prevention of terrorism financing and hopes that these practices will be adopted by the international banking community. The Board also participates in the G-7 group, composed of the finance ministers and central bank governors of large industrial countries, and the G-20 group, composed of ministers and governors of emerging-market countries. Following the G-7 meeting in Washington on October 6, 2001, the G-7 ministers and governors issued a statement that highlighted the commitment of its members "to vigorously track down and intercept the assets of terrorists and to pursue the individuals and countries suspected of financing terrorists." On November 17, 2001, finance ministers and central bank governors of the G-20 announced a comprehensive action plan of multilateral cooperation to deny terrorists access to their financial systems. The plan commits members of the G-20 to take a number of concrete steps in cooperation with other international bodies to combat terrorist financing and money laundering. Assistance to Law Enforcement Earlier in my testimony, I emphasized that as a federal bank supervisory agency we view the Federal Reserve's role as complementary to law enforcement's duties. That being said, however, bank supervisors have an important role in ensuring that criminal activity does not pose a systemic threat to the financial system. Since its inception, our Special Investigations Section staff has provided financial investigative expertise to law enforcement agencies, and we have continued and expanded those efforts. Also, since September 11th, many of our Reserve Banks have assisted law enforcement in various ways. Shortly after September 11th, the FBI sought our assistance in circulating a list of suspected terrorists to banks. The Bureau wanted the banks to check their account and transaction records against this list and report any positive responses to law enforcement as quickly as possible. Within twenty-four hours of that request, the Federal Reserve and the other federal banking supervisors disseminated the list to virtually every banking organization in the country. The Federal Reserve distributed this list by issuing a supervisory letter to all of its banking organizations. Soon thereafter, Treasury's FinCEN set up a telephone hotline so that banks and others could report suspicious activities related to terrorism through FinCEN to the FBI, thereby enabling law enforcement to receive information on almost a real time basis. We advised the financial institutions supervised by the Federal Reserve about this new procedure as soon as it was in place by issuing another supervisory letter. From the middle of September through October, the proliferation of various requests continued as banks received increasingly longer lists from a variety of law enforcement sources, both domestically and abroad. To alleviate the burden of searching for names on these multiple lists, many of which were duplicative, the FBI and other law enforcement agencies prepared a unified "Control List" to supersede all other lists. To ensure that the broadest number of financial institutions received this Control List, it was agreed that electronic communication would be the most efficient and expeditious method of distribution. The New York Reserve Bank, working with the U.S. Attorney for the Southern District of New York, devised a dedicated e-mail account that allows banks to receive one Control List from law enforcement. Banks respond with positive information back to this same e-mail account, and the information is then forwarded promptly to law enforcement for further action such as an issuance of a subpoena. The Federal Reserve and the other federal bank supervisors issued a Joint Agency Request explaining this system to almost 20,000 financial institutions. Cooperation from the banking industry has been outstanding despite the time consuming effort that is needed to run name checks on many similar names with few identifiers. This system continues to be active, and, to date, there have been over two hundred responses forwarded to law enforcement. The Federal Reserve provided the Control List to the Basel Committee for circulation among its member countries. In addition, the Federal Reserve sent the Control List to over a dozen other central banks around the world. The Control List is different, of course, from Treasury's Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) list. OFAC disseminates its own list for which many banks have automated filters to block transactions and assets or to deny transactions altogether. Most banks are notified of additions and modifications to the OFAC list through Fedwire, the Federal Reserve's large value electronic payments system. The OFAC list has been amended numerous times since September 11th, and U.S. banks have diligently complied with their responsibilities to block and freeze accounts. Finally, I can report that starting on September 17, 2001 the New York Reserve Bank, at the request of law enforcement and pursuant to subpoenas, began searching the records of Fedwire for information related to the terrorist acts. Search results have been provided to various law enforcement agencies, which have reported to us that the information we provided has been useful in their on-going investigations. In addition, multi-agency teams led by various U.S. government agencies have been deployed to foreign countries to analyze bank and other financial records. On several of these occasions, senior Reserve Bank examiners have traveled and worked with the teams. The feedback we received is that our expertise was of great assistance and that the foreign jurisdictions welcomed the presence of a central bank examiner on the investigative teams. Based on information developed by the team members, OFAC included new entities and individuals on its lists. In the wake of the terrorist attacks, the FBI formed the Financial Review Group (FRG), a multi-agency law enforcement task force to trace transactions and assets of terrorists and their supporters here and abroad. Recognizing the particular expertise that we have in financial investigations and our facility with bank records, representatives from the group of specialized examiners that I referred to previously -- the Federal Reserve's Special Investigations Section -- were requested to participate. Staff from this group regularly participates in the FRG's efforts. Over the past several months, Federal Reserve staff has assisted in the evaluation of financial data collected by the FRG and has provided other valuable services to the law enforcement officials participating in the FRG. For example, a need very quickly developed for information on specific foreign banking organizations. Law enforcement sought details such as ownership, organizational structure, nonbank subsidiaries and geographic location of operations. Special Investigations Section staff was able to obtain this information very promptly. Additionally, FRG staff needed information relating to funds transfer systems; wire transfer practices, particularly in the Middle East; non-traditional funds transfer methods; and general banking practices, such as account opening procedures. Federal Reserve staff helped to answer these questions. The Federal Reserve has also provided assistance and technical support to OFAC's Foreign Terrorist Asset Tracking Center. This OFAC group gathers information relating to terrorist groups' methods of fundraising and funds movement. Conclusion As a bank supervisor, the Federal Reserve believes that it is necessary to take all reasonable and prudent steps to assure that banking organizations are not victims of, and do not knowingly participate in, illicit activities such as money laundering and the funding of terrorist activities. Bank supervisors must ensure that criminal activity does not pose a systemic threat, and that banking organizations operating in the United States protect themselves fully from such illicit activities. All of the actions I described underscore the Federal Reserve's significant commitment to the bank regulatory community's anti-money laundering and anti-terrorism mission. We will continue our cooperative efforts with Congress, the banking industry, the other bank and securities supervisors, and international communities to develop and implement effective programs addressing the ever-changing strategies of terrorists and other criminals who attempt to launder funds through banking organizations here and abroad. The Federal Reserve will also continue to lend our expertise to the U.S. law enforcement community anywhere in the world when it seeks to track or intercept terrorist funds.
No content found