No content found
Remarks by Governor Edward M. Gramlich At the International Research Forum on Monetary Policy, European Central Bank, Frankfurt, Germany July 5, 2002 Introductory Remarks I am pleased to follow President Duisenberg in introducing the first conference organized by the International Research Forum on Monetary Policy, sponsored jointly by the European Central Bank (ECB), the Federal Reserve System (Fed), the Center for German and European Studies at Georgetown University, and the Center for Financial Studies at the Goethe University in Frankfurt. For this first conference, the paper-givers are from the United States and seven European Union (EU) countries, and attendees include members from all G-7 and EU countries, most of the G-20 countries, and a few others as well. This is a truly international undertaking and I congratulate all participants. I also join President Duisenberg in specially congratulating the organizers--Ignazio Angeloni, Matt Canzoneri, Dale Henderson and Axel Weber. Both the Forum and this conference will focus on research. We central bankers have plenty of opportunity to talk policy in our various groups. For research, there are lots of research conferences out there, but there are very few held between our staffs to discuss papers, talk about new policy research, and develop research strategies. There are also few opportunities to discuss the implications of research in a way that does not lead to the question, "Oh, yes, but does that mean they will raise rates at the next meeting?" Because of these conferences, policymakers will not raise or lower rates. But we will listen to your results and hope to learn from them. More significantly, we hope that you will learn from your own papers and those of others. There are areas of economics where there is alleged to be a wide gap between economic research and real world policy decisions. Whatever the case elsewhere in economics, this is not true of monetary policy, monetary economics, or even macroeconomics. Here there is a relatively short distance--many of the questions that you will be dealing with in the next two days are those that my colleagues in the ECB, the banks of Australia, Canada, England, Japan, and on down the list, and the Fed deal with. Policymakers probably do not deal with these questions in the same way as researchers--I have seen very few propositions proved in my five years of going to Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meetings. But we deal with them in our own ways and they are the same questions. Let me take this opportunity to mention some examples of policy questions that could be illuminated with further research. These are all questions that come up in monetary policy discussions or in policymaker meetings, with many of them coming up in your papers for this conference as well. I probably do not need to indicate that the research questions that you have not touched this time around might be very good candidates for future papers and conferences, in my view. One-Country Issues In this open-economy world, monetary questions can be grouped naturally into those affecting the operation of one central bank, a bank that recognizes that the economy is open, and those involving interactions between many economies and central banks. I will start with the one-country issues. 1. Dynamics of the inflation process. In the long run, of course, a central bank's most important job is to bring about stable prices, avoiding inflation and deflation. For a good half-century, economists have studied the dynamics of the inflation process, with that work still going on and spawning at least one of the papers this week. This has always been very critical work for central banks, and will continue to be so. Among the issues raised today is whether the inflation process differs from country to country--and I suppose with different market institutions, there is no reason why it would not. I would also like to propose that somebody take a look at whether the inflation process is the same as the deflation process in various countries, or whether some different behavior takes hold when prices start going down. 2. The impact of the exchange rate on demand in the short run. Most modern-day open economy macroeconomists have been schooled in the Mundell-Fleming model. In this model, expansionary monetary policy lowers interest rates and the value of a country's currency, and expansionary fiscal policy (budget deficits) raises interest rates and the value of a country's currency. If exchange rates were totally determined by bond markets, these outcomes might make sense. But, with exchange rates being determined by bond and stock markets together, the Mundell-Fleming conclusions are open to challenge, I think. In recent years, Fed monetary policy easings have often been followed by rises, not declines, in the value the dollar--because the profit outlook is improved, according to analysts. And we all know that deficit-induced rises in interest rates may lower, not raise, the value of the domestic currency. Our short run understanding of the economy is heavily impacted by all of this, and I think this whole set of questions needs some new thinking and research. 3. Optimal policy design. There has been much discussion in recent years about how to conduct monetary policy--simple inflation targeting; forward-looking, flexible inflation targeting; a dual pillar approach; the Taylor Rule; seat of the pants. This discussion should go on and will go on--my money says that the various approaches will converge over time. But while that is happening, there is one unresolved traditional question--should the monetary authority target exchange rates? There are also some new questions--should the monetary authority target stock values, should there be special provisions for the zero-bound problem? These and other new questions will make this a fertile topic for years. 4. Currency regimes. We still have not solved the currency regime problem. Given the undoubted importance of capital flows, should countries float their currency, float with occasional intervention, float with continual intervention, follow a crawling peg regime, or peg their currency to some other currency? A key question here is the pass-through issue discussed in one of the conference papers. There is some recent empirical evidence that pass-through effects seem to be smaller than believed, but how small is small? Many economists are lately taking the bipolar view--either a pure float or a pure peg, but regimes in the middle break down. And some take an even harder position that in the long run, pegging regimes often break down too, as one recently did. Multi-Country Issues There is no need to tell a European that the issues are just as rich when we get to the interactions. The ECB has successfully brought about what is probably the largest currency union in the history of the world. Those of you from Europe see, and fight about, any unresolved issues daily. But there are some questions that strike this overseas observer as eminently interesting, and eminently researchable. 1. Benefits and costs of a currency union. The 12 ECB countries that have formed a currency union have seemed to be relatively forward-looking, anticipating new problems and not looking back at old ones. At the same time, other countries are considering currency unions, and it might make sense at some point for the EU to look back. Have the benefits of your currency union been all you imagined--more, less, or different? Have the costs been more, less, or different? What advice would you have for countries in South America, Asia, or Africa that might be considering currency unions? This was a huge undertaking and we ought to study it carefully while the lessons are still fresh. 2. The role of fiscal policy in a currency union. I read in the newspapers every day that your Stability and Growth Pact is up for discussion, or at least that some people wish it were up for discussion. Most of these people seem to be politicians who, euphemistically, may have goals in mind other than minimizing output fluctuations and maximizing output growth in the long run. But there is still a serious question about fiscal policy in a currency union. Does the union want to force all countries to bring their deficits and/or debt ratios down? Or, given that demand shocks will vary across the union, is there a role for decentralized fiscal policy? Can the two objectives be combined, say by writing deficit limits in a certain way, having transition rules, or encouraging countries to run fiscal rainy day funds that would promote long-run fiscal responsibility and short term flexibility? There are many possibilities, and many nuances. 3. Financial integration in a currency union. This is close to the topic of the next session, the one I will be chairing. We can say more about the issue at that time, but financial market integration is an inevitable feature of the modern open economy. It can take many forms, all of which have implications for exchange rate policy, for currency stabilization, for currency unions, and for policy coordination. These issues all lie on what might be considered a new frontier for monetary economists--beyond the simple macroeconomics we learned in graduate school, and on to broader issues. I am glad to see that these broader issues are within the domain of the research conference. 4. Policy coordination. This is another topic that has been the focus of research and debate since the end of World War II. Coordination clearly broke down in the inter-war period, and analysts continue to have ideas for improving it. At the same time, global institutions have changed dramatically since the end of World War II, and there may be less need for coordination today. I would first reiterate President Duisenberg's distinction between cooperation and coordination. Beyond that, the widespread introduction of floating exchange rates at least in principle provides a shock absorber that makes policy coordination less important than in a fixed-rate world. Provided that currency swings are modest and do not introduce their own instabilities, we should get specific about the exact gains from coordination in the modern world. Getting specific involves you researchers. These are some of the questions that might come up in a conference such as this, today and in the future. There might well be more questions, but this is already a very rich agenda. But you researchers should not limit yourselves to the questions that we policymakers might ask. We will be confronting policy questions and asking for your help. You should also be confronting questions and dealing with them. In the end, we should hope that a common and open research forum like this one will become a significant development in the evolution of monetary policy, on all continents. Here's hoping for a successful enterprise, and here's a challenge for you to make it a successful enterprise.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the issuance of Orders of Restitution against William Chiang, Paul Lee, Joseph C.C. Kuo, Lih Yuh Kuo, and Ching-Tseh Yao, all former directors of the Great Eastern Bank, Flushing, New York. The five individuals, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Orders for alleged breaches of fiduciary duties, violations of law and regulations, and unsafe and unsound banking practices. The Orders require each individual to pay restitution in the amount of $50,000 to Great Eastern Bank. Copies of the Orders are attached.
Remarks by Governor Mark W. Olson At the Second Financial Summit: Challenges and Emerging Risks Facing the Financial Industry, Madrid, Spain July 8, 2002 Financial Markets Regulation in the United States First, my thanks for being invited to participate in the Second International Financial Summit on Financial Regulation. Today I would like to share our experiences in the United States in dealing with this important issue. We are increasingly participating in a world economy, and our financial institutions are increasingly global in scope. Today's sharing of experiences and observations is therefore more than an interesting intellectual exercise. We, indeed, have a shared obligation to understand the evolving nature of our respective industries and to learn from each other's best practices. My opening comments will be brief as they are intended only to stimulate discussion among the panel members and audience. In my remarks, I want first to identify the major trends driving change in the financial services industry. These trends will not be new to you, as they are global, but they will help define our current environment. I will then discuss briefly some issues that may be specific to the United States. As with every country, the financial services industry in the United States is a product of numerous influences. In my country, the most notable of those influences was our Founding Fathers' determination to decentralize authority and to limit the federal government's influence and to place the law and rule-making responsibility for commercial activities with the various states. I will move from there to the major trends in U.S. financial regulation and conclude with a brief description of the evolving regulatory role of the Federal Reserve. Drivers of Change Several common forces are influencing financial services industries around the world. Perhaps most dominant is the extraordinary leap forward in technology that has changed every facet of these industries. The first major technological changes, almost forty years ago, dramatically changed back-office processing. In recent years, technological improvements have changed the delivery of retail financial products to such an extent that our traditional definitions of deposit gathering and lending are in continual need of updating. A second major driver of change is the growing complexity of our largest financial institutions. This complexity is a combination of increased size driven significantly by industry consolidation and by the creation of more-sophisticated financial instruments. A third major change is the continued blurring of lines between financial products and financial industries. In the United States we have, in past years, devoted a great deal of regulatory and legal attention to sorting financial products by industry designation and attempting to confine products with certain characteristics to specific industries. For example, in the 1980s and 1990s we devoted considerable attention to the manner in which a money market fund account with third-party access offered by a securities firm differed from a bank-sponsored interest-bearing checking account. Another cross-industry debate focused on whether fixed or variable rate annuities were fundamentally insurance products, bank products, or simply annuities. Consumers, not surprisingly, have indicated minimal interest in these legal and regulatory squabbles and have just made their own evaluation of how the product characteristics fit with their personal financial needs. These three factors, the advanced technology, the move toward larger and more complex institutions, and the blurring of financial products--in turn have also substantially changed the manner in which institutions measure and manage risk. Those management innovations, themselves, are not only of great interest and importance to regulatory agencies, but they also are forces driving further change. Simply because institutions can measure and manage risk better, they are able to create products that make markets more efficient. Issues Peculiar to the United States In the United States, our tradition of separating the financial, securities, and insurance industries and, more broadly, separating banking and commerce has consumed a significant portion of our regulatory attention in a manner not required of European countries that have adopted the Universal Bank concept. In addition, we have a tradition of multiple chartering options for full-service banks. This tradition flows from the previously described dispersion of legal and regulatory authority. Therefore, not until the Abraham Lincoln Administration in 1864 was our national banking authority created, and only after the 1929 Wall Street panic, was a national securities regulator created. Today, although nationally chartered banks hold the majority of U.S. banking assets (55 percent), the states continue to charter most insured commercial banks (74 percent). We continue to have very active state bank chartering authorities in all fifty states. The insurance industry is the last bastion of a financial services industry without a federal regulator. To this day, insurance regulation continues under the direction of state insurance regulators. Fundamental Regulatory Changes In whatever form, financial services regulation is adapting to the fundamental changes under way in our respective industries. A dramatic change affecting all of the financial services industries is the shift from a paper-based to an electronic commerce environment. This change requires new definitions for certain basic business practices--for example, a redefinition of what constitutes finality of a sale when the entire transaction is conducted electronically. Other examples are determination of what constitutes a signature in a fully electronic transaction or of how state law applies to electronic business transactions, some of which are conducted by multiple parties in multiple states. Other regulatory issues arise when technological advances allow new entities to leapfrog traditional institutions and command major market positions. This phenomenon is most clearly defined in the securities industry, where the electronic communication networks (ECNs)--now only six years old--account for 50 percent of the transactions that take place on NASDAQ. These changes, in turn, have important regulatory implications for banking organizations. The definition of what is or should become a "banking business" can rapidly change and in many cases should change if banks are to remain competitive and innovative in financial markets. A second fundamental change involves bank supervision--it is the shift from a transaction-based to a risk-based focus. As financial institutions increased in size and complexity, it became clear that examiners could not keep pace in the historic manner of examining transactions. Instead, examiners needed to evaluate large, complex institutions' ability to identify and manage risk. For example, in evaluating credit-risk exposures, examiners first determine how credit risk is managed. They look, for example, at such basic elements of risk management as the way the institution establishes its risk parameters and more specific elements of credit administration and credit review. They evaluate risk-management models or tools that the institution uses and their suitability to the relative sophistication of the institution's loan portfolio. Determining the level of individual transaction testing depends, in part, on the results of the initial assessment. Banking regulators are still shifting from transaction-based to risk-based examination procedures, but our ability to keep pace with the increasing size and sophistication of our largest institutions necessitates that we successfully make that transition. Besides looking at credit risk, the Federal Reserve also specifically evaluates banks for market risk, liquidity risk, operational risk, legal risk, and reputational risk. The potential exposure of reputational risk has become quite apparent after the recent experiences of Enron and Arthur Andersen. Current Role of the Federal Reserve Three years ago, the Congress concluded more than twenty years of negotiation and produced a major reform of financial services laws and regulations. In very brief summary, this new law allows banks, securities firms, and insurance underwriters to function using common ownership by a newly authorized entity called a financial holding company. The new law also provides a mechanism for determining prospectively which products or services fit the definition of "financial in nature" or "incidental to financial activity" and therefore qualify as appropriate for a financial holding company. The Federal Reserve has been accorded a major role in deciding these issues and has also been assigned the role of umbrella supervisor of financial holding companies. As such, the Federal Reserve will rely as much as possible on the functional regulators of a company's subsidiary banks, securities firms, and insurance entities, but will oversee the financial soundness of the consolidated organization, including the activities that are otherwise unregulated. Our focus is the potential risk these nonbank activities can present to banks. In addition, the Fed, in conjunction with the Treasury Department, will respond to requests for determination as to whether new products and services meet the test for "financial in nature" or "incidental to financial activity" to be approved for financial holding companies. This change has made our laws more consistent with changes that occurred in the marketplace and has provided a mechanism for allowing new products as the marketplace evolves. Conclusion The past decade has been a time of dynamic change in the financial services industry, and there are no signs that the pace of change will abate. An important component of this change is the growing global reach of many of our financial entities. Financial regulators throughout the world will need to continue responding to these marketplace changes and providing oversight consistent with our safety and soundness responsibilities. For that reason, I look forward to today's discussion of financial markets regulation.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Rurban Financial Corp., Defiance, Ohio; The State Bank and Trust Company, Defiance, Ohio; the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland; and the Ohio Division of Financial Institutions. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
Joint Press Release Department of the Treasury Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System National Credit Union Administration Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Office of the Comptroller of the Currency Office of Thrift Supervision Commodity Futures Trading Commission Securities and Exchange Commission For Immediate Release July 17, 2002 CONTACT: BETSY HOLAHAN 202-622-2960 Treasury and Federal Financial Regulators Issue Patriot Act Regulations on Customer Identification The Department of the Treasury and seven federal financial regulators today issued proposed rules that would require certain financial institutions to establish minimum procedures for identifying and verifying the identity of customers seeking to open new financial accounts. Written comments on the proposed rules may be submitted within 45 days of their publication in the Federal Register, which is expected to occur later this week. These proposed rules implement section 326 of the USA PATRIOT Act, which directs the issuance of regulations requiring financial institutions to implement reasonable procedures for (1) verifying the identity of any person seeking to open an account, to the extent reasonable and practicable; (2) maintaining records of the information used to verify the person's identity and; (3) determining whether the person appears on any list of known or suspected terrorists or terrorist organizations. Final rules implementing section 326 must be effective by October 25, 2002. The proposed rules seek to protect the U.S. financial system from money laundering and terrorist financing. Additionally, by requiring identity verification procedures for all new accounts opened after the effective date of the final rules, the rules could also protect consumers against various forms of fraud, including identity theft. The proposed rules were developed jointly by the Treasury Department, Treasury's Financial Crimes Enforcement Network and seven federal financial regulators, including the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Commodity Futures Trading Commission, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, National Credit Union Administration, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Office of Thrift Supervision, and Securities and Exchange Commission. The proposed rules outline requirements for the following financial institutions: banks and trust companies, savings associations, credit unions, securities brokers and dealers, mutual funds, futures commission merchants, and futures introducing brokers. The financial institutions subject to the proposed rules would be required to establish programs specifying procedures for obtaining identifying information from customers seeking to open new accounts. This identifying information would be essentially the same information currently obtained by most financial institutions and for individual customers generally, including the customer's name, address, date of birth and an identification number (for U.S. persons, a social security number and for non-U.S. persons, a similar number from a government-issued document). Customers with signature authority over business accounts would furnish substantially similar information. A financial institution's program would also have to contain procedures to verify the identity of customers within a reasonable period of time. The proposed rules contemplate that financial institutions will generally use the same forms of identity verification that are already in place, such as examining driver's licenses, passports, credit reports, and other similar means. While every program must meet these minimum elements, the proposed rules give financial institutions the flexibility to tailor their procedures as appropriate, taking into consideration an individual institution's size, location, and type of business. In developing these regulations, the importance of many factors was taken into account, including the need to guard the U.S. financial system against terrorist financing and money laundering, the legitimate privacy interests of customers, and the need for these regulations to be effectively integrated into the daily operations of financial institutions. Proposed rules:
Joint Press Release Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Securities and Exchange Commission For Immediate Release July 18, 2002 FEDERAL RESERVE AND SEC JOINTLY ANNOUNCE ADMINISTRATIVE ACTIONS AGAINST THE PNC FINANCIAL SERVICES GROUP, INC. The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission on Thursday jointly announced the issuance of administrative actions addressing bank supervisory and securities law-related matters against The PNC Financial Services Group, Inc., Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, a bank holding company. Under the agencies' respective statutory authorities, the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland executed a Written Agreement with The PNC Financial Services Group, Inc., and the SEC issued an Order Instituting Public Administrative Proceedings Pursuant to Section 8A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21C of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 against The PNC Financial Services Group, Inc. Copies of the Federal Reserve's Written Agreement and the SEC's Press Release and Order are attached.
Joint Press Release Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Office of the Comptroller of the Currency Office of Thrift Supervision For Immediate Release July 22, 2002 FEDERAL FINANCIAL INSTITUTION REGULATORS DRAFT GUIDANCE ON CREDIT CARD LENDING Under the auspices of the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of Thrift Supervision have developed account management and loss allowance guidance for credit card lending. A draft of this interagency guidance, which the agencies intend to issue on August 16, 2002, is attached. The draft guidance would apply to all institutions under the agencies' supervision that offer credit card programs. It describes the agencies' expectations for prudent risk management practices for credit card activities, particularly with regard to credit line management, over-limit accounts, and workouts. The draft guidance also addresses income recognition and loss allowance practices for credit card lending. The agencies recognize that some institutions may require time to implement changes in policies, practices, and systems in order to achieve full consistency with the credit card guidance. Such institutions would be expected to work with their primary federal regulator to ensure implementation of needed changes as promptly as possible after the issuance of the guidance. With respect to those elements of the guidance that reflect existing, longstanding regulatory reporting requirements, the agencies' expect, as always, continued and ongoing compliance. As the agencies complete their review of the draft document, they are interested in the views of affected institutions and other interested parties as to whether the draft provides clear guidance concerning the agencies' expectations in the areas of credit card account management, risk management, and loss allowance practices or, instead, has "fatal flaws" in these areas. Institutions and other parties that choose to respond should provide their views electronically no later than 5:00 p.m. on August 9, 2002 . Responses to the agencies should be submitted electronically to the FFIEC Web site, (click on the option ). Federal Reserve Dave Skidmore (202) 452-2955 FDIC Frank Gresock (202) 898-6634 OCC Bob Garsson (202) 874-5770 OTS Chris Smith (202) 906-6688
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today the approval of the application of Nordea Bank Finland Plc, Helsinki, Finland, to establish a branch in New York, New York and acquire ownership of a commercial lending company, American Scandinavian Banking Corp., New York, New York. Attached is the Boards Order relating to this action.
Remarks by Governor Mark W. Olson Before the Fergus Falls Rotary Club, Fergus Falls, Minnesota July 26, 2002 Economic change in rural America Good afternoon. I am delighted to have this opportunity to talk with you, and I am enjoying being among old friends and neighbors here in Fergus Falls. When I considered my remarks for today, I reflected on my years in Fergus Falls. My reflection included the benefits of the small-town quality of life that I experienced both while growing up and as a banker focusing on the economic realities of small towns. I am sure that many people throughout rural America have experienced the conflicting realities of rural economic life. On the one hand, the appeal is enormous. People born and raised in small towns often want to raise their families in such an environment. Less common, but not rare, are people who spent formative years in larger cities and want instead to experience the more hassle-free style of small-town life. For many people who feel so inclined, the barrier to staying, returning, or moving to rural America is finding a job. For most of the last century, rural America experienced a continual outmigration of its young people, who moved to population centers where job opportunities were more plentiful. That pattern was certainly true of my generation. But I was both surprised and pleased upon moving back to Fergus Falls at age thirty-three to discover that a significant number of the people moving back here were professional people who could have found similar employment virtually anywhere in the country. Numerous doctors, lawyers, dentists, educators, and other professionals of my generation actively sought a combination of life style and professional opportunity in communities such as Fergus Falls. It struck me at the time that, if professional people see the opportunity to live in rural areas as a first choice rather than as a default option, and if job opportunities permitted, rural America could experience renewed growth. Further, I thought that if this situation was true for Fergus Falls, it was also true elsewhere in rural America. Therefore, I was not entirely surprised to learn that, since the 1990s, rural America has been experiencing a resurgence of economic opportunity. Consider the following: During the 1990s, rural America saw population growth, reversing a trend of several decades. More than half the rural counties in the nation experienced such growth. Between 1990 and 1999, 2.2 million more Americans moved from the city to the country than moved from the country to the city. There are 2 million more jobs in rural America today than there were a decade ago. These facts are good news for rural America, but it is also true that the benefits of the migration to rural America fall unevenly. For communities in rural America to provide the benefits of rural living to more residents and, in turn, for communities to benefit from an increased population base, they must first understand the economic changes that affect the rural economy. Today I will begin with a brief historical review, then discuss the changing dynamics of economies in rural America, and close by identifying the factors that will influence development. For more than a century, change has been the norm for rural communities. Perhaps the most profound shift has been the transformation of the economic base from a primarily agrarian system of small farms to a more diversified structure with not only some farming but also service and manufacturing activities. As late as the 1920s, about one-third of the U.S. population lived on farms. But early in the last century, farmers began to substitute tractors and combines for horses and mules, and the resulting gains in efficiency meant that, over time, fewer farmers were needed to keep production at a high level. This push from the farm sector worked with the lure of salaried jobs in urban areas to spark a massive exodus of rural residents to the cities. Later, around World War II, crop yields increased dramatically, boosted by the widespread adoption of hybrid varieties and the use of commercial fertilizers and chemicals; the production of livestock products increased rapidly as well. These further gains in farm productivity helped continue the migration from rural areas to urban ones; and for decades, rural areas, in general, lost population. The population of Otter Tail County, for instance, fell about 5 percent in each decade from the 1940s through the 1970s. For a time, the widespread population declines in rural communities seemed inexorable. But around 1990, demographers began to notice an upturn in the population of many rural areas of the country. To examine the extent of this apparent change in migration patterns, analysts at the U.S. Department of Agriculture, using data from the Census Bureau, compared population changes in the first half of the 1990s with those in the second half. They found that roughly 480 rural counties lost population in both five-year spans but that almost three times as many gained in both periods; another 480 or so had mixed changes in population. Here in Otter Tail County, one can easily see the two extremes in these recent demographic patterns. We are on a dividing line between regions that in the 1990s experienced persistent population declines and regions that seem to have begun an upswing in residents. To our west and south--in Minnesota and fanning out through North Dakota, South Dakota, Nebraska, and Iowa--most rural counties lost residents throughout the 1990s. In contrast, counties to our east and north generally saw substantial gains in population throughout the decade. Otter Tail County is solidly among the growing counties: According to the Census data, our population increased 12-3/4 percent over the 1990s. Why have counties such as Otter Tail been among the winners in the population migration? To examine why some counties emerged from the 1990s with population increases, we need to review the changing nature of the rural economy. The most notable change in our rural economy is the decline of agriculture as a dominating industry. This statement is not news to Otter Tail County residents for the county has experienced a continual decline in the number of full-time farms. From 1992 to 1997, Otter Tail County experienced an 11 percent decline in the number of full-time farms. However, over that same five-year period, the market value of farm products sold from Otter Tail County farms increased 18 percent, to more than $200 million. This pattern is typical of rural areas throughout the United States. The total output of agricultural products continues to grow, but fewer people and fewer full-time farms are producing and selling our nation's crops and livestock. A less evident, but still important, trend is in the manufacturing sector. Though manufacturing was thought by many to be the primary alternative to agriculture as a source of employment in rural areas, a recent study indicates that manufacturing jobs in rural areas have increased only slightly since the mid-1970s. Though job growth in the manufacturing sector has been slow, it is important to note that manufacturing is the largest category of employment in one out of five rural counties. The substantial growth in jobs in rural America over the past decade has occurred in the services sector. This sector includes such producer services as financial, legal, and business support services. It also includes important social services such as health and education. Finally, it includes the consumer services involved in providing recreational and personal services. Other areas that are growing, though more slowly, are retail and government services. The various parts of the service sector of the economy have grown for numerous reasons, but for purposes of today's discussion an important reason is that these job categories are largely independent of the natural resources of a given area. Earlier in our history, the areas with the most abundant natural resources, such as rich agricultural land and mineral or energy resources, determined, to a great extent, the viability of a local economy. With the dramatic shift in job growth to service-related industries, many other factors affect the economic viability of a given rural area. Examples of such factors are the proximity to metropolitan areas and the access to major highway systems. For the past two decades, these two factors have been the most important in distinguishing strong economic performers in rural areas. Though the statistics do not yet indicate it, these characteristics will likely fade in importance as the growth in electronic commerce continues to minimize the need for proximity to urban areas. A factor that has been important for economic growth for two decades in rural areas is the availability of scenic and recreational amenities. Several Northern Minnesota counties, including Otter Tail, have benefited from these natural amenities. An important component of the growing economic base of counties with this characteristic has been the impact of retirees, who now represent a significant and highly mobile economic force. The phenomenon of aging baby boomers has made retirement more than just a demographic fact of life; it is an economic source of strength for rural areas that retirees find attractive. A consistent factor identified with rural economic growth is lower labor and business costs. A recent study by the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis identified "underemployment" as a characteristic of the rural economy in this area. As communities assess their availability of labor resources, they discover that low unemployment does not always accurately reflect labor availability, such as when higher- paying opportunities generate job applicants in numbers disproportionate to the unemployment rate for that area. A challenge for rural areas, however, is not to be content with being the low-cost option of available labor. Instead, rural America's communities are working to grow value by generating higher-skilled jobs in order to attract better-paying and more stable career opportunities. Two other factors affect the economic viability of rural areas. First, good educational facilities, such as colleges and technical training schools, and a better-educated work force correlate very strongly with economic growth. Second, as highlighted by a recent Federal Reserve study, high agglomeration--a concentration of business activity--tends to lower business costs by facilitating access to specialized materials or business services. In summary, the economic prosperity of rural America is no longer tied exclusively to the geographic or natural resources of the immediate area. Communities in rural areas can affect their economic future by understanding the changes that have occurred in rural America and adjusting to them. I would like to take a few minutes to consider the roles of the financial sector and of the Federal Reserve in rural development. Certainly, a strong and active banking community is a tremendous asset in an area's development. Experienced loan officers who are well acquainted with their markets can channel funds into those loans that are most likely to benefit the local economy. With regard to my institution's role in promoting the growth of rural communities, the Federal Reserve is charged with maintaining credit conditions that are conducive to our nation's overall economic progress. To be sure, our main tool, monetary policy, is a blunt instrument that cannot effectively be targeted toward individual industries or particular regions. However, the Federal Reserve can help create a credit climate that fosters rural progress in general, a climate in which the natural advantages of individual communities can be realized. We nurture this progressive credit climate by striving to maintain low inflation, which makes it easier for entrepreneurs to bear the long-term risks associated with creating new enterprises. We also strive to maintain strong banking organizations that can dependably offer the wide range of financial services that a growing community requires. Finally, we promote sound lending practices among banking organizations so that solid enterprises have adequate access to credit and so that the accumulated capital of the community is not dissipated by lending for overly risky schemes. As I mentioned earlier, we cannot target our monetary policy toward particular industries or regions. However, the Federal Reserve has developed a number of ways to monitor the effects of its policies on various parts of the economy. For instance, we conduct a quarterly Survey of the Terms of Bank Lending to Farmers, which we use to follow credit conditions in the agricultural sector, and we publish these data with other information on farm financial conditions in the Agricultural Finance Databook. In addition, our Reserve Banks--the Minneapolis Bank covers the Fergus Falls area--are a vital source of information on regional economic developments. This information includes the Beige Book reports that are compiled by the staff at each Reserve Bank before meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee. The Federal Reserve Banks have initiated various programs to study rural trends and promote economic development in their regions. In broad terms, the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City recently established the Center for the Study of Rural America, which is intended to furnish the Federal Reserve and the nation with timely data and analyses of the progress of rural areas. Locally, the Minneapolis Bank has a Community Affairs Department that has been involved in several programs to disseminate information about rural development in this region. The Federal Reserve Banks of Minneapolis and Kansas City together with staff members at the Federal Reserve Board in Washington, D.C., are primarily responsible for assembling today's analysis. To conclude, as a product of rural America, I find that being an advocate of the benefits of small town life is quite natural. Also, having participated for many years in the economic development effort of this community, I have been very aware of the traditional difficulty in attracting people to our communities. The trend that began within the past ten years to reverse decades of outmigration is encouraging, but the benefits will not fall evenly in all areas. As economic growth in rural America becomes no longer tied primarily to the natural resources of their immediate area, individual communities will have more opportunity than ever to affect their own growth and economic prosperity.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among the Community First Bank and Trust, Celina, Ohio, the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, and the Ohio Division of Financial Institutions. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the applications by Bank of Orange County, Fountain Valley, California, to merge with Cerritos Valley Bank, Artesia, California, and establish branches at the former locations of Cerritos. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.