Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan Financial literacy Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate February 5, 2002 I am pleased to be here this morning to discuss the importance of improving financial literacy and learning for consumers. Given the importance of accurate and timely information in the financial services industry, it is not surprising that this sector has benefited enormously from the innovative application of new technologies that have facilitated the development of a wide range of new financial providers and products. For consumers of household and business credit, computer and telecommunications technologies have lowered the cost and broadened the scope of financial services. As a consequence, we have seen a proliferation of specialized lenders and new financial products that are tailored to meet very specific market needs. At the same time, the development of credit-scoring tools and the securitization of loan pools holds the potential for opening doors to national credit markets for both consumers and businesses. In addition to technological advancement, deregulation has created important structural changes in the financial services industry and contributed significantly to creating a marketplace that is increasingly competitive and highly innovative as a result of the entry or expansion of new players. Throughout our banking history, we have seen significant adjustments made to existing policies to enable markets to respond to the demand for services. These structural changes have heightened competition, resulting in market efficiencies that continue to help drive down costs and foster the emergence of increasingly diverse and highly specialized organizations. Through these entities, which range from banks and brokerage firms that offer their services exclusively through electronically based delivery mechanisms to locally based public-private partnerships that provide counseling and financing arrangements to facilitate access to mortgage credit for low- and moderate-income families, consumers have increased access to a variety of credit and savings instruments. Corporations, for example, often allow employees to self-direct their investments in pension and other benefit plans, whereas employers dictated such decisions twenty years ago, and the advent of on-line brokerage firms has enabled individual investors to directly conduct stock transactions. For an increasingly complex financial system to function effectively, widespread dissemination of timely financial and other relevant information among educated market participants is essential if they are to make the type of informed judgments that promote their own well-being and foster the most efficient allocation of capital. However beneficial, constant change, of course, can be unsettling, and one challenge we face is overcoming such anxieties. But just as the rapid adoption of new information technologies has expanded the scope and utility of our financial products, so has it increased our means for addressing some of the challenges these changes pose. For example, just as universities provide remote learning options to allow students to pursue continuing education via the Internet, consumers can utilize software to create customized budgets to develop long-term savings strategies for retirement or their children's college education. In both scenarios, technological advances represent the opportunity for achieving efficiencies and exercising preferences, but only when the end users possess the knowledge of how to access pertinent information and how to capitalize on those choices. As in the workplace, fostering education that will enable individuals to overcome their reluctance or inability to take full advantage of technological advances and product innovation in the financial sector can be a means of increasing economic opportunity. As market forces continue to expand the range of providers of financial services, consumers will have more choice and flexibility in how they manage their financial matters. They will also need to accumulate the appropriate knowledge about how to use new technologies and how to make financial decisions in an informed manner. Indeed, surveys repeatedly demonstrate a strong link between education and the use of new financial technologies. For example, data from the Federal Reserve's Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) suggest that a higher level of education significantly increases the chances that a household will use an electronic banking product. In particular, in 1998, the typical user of an electronic source of information for savings or borrowing decisions had a college degree--a level of education currently achieved by only about one-third of U.S. households. These most recent data from the SCF exhibit a mixed picture of the financial status of households, providing evidence that we need to reach out to those who have not been able to participate fully. For example, while the median real net worth for all families increased 17-1/2 percent between 1995 and 1998, this trend did not hold where the head of the household had a high-school level of education or less, family earnings were less than $25,000 annually, or the ethnicity of the respondent was non-white or Hispanic. That families with low-to-moderate incomes and minorities did not appear to fully benefit from the highly favorable economic developments of the mid-1990s is, of course, troubling, and the data from the 2001 survey that will be available later this year will warrant a detailed look. Through 1998 we found that families with incomes below $25,000 did increase their direct or indirect holdings of stock, and more reported that they had a transactions account. However, they were less likely to hold nonfinancial assets--particularly homes, which constitute the bulk of the value of assets for those below the top quintile according to income. At the same time, one encouraging finding from the survey is that the homeownership rate among minorities rose from 44 percent to 47 percent between 1995 and 1998, and according to the Census surveys, the rate edged above 48 percent as of the fourth quarter of 2001. This trend may be a sign of improved access to credit for minorities. Other findings of the SCF through 1998 include the rise in families' median level of debt burden, financial stress (defined as debt payments that represent more than 40 percent of income), and incidence of late debt repayment. The findings showed increases in each of these categories across all income and age groups, with the highest levels of financial stress among households headed by people 65 and older and earning less than $25,000 annually. The recent evident rise in subprime loan delinquencies is of some concern in this regard. In considering means to improve the financial status of families, education can play a critical role by equipping consumers with the knowledge required to make wise decisions when choosing among the myriad of financial products and providers. This is especially the case for populations that have traditionally been underserved by our financial system. In particular, financial literacy education may help to prevent vulnerable consumers from becoming entangled in financially devastating credit arrangements. In the quest to stem the occurrence of abusive, and at times illegal, lending practices, regulators, consumer advocates, and policymakers all agree that consumer education is essential to combating predatory lending. An informed borrower is simply less vulnerable to fraud and abuse. Financial literacy can empower consumers to be better shoppers, allowing them to obtain goods and services at lower cost. This effectively increases their household budgets, providing more opportunity to consume and save or invest. In addition, comprehensive education can help provide individuals with the financial knowledge necessary to create household budgets, initiate savings plans, manage debt, and make strategic investment decisions for their retirement or their children's education. Having these basic financial planning skills can help families to meet their near-term obligations and to maximize their longer-term financial well-being. While data to measure the efficacy of financial education are not plentiful, the limited research is encouraging. For example, a recent study by Freddie Mac, one of the nation's largest purchasers of home mortgages, finds that homebuyers who obtain structured homeownership education have reduced rates of loan delinquency. Similarly, an evaluation conducted by the National Endowment for Financial Education on its high-school-based programs found that participation in financial-planning programs improved students' knowledge, behavior, and confidence with respect to personal finance, with nearly half of participants beginning to save more as a result of the program. Another Freddie Mac study of the relationship between financial behavior and financial outcomes revealed that comprehension of the general principles of sound financial behavior, such as budgeting and saving, is actually more beneficial in producing successful financial results over time than specific and detailed information on financial transactions. These findings underscore the importance of beginning the learning process as early as possible. Indeed, in many respects, improving basic financial education at the elementary and secondary school level is essential to providing a foundation for financial literacy that can help prevent younger people from making poor financial decisions that can take years to overcome. In particular, it has been my experience that competency in mathematics--both in numerical manipulation and in understanding its conceptual foundations--enhances a person's ability to handle the more ambiguous and qualitative relationships that dominate our day-to-day financial decisionmaking. For example, through an understanding of compounding interest, one can appreciate the cumulative benefit of routine saving. Similarly, learning how to conduct research in a library or on the Internet helps one find information to evaluate decisions. Focusing on improving fundamental mathematic and problem-solving skills can develop knowledgeable consumers who can take full advantage of the sophisticated financial services offered in an ever-changing marketplace. As I noted earlier, we have seen the marketplace respond to an increased demand for conceptual job skills by increasing the range of educational options available to individuals. We are also beginning to see similar efforts to provide consumers with information and training that will improve their knowledge about financial matters throughout their lives. For example, the U.S. military, in response to surveys that revealed that nearly one-third of enlisted service members reported moderate-to-severe difficulty in paying bills, has mandated that all incoming enlisted personnel receive financial education. Some school systems have introduced financial-management classes as part of their high-school curricula and many employers are taking up the challenge as well. At the Federal Reserve Board, for example, interest in financial education prompted an employee committee to host a seminar on financial-planning strategies, and our Consumer and Community Affairs staff recently hosted several well-attended educational programs for Federal Reserve employees, providing information on qualifying for a mortgage and managing debt. In fact, in conjunction with National Consumers' Week, today an additional employee seminar on budgeting is underway Despite the existence and proliferation of numerous training programs offered by a wide variety of public, private, and nonprofit organizations, evaluation of the efficacy of such programs has just recently begun. A study commissioned and published by the Fannie Mae Foundation recommended that financial education programs equip consumers of all ages and across all socioeconomic groups with the ability to know when they need information, where they can find it, and how to apply it. The Federal Reserve also has a keen interest in measuring the effectiveness of financial literacy programs. For example, we hosted a forum highlighting best practices in credit education focusing on effective tools and techniques and identifying programmatic challenges and issues. More recently, we have included studies that evaluate the impact of such training initiatives in our call for papers for the Community Affairs Research Conference scheduled for the spring of 2003. Additionally, our Community Affairs and Public Information Offices have embarked on a national initiative to highlight the importance of financial literacy and heighten the visibility of economic education programs. Quantitative study of the quality and long-term success of education and training will be of particular interest to the Federal Reserve System, as we develop and distribute a wide variety of financial and economic literacy products. Both individually and through long-standing partnerships with a variety of local, regional, and national organizations, each of the twelve Federal Reserve Banks and the Board provide extensive information on these topics to a wide range of audiences, including school-age children, low- and moderate-income families, and minority and immigrant populations. The scope of these activities ranges from the sponsorship of competitions on economic principles for high-school students and workshops on homeownership and wealth-building strategies to the development of computer-based tools for understanding mortgage borrowing and creating household budgets and savings plans. The economic educators of the Federal Reserve System launched an interactive web site offering students, educators, and the general public an introduction to the workings of the Fed and the nation's banking system. The goal is to offer consumers a clearer picture of, for example, how the Federal Reserve's decisions influence the economy and consequently affect their monetary choices. In closing, let me simply reiterate that the pace of technological change and competitive pressures can only increase. These changes are affecting both financial and nonfinancial institutions around the world. We cannot know the precise directions in which technological change will take us, but as in recent years, the role of banks and other providers of financial services will surely be significantly affected by the same basic forces that guide the real economy. Building bridges between community organizations, our educational institutions, and private business will be an essential aspect of our efforts to increase familiarity with new technological and financial tools that are fundamental to improving individual economic well-being. And the success of such efforts will have a significant bearing on how well prepared we are to meet the challenges of an increasingly knowledge-based economy.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Commodity Futures Trading Commission Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Federal Trade Commission National Credit Union Administration Office of the Comptroller of the Currency Office of Thrift Supervision Securities and Exchange Commission FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE February 6, 2002 Agencies Publish "Privacy Choices for Your Personal Financial Information" In conjunction with National Consumer Protection Week, several federal agencies today released a guide to help consumers make informed choices about whether to allow their personal financial information to be shared. Privacy Choices for Your Personal Financial Information guides consumers through the choices they face as a result of the privacy provisions of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act of 1999. The theme for National Consumer Protection Week this year is "Consumer Confidential: The Privacy Story." Federal privacy laws give consumers the right to prevent, or "opt out" of, some sharing of their personal financial information. These laws balance consumers' right to privacy with financial companies' need to provide information for normal business purposes. The consumer information explains the privacy notices that consumers receive from their banks and other financial companies, what choices consumers face, and consumers' right to opt out of information sharing. The materials encourage consumers to: Read all privacy notices; Get answers to questions from the financial companies that provided the notices; If applicable, decide whether to opt out; and If they want to opt out, follow the instructions in the notice - and, if necessary, shop around for a financial institution with the privacy policy they want. The agencies include the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Commodity Futures Trading Commission, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Federal Trade Commission, National Credit Union Administration, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Office of Thrift Supervision, and Securities and Exchange Commission. Single printed copies of the brochure are available free of charge upon request from the member agencies. The brochure also can be printed from or from the agencies' web sites. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System: The Board's web site at and from Publications, Stop 127, Federal Reserve Board, 20th & C Streets, NW, Washington, DC 20551, 202-452-3245. Commodity Futures Trading Commission: CFTC's web site at and from the Office of Public Affairs, Three Lafayette Center, 1155 21st Street, NW, Washington, DC 20581, 202- 418-5080. Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation: FDIC's web site at and from the Public Information Center, 801 17th Street, NW, Room 100, Washington, DC 20434, 800-276-6003 or 202-416-6940. Federal Trade Commission: FTC's web site at and from the Consumer Response Center, Room 130, 600 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW, Washington, DC 20580, 877-FTC-HELP (877 382-4357, toll-free); TDD for the hearing impaired 202-326-2502. National Credit Union Administration: NCUA's web site at and from the Publications Center, 1775 Duke Street, Alexandria, VA 22314, 703-518-6340. Office of the Comptroller of the Currency: OCC's web site at and from Communications, Mail Stop 3-2, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, 250 E Street, SW, Washington, DC 20219, 202-874-4700. Office of Thrift Supervision: The OTS's web site at and from Publications, Office of Thrift Supervision, 1700 G Street, NW, Washington, DC 20552, 202-906-6410 (OTS Publications Hotline). Securities and Exchange Commission: The SEC's web site at and from the Office of Investor Education and Assistance, 450 5th Street, NW, Washington, DC 20549-0213, 202-942-9634 (fax). Media Contacts: Federal Reserve Susan Stawick 202-452-2955 CFTC Dennis Holden 202-418-5088 FDIC David Barr 202-898-6992 FTC Claudia Bourne Farrell 202-326-2181 NCUA Cherie Umbel 703-518-6337 OCC Robert M. Garsson 202-874-5770 Dean DeBuck 202-874-5770 OTS Chris Smith 202-906-6677 SEC John Nester 202-942-0032
For immediate release
Remarks by Governor Mark W. Olson At the Center for the Study of Mergers and Acquisitions, University of Miami School of Law, Sixth Annual Institute on Mergers and Acquisitions, Miami Beach, Florida February 7, 2002 Observations on the Evolution of the Financial Services Industry and Public Policy It is a pleasure to visit the University of Miami School of Law, and I thank you for inviting me. In line with the theme of your Institute, today I would like to discuss the ongoing consolidation of American banking, and to some extent the conglomeration of the American financial system. This trend is one of the most notable features of the contemporary financial landscape. Because the health of the financial sector is central to the health of the entire economy, understanding the evolution of the financial services industry is important to us all. As a third generation banker and having spent much of my adult life on financial services public policy issues, the implications of this evolution are of particular interest to me. I will first briefly trace the evolving structure of the financial services industry, including some of the more interesting developments since the passage in November 1999 of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act. I will suggest that the U.S. financial services industry will likely remain a highly diverse and competitive industry with room for many successful business models. I will then outline what I believe are the key supervisory and regulatory issues facing bank supervisors in two critical areas: bank safety and soundness and antitrust enforcement. I will argue, among other things, that the regulatory system set up by Gramm-Leach-Bliley provides a sound and workable model for maintaining a secure and competitive financial system. The Evolving Structure of the Financial Services Industry Commercial banking, the largest single component of the financial services industry, has experienced massive consolidation since 1980. The number of banking organizations in the United States declined from around 12,300 in 1980 to slightly more than 6,600 by the middle of 2001. But in comparison with virtually any other developed economy of the world, the 6,600 existing banking organizations is an extraordinarily large number. It reflects the origin of banking in this country. Until President Lincoln signed the National Banking Act, all bank charters were state charters. Thus, for our first one hundred years, we had a tradition of a large number of relatively small community-based banks. The rapid consolidation was initiated here in the Southeastern states in the 1980s with the relaxation or removal of previously existing legal restrictions on intrastate and interstate banking and branching. Following a decade and a half of significant consolidation, the percentage of banking assets held by the top ten banking organizations more than doubled, from about 22 percent in 1980 to about 45 percent in 2001, while the share held by the top twenty-five organizations increased from about 33 percent to 61 percent. Despite the scale of consolidation and the substantial increase in banking concentration at the national level, banking concentration within local market areas has, on average, declined a bit over the past two decades. This apparent anomaly largely reflects the fact that many of the mergers and acquisitions have been between banking organizations in different geographic markets. In those instances when the merging parties did serve the same local markets, the dynamic nature of competition and antitrust enforcement by the Federal Reserve and the Department of Justice has helped to limit increases in local-market concentration. The stability of average local-market concentration over time is noteworthy because research suggests that competition for retail customers takes place substantially at the local-market level and concentration is an important determinant of competition. A second factor impacting the declining concentration in local markets was the expanded number of bank branches during that period. Though the number of banks has declined, the number of bank branches has increased. Besides commercial banking, other components of the financial service industry have experienced some consolidation in recent years. However, consolidation involving nonbank financial institutions such as insurance and securities firms has been much more modest than that in commercial banking, most likely because of the absence of preexisting restrictions on geographic expansion for these types of firms. Like banks, insurance underwriting firms vary widely in size, ranging from several large national insurers to numerous small local or technically specialized firms. Investment banking has been more heavily concentrated for some time, no doubt in part reflecting the greater geographic expanse of the markets for their services. In the past two decades, some degree of consolidation has also occurred across different segments of the financial services industry. During the 1980s and 1990s, as the Federal Reserve modified its regulations, many bank holding companies established so-called section 20 subsidiaries to carry out securities activities that had not been permitted within banking organizations since passage of the Banking Act of 1933, or Glass-Steagall. In 1998, Travelers and Citicorp combined to form Citigroup in anticipation of the repeal of Glass-Steagall and the enactment of more liberal legislation. In November 1999, the Congress passed the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, which in fact allowed firms to combine banking, insurance, and securities activities within a financial holding company, or FHC. In the two years since the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act went into effect, nearly 600 financial holding companies have been formed. Although the act was initially perceived by some to benefit primarily large institutions, approximately three-quarters of the current domestic FHCs have assets of less than $500 million, and about 45 percent of these have assets of less than $150 million. Virtually all of the new activities undertaken by FHCs have been in insurance sales and merchant banking. In addition, most of the previous section 20 subsidiaries have converted to traditional securities underwriting and dealing subsidiaries of FHCs. When the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act was passed, many observers predicted that it would dramatically transform the structure of the financial services industry through the formation of large financial conglomerates. Such a transformation has not yet occurred. My take is somewhat different. By 1999 significant cross-industry affiliations had occurred without the benefit of evolving legislation. Gramm-Leach-Bliley brought the statute more in line with marketplace changes rather than creating opportunities for entry to new markets. Many view the lack of large mergers across different segments of the industry as an indication that the act has failed to achieve its objectives. As a result, it is probably the case that most bank holding companies that wanted to engage in securities dealing were already doing so before the passage of Gramm-Leach-Bliley. Also, though banks have engaged in selling insurance for some time, it is not clear that many of them are really interested in underwriting insurance. Indeed, Citigroup's recent decision to spin off its property and casualty business suggests that the benefits of combining commercial banking and the full range of insurance activities may be less than initially anticipated. Still, the concept of the financial conglomerate has received a great deal of attention in recent years because of the diminishing distinctions across financial services firms. It is useful to recall that the retail financial industry went through a phase of conglomeration about twenty years ago in the movement toward the "financial supermarket." The acquisitions of Coldwell Banker and Dean Witter by Sears, Shearson by American Express, Schwab by Bank of America, and Bache by Prudential come to mind. Despite the enthusiasm for the financial supermarket in the early 1980s, by the end of the decade the concept had stagnated, and the benefits of specialization and the provision of niche service were recognized instead. I believe that this past experience with business conglomerates could be tempering some enthusiasm for affiliations among the larger financial firms. The difficulty of finding synergies, planning management structures, engaging in post-merger integration, and other management issues may be influencing the willingness of larger firms to affiliate. These same experiences should temper our views of the future structure of the financial services industry. Managing much larger, more-diversified firms clearly offers both challenges and benefits. Although this business strategy may be optimal for some, it is surely not the best approach for all financial services firms. So what will the financial services industry look like in the future? Obviously, no one can say for sure, but I expect that consolidation will continue to occur both within and across segments of the financial industry. The number of commercial banks is likely to continue to decline, but I expect that we will always have a large number of banks in the United States and that they will vary considerably in their size and geographic scope. As one telling piece of evidence, I note that over the 1980s and the 1990s more than 4,000 new commercial bank charters were granted in the United States. Essentially all of these new banks were quite small, but were able to achieve profitability in a relatively short period of time. This having been said, we may well see the formation of a few very large financial conglomerates, but we will almost certainly continue to see many firms, both in banking and other financial businesses, that specialize in providing a narrower range of financial products and services. We will probably see an increase in the number of combinations between U.S.-based and foreign-based entities, but many strictly domestic financial service providers will remain. In short, I believe that diversity in size, product offerings, and geographic scope will continue to characterize the American financial services industry for many years to come. Some Implications for Supervision and Regulation What do these trends and projections mean for bank supervision and regulation? A full answer to that question is too tall an order for today, but I would like to highlight what I consider some of the most important implications for maintaining a safe, sound, and competitive banking system. Perhaps the best place to begin is with an understanding of the regulatory framework of Gramm-Leach-Bliley. This landmark legislation facilitated the development of truly diversified financial institutions, allowing the market system to decide what arrangements are viable. It also established a supervisory structure for balancing the difficult tradeoffs that arise when firms that are rightly subject to different types of regulation are combined into one entity. The basic problem was how to allow banks and other financial institutions to respond to the evolving marketplace, and, at the same time, preserve the benefits of the financial safety net provided to banks--all without extending that safety net to other financial activities and thereby expanding the inevitable incentives to take risk and expose taxpayers to loss. The Gramm-Leach-Bliley compromise was to require some separation of financial activities into different subsidiaries of a common parent, the financial holding company. Under this approach, so-called functional regulators continue to play their necessary roles for a particular type of legal entity, but one umbrella supervisor is also assigned a critical function. The umbrella supervisor's responsibilities are clearly focused on protecting the insured and regulated depository subsidiaries of financial holding companies. Under this overall framework, the umbrella supervisor is to rely on the functional regulator as much as possible and is allowed to examine functionally regulated affiliates if, and only if, it believes that their activities are creating undue risk for the insured depository affiliate. Put differently, the umbrella supervisor is charged with evaluating risks in the organization that could affect any bank or other insured depository affiliate. The Congress chose the Federal Reserve to be the umbrella supervisor based on our many years of experience with supervising bank holding companies and the Fed's central role in managing financial crises. The supervisory and regulatory framework established by Gramm-Leach-Bliley is a logical extension of the development of bank supervision in this country. The Board has moved assertively and flexibly to implement the full intent of the law, and we are focused on controlling risk exposures at insured depository subsidiaries of an FHC. For example, our approach to umbrella supervision differs depending on the mix of banking, securities, and insurance activities and the degree of their integration within the financial holding company. Holding companies that include large and complex banks receive considerably more attention than do organizations that have only minimal and relatively straightforward banking operations. We have established formal procedures for sharing information with a number of functional regulators and have informal sharing arrangements with many others. We meet periodically with a wide range of agencies to discuss issues and to coordinate supervision. To further this effort, we continue to develop programs for establishing the practical processes of meeting joint responsibilities, especially with the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the Securities and Exchange Commission. Indeed, it is widely understood that all our activities need to evolve with changing market and technological realities. With the Gramm-Leach-Bliley structure as background, let me turn to what I believe should, as we move forward, be our major supervisory and regulatory priorities in the areas of safety and soundness and competition policy. In my judgment, both the safety and soundness of individual banks and the stability of the overall banking system begin with strong equity capital positions at individual depository institutions. Strong equity capital provides a cushion against unexpected losses that can be used without triggering a bank's default. More generally, strong equity capital lowers the probability that a bank will fail. Strong equity capital also provides owners with a substantial stake in the future value of the firm and thus helps to control the safety net's moral hazard incentives to take excessive risk. From the perspective of day-to-day supervision, regulatory capital standards, the core of which are standards for equity capital, provide the foundation for nearly all supervisory and regulatory policies. The current set of regulatory capital standards, established in 1988 by an international agreement among the industrialized nations known as the Basel Accord, is in need of reform. The central role of such standards requires us to give reform a high priority. As you may know, such efforts are well under way. Our efforts are focused on reforming the Basel Accord for those banks for which the current standards are most in need of repair. Specifically, reform efforts are concentrated on developing standards that are more risk sensitive and that build upon the internal risk-rating and risk-measurement systems that have been developed by the relatively small group of the world's most financially sophisticated and complex banks. These banks are engaged in a wide range of traditional and not-so-traditional banking activities, and their risk exposures and risk-management systems are often extraordinarily complicated. I expect that concrete proposals for reform will be forthcoming within a year or so. We must take the time to get these revisions right. I hope that the process, rather than being driven by the calendar, is being driven by a desire both to achieve more risk sensitivity and to acquire a meaningful understanding of the new Accord's implications. Both can occur only if the industry and the regulators work together to develop and assess the likely effects of the new Accord. A second priority for bank supervisors is to continue to develop policies and procedures that ensure that no bank is too big to fail. By "not too big to fail" I mean that stockholders can lose all of their investment, that existing managers can lose their jobs, that uninsured creditors can suffer losses, and that the institution can either be reorganized or be wound down and possibly sold, in whole or in part, in an orderly way. Given the size, complexity, and international scope of some of our banking institutions, this task is not easy. But at the Federal Reserve, developing such procedures has been a priority for some time. Considerable evidence supports the view that market discipline is an important force for controlling bank risk-taking, especially at the largest institutions. This evidence suggests that reinforcing the effectiveness of market discipline would have considerable benefit, and thus I believe that such support should also be a priority. Indeed, in my judgment, market discipline should be an important complement to supervisory discipline. Efforts over the past couple of years by U.S. banking supervisors to augment market discipline have focused on better accounting practices and increased disclosure to improve the transparency of banking organizations. After all, markets function best when all participants are well informed. Recently, as we all know, the issue of balance sheet transparency has become a very hot topic. In part for this reason, I will highlight one area of transparency in banking that I believe is of particular importance. As recent events have shown, companies can use special-purpose vehicles to obscure their true financial condition. Such vehicles can serve as useful tools for structuring their legitimate business transactions. Unfortunately, they can also be used to give the appearance that a company has shed risk that it has, in substance, retained. Use of special-purpose vehicles to create such an appearance, coupled with financial-engineering techniques, is not in the spirit of the accounting rules. The accounting profession's rules require consolidation of certain special-purpose vehicles when an independent third party has not assumed the substantive risks of ownership of the underlying assets. Though there does not appear to be a systematic problem with inaccurate treatment by bank holding companies of sales of loans to off-balance-sheet special-purpose entities, in certain instances companies have not given appropriate consideration to this accounting requirement. The banking agencies have long recognized that exposures to risk can include interests in special-purpose vehicles and other entities that a banking organization does not consolidate. As a result, as part of our ongoing examination activities, supervisors have endeavored to take such exposures into account in assessing the condition of an institution. Furthermore, in appropriate circumstances, when we find that a banking organization has effectively retained the substantive risks of assets it has transferred to a special-purpose vehicle, we will require consolidation of those assets in publicly available regulatory financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. These statements are required at a minimum to meet generally accepted accounting principles. But the Federal Reserve reserves the right to apply its own sound interpretation of those accounting principles based on a careful consideration of the underlying facts and circumstances and the economic substance of the transactions. We have exercised this right and will continue to do so when necessary to ensure the transparency of an institution's risk profile and financial condition through the accuracy of its public financial statements. In related efforts, bank supervisors have in recent years increased their use of market information in supervisory surveillance of large and complex banking organizations. For example, for some time the Fed staff has been providing reports to examiners on the interest-rate spreads the market requires on the subordinated debt of large banking organizations. Examiners are also given estimates of expected default frequencies derived from the organizations' stock price data. Because such information can be difficult to interpret, the reports given to examiners provide guidance designed to assist in understanding whether changes in an institution's debt spread or probability of default are significant. Looking forward, the Board has instructed its supervisory and research staffs to devote substantial efforts to improving their ability to use market information in surveillance activities. The maintenance of open and competitive markets should also be an important goal of public policy. Such markets are a prerequisite to maximizing both the quality and the quantity and minimizing the cost of products and services consumed by households, businesses, and government. This is no less true in banking than in any other line of business. To that end, the Board helps enforce antitrust policy in the United States. And, just as with bank safety and soundness policy, antitrust policy, to be successful, must evolve with technological and market realities. Changes in the way firms deliver financial services to their customers and in the nature of the relationships among providers of various financial services may require some adjustments in the implementation of antitrust policy. For example, as the number of large, geographically diverse banking organizations increases, the nature of competition among banks within a local geographic market may change. Likewise, if financial institutions continue to expand the scope of products offered within a single organization, the influence of nonbank competitors on prices of services provided by banking organizations may increase. In addition, technological change may someday reduce the importance of local bank branches in the provision of retail banking services. Federal Reserve staff and other economists continue to monitor and analyze the effects of these and other developments on the nature of competition within the financial services industry. If changes are needed in the ways that we evaluate the potential competitive effects of proposed mergers and acquisitions, the Board is prepared to modify its approach. Conclusion In closing, I hope that I have provided you with a useful perspective on the financial services industry and on the policies of the Federal Reserve. The United States has prospered from and, I believe, will continue to reap the benefits of a strong and competitive financial services industry. This industry is evolving at a sometimes breathtaking pace. The resulting changes require all of us to frequently revisit our assumptions, views, and policies and sometimes to revise those assumptions, views, and policies in order to continue to achieve the unchanging objectives of a sound and competitive financial system.
No content found
Remarks by Governor Mark W. Olson Before the American Law Institute and American Bar Association, Washington, D.C. February 8, 2002 Implementing the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act: Two Years Later First of all, my thanks to Ron Glancz, Bill Sweet, Pat Doyle, and Marty Lybecker for inviting me to speak on the very important subject of Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLB) implementation. In reviewing the first day of the program, I see that you have covered some major topics including financial holding company (FHC) mergers, acquisitions and regulation, and new bank activities. At the risk of repeating some of what has already been discussed, I will focus today on GLB implementation from the vantage point of the Federal Reserve Board. Since your other presenters are quite specifically focusing on implementation issues, my comments will be more at a policy level. To do so, I first need to put the GLB Act in perspective. This act is arguably the most significant banking legislation in the last quarter of the twentieth century, but it pales in significance to the dynamic changes in the marketplace during that period. In passing this bill, the Congress accomplished three important and occasionally controversial objectives. First, the act significantly realigned the statute to comport with changes that had already occurred--laboriously and at great expense--in the marketplace. Second, by expanding permissible activities to include those that are "financial" or "complementary" to financial activities, the act granted the Fed and the Treasury the authority to allow modifications that allow FHCs to compete in the financial marketplace. Third, and very importantly, GLB addressed an important public policy concern of the Congress, which was to provide a clear separation between entities that received the benefit of deposit insurance and those engaged in the new permissible activities. As I look around this room I see many people who have been involved for years in attempting to update our banking laws to expand product opportunity. During the twenty years that I have been an active participant in this process, I have heard many arguments for and against this expansion. However, one constant over that period has been the clear recognition that the Congress would not permit expanded product opportunity if it would bring additional risk exposure to the deposit insurance funds. Thus, vehicles needed to be created that would allow new opportunities or new affiliations while insulating the safety net of deposit insurance and direct access to the discount window and payment system from them. The vehicles identified for this purpose were the financial holding company and, to a limited but important extent, the financial subsidiaries of banks. That, in brief summary, is the GLB. It expanded banking organizations' activities, allowed cross-industry affiliations in the financial services business, gave regulators the ability to modify permissible activities without new legislation, and put in place a prudential framework using the FHC and separating the safety net from new risk-taking. The Congress has freed financial institutions to follow their markets and has provided the regulators with the ability to let them do so, while still requiring prudential supervision focused primarily on ensuring the safety and soundness of insured depository institutions. The Prologue I am sure that everyone who has been involved in the financial services industry during the past two decades recognizes that it is the markets--not the Congress and not the regulators--that are the force for dynamic change. As a reminder, let me briefly review some of the significant changes. If ever a set of institutions was insulated from competitive pressures, it was U.S. banks after World War II. Entry was limited. The Depression and World War II had left the banks with excess portfolio liquidity and no need to compete for deposits or other funding. Regulations essentially set deposit rates and state usury laws, and custom limited inter-institutional loan price competition. Capital and money markets provided very poor substitutes for bank credit. Markets and technology would eventually destroy this insulation. Money market funds contributed early to blurring the lines between the banking and securities industries as saving deposits, which had historically been the exclusive purview of depository institutions, proved no match for an account that could provide market rates, liquidity, and third-party access. With money market funds, banks discovered that bank deposits, including checking accounts, had substitutes. Larger corporate borrowers found substitutes for bank loans when they began to borrow increasingly through the commercial paper market. The more-sophisticated banks found ways to meet changing competition. Besides purchasing funds in the money market through negotiable certificates of deposit when domestic deposit-rate ceilings were binding, they learned to use the eurodollar market to fund domestic operations. Both of these developments revolutionized the way banks thought of the liability side of their balance sheets. Securitization quickly followed on the asset side. Securitizations, of course, reflected a new use of the market by banks--a shift of assets from the bank balance sheet to the securities market whenever liquidity needs or margin pressures made such a move advantageous. Also, higher-quality borrowers shifted to the commercial paper market, and a broader spectrum of borrowers shifted to the capital markets, pressing banks even further. The banking industry's early response to these pressures took two forms: bank facilities that offered very short-term, market-rate, low-margin credit on the bank balance sheet (renting the banks' balance sheet) and letters of credit to permit some borrowers to tap the markets with the banks' help (renting the banks' credit rating). Bound by the limits of Glass-Steagall, however, even the most sophisticated banks had only these avenues as their range of options. The shift of customers from bank credit to the capital markets was a particularly profound challenge because, as I noted, since the early 1930s the Glass-Steagall Act had prohibited banks from affiliating with companies that engaged principally in underwriting securities, except for government securities. The contrast here is worth repeating. Securities firms had the latitude to evolve as the markets and technology changed, but banks were very tightly restricted. Other efforts by banks to expand their customer service menu had been constrained by law as well. Spurred by the attempted affiliation of Transamerica, one of the largest insurance underwriters of the time, with Bank of America, one of the largest banks of the time, the Congress enacted the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956. The act prohibited such affiliations, as well as those between banks and nonfinancial firms, in multi-bank holding companies. The affiliation some forty-plus years later of Travelers and Citibank occurred just before GLB repealed the ban on insurance-bank affiliation. Bank regulators recognized the quandary that banks faced as competitive pressures and technology eroded the post-Depression legal framework in banking, even though staying within both the letter and, arguably, the spirit of the law permitted some additional regulatory flexibility for banking organizations to follow their customers. Of particular note were the Federal Reserve decisions authorizing the section 20 affiliates that permitted banking organizations with sufficient U.S. government securities operations to engage in corporate securities underwriting and the Comptroller of the Currency's rulings that allowed insurance to be sold by national banks anywhere from towns of fewer than 5,000 residents. As a result of these actions, bank holding companies had achieved expanded securities authority and national banks had achieved broader insurance brokerage authority, and both kinds of institutions had done so without the benefit of legislation. The authority instead took the form of a sequence of regulatory rulings, usually vigorously challenged in court, that allowed new products to be offered but often with constraints that were both inefficient and occasionally irrelevant. However circuitous the route the actions by the Federal Reserve and the Comptroller of the Currency helped reduce the final restrictions, other than the ones on insurance underwriting, that had been in the way of full financial-service integration. Thus, by the time the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act passed through the Congress, in the summer and fall of 1999, it was long overdue. After Gramm-Leach-Bliley Now let's look at post-GLB developments: In particular, the level of participation by banks and nonbanks, the new or expanded activities conducted in the FHCs, and the differences in the regulation of FHCs and BHCs. There has not been a land rush of large inter-industry mergers since GLB was enacted. Though some see this lack as evidence of weakness in the law, one should remember that many major bank and securities firm mergers predated GLB. What's more, the market has not perceived bank and insurance underwriter mergers to have the same attractiveness as bank and securities firm mergers. Still, several interesting combinations have occurred: Charles Schwab has merged with U.S. Trust. Two large foreign banks have purchased large U.S. securities firms. One large domestic insurance company (Metlife) and two securities firms have acquired small banks. And, of course, Travelers, Solomon and Citicorp have affiliated. The traditional banking industry has also been active. Twenty-four of the largest twenty-five bank holding companies have chosen financial holding company status. In total, about 570 domestic and 24 foreign bank organizations have applied for such status and, at least initially, have met the statutory standards. Of that total, 460 of the FHCs have $1 billion or less in assets with a substantial segment holding less than $150 million. At this point, only seventy-one of the FHCs report activities that require the GLB Act. But the minimal notification process has allowed these new entities the authority to make financial acquisitions on a post-notification basis. Indeed, those FHCs that have not yet used their new authorities apparently want the flexibility that FHC status provides to act promptly without application. Virtually all of the previous section 20 companies have converted to regular securities underwriting and dealing subsidiaries. Twenty of the authorized FHCs either lost or dropped their FHC certification because of supervisory downgrades or changes in strategic direction. What are the FHCs doing that they could not have done as bank holding companies? Probably the most important benefit to date has been the removal of the previous restrictions on the securities business of banking organizations. Removing them has improved the efficiency and competitiveness of bank-affiliated broker-dealers by eliminating the cumbersome restrictions applicable to section 20 companies. Some of these benefits are obvious, such as the elimination of the eligibility revenue limits, although others are more subtle. For example, post-GLB, several FHCs have established multiple broker-dealers to enhance internal controls and management incentives. The previous section 20 rules acted to force institutions to have only one full-service securities subsidiary. Not surprisingly, another significant result is that the largest institutions have used the merchant banking powers to enhance their existing private equity business. A common example is using the merchant banking authority to establish and manage private equity funds for venture capital investment, an activity that was generally not feasible under previous authorities used by BHCs to conduct their venture capital business. The smaller FHCs have most commonly used the new authority to acquire insurance brokerage entities without the artificial constraint of locating that brokerage in a town of less than 5,000 residents. From a regulatory perspective (and even from a lawyer's perspective) the application process is as interesting as the new authorities. The requirement for approval or even prior notice of a nondepository acquisition has been eliminated. Instead, all the non-depository acquisitions by FHCs are completed and then the Federal Reserve is notified. How has the regulation and supervision of FHCs differed from the regulation of BHCs? First, the need for and, consequently, the number of applications have dwindled, and FHCs can rapidly complete nonbank acquisitions. This change removes some previous oversight that the Fed had for ensuring safety and soundness, but to date the elimination of this authority has not had adverse effects. Moreover, though not required, some dialog between the Fed and FHCs generally occurs with large proposed acquisitions. From a supervisory perspective, among the most dramatic changes has been the elimination of the section 20 examinations for broker-dealer subsidiaries of FHCs. Many of you have been involved in either premerger reviews or on-site examinations. These examinations focused in great detail on firewalls, internal controls, interlock restrictions, reporting requirements, and funding limitations. The special firewalls created to separate the insured depository from risks undertaken by subsidiaries are no longer required, and the Fed now relies almost totally on section 23A and 23B of the Federal Reserve Act to protect the insured depository institution subsidiary. These provisions, which statutorily apply to all insured depository institutions, place quantitative limits and collateral requirements on credit flows from an insured depository institution to its nondepository affiliates and require that virtually all such transactions be made on market terms. Since GLB, these provisions also apply to transactions between the bank and its own financial subsidiaries, just as it applies to nondepository affiliates. The Fed now collects hard data each quarter to ensure that the quantitative requirements of these provisions are being met. In addition, it has invited public comment on a regulation that would put in one place all the limitations and Board interpretations dealing with 23A and 23B. Moreover, the Board has adopted a temporary rule addressing how these provisions would apply to derivatives and intraday credit, as required by GLB. This leads to another major change in Fed regulatory involvement, an approach to supervision and regulation, which acquired the name "Fed lite." Implicit in the umbrella supervisory role of the Fed endorsed by GLB is the recognition that the focus of supervisory attention would be on risks that could adversely affect the insured depository institution. An FHC must maintain a well-managed/well-capitalized designation for all its subsidiary depository institutions. Such FHCs, in turn, are subject to only limited Fed regulatory oversight. Fed holding company supervision centers on the FHC level, not on nondepository subsidiaries, and is focused only on those risks that could affect depository subsidiaries. Within this framework, the umbrella supervisor is to rely on the supervisor of other regulated subsidiaries (the Comptroller of the Currency, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Securities and Exchange Commission, and the state insurance supervisors) as much as possible and to examine functionally regulated nonbank affiliates only if it believes that their activities are creating risk for the bank affiliate. That is, the umbrella supervisor is charged with evaluating both on- and off-balance sheet risks in the consolidated organization that could affect the insured depository affiliates. GLB has not impaired the Federal Reserve's ability to monitor management and direct it to correct risk exposures that could impair the health of the FHC and its depository subsidiaries. On this same issue, a concern often expressed is that though GLB may provide expanded opportunities for FHCs, the advertised Fed-lite regulatory oversight effectively blocks the so-called two-way street. Undoubtedly, organizations that would have to divest significant business lines falling outside parameters of allowable FHC activities, such as nonfinancial commercial activities, might find becoming a financial holding company is not in their strategic best interest. But marketplace activity suggests that umbrella supervision has not discouraged some of the largest securities firms and at least one large insurance company from affiliating with banks in an FHC structure. What do we expect to happen? The Fed does not attempt to predict market changes, but I hope the process put in place by the Congress will allow financial institutions to adjust to market changes within certain notable bounds. For example, we expect insured financial institutions to propose new activities which may fit the definition of "financial" and "complementary" as changes in technology or new market opportunities suggest new strategies. At present the Fed is considering requests to rule on real estate brokerage as a permissible activity. We also expect nondepository financial institutions to examine the trade-offs in accepting the regulatory oversight accompanying bank ownership in exchange for the benefits of affiliation with banks in the FHC format. Though some nonbank financial institutions have deemed the regulatory oversight to be excessive, we find reassuring the ongoing affiliation of banks and securities firms, which involves many of the nation's largest banks and securities firms. To carry out its responsibilities as umbrella supervisor, the Fed has had to work closely with other agencies. We have established formal procedures for sharing information with a number of regulators and have informal arrangements for sharing with many others. We meet periodically with a broad spectrum of agencies to discuss general issues and to coordinate supervision. We continue to work on pilot programs for creating the practical processes of meeting joint responsibilities, especially with the OCC and the SEC. Practically, we need to continue to cooperate if we are going to minimize the risks to our banking system that could accompany the new financial structure. Summing Up The Glass-Steagall and the McFadden-Douglas Acts sought to impede the natural development of markets. The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act does the opposite. Indeed, GLB allows both banks and supervisors to respond to the marketplace, while still safeguarding a banking system with access to the safety net. Over time, we believe that the success of GLB will be evaluated by its effect on the marketplace. Specifically, it will be judged by the quantity, quality, and price of the services that are delivered to households and businesses. GLB has created a flexible system that permits financial organizations to adopt, within the constraints previously described, the structure that best fits their skills. It relieves them from the pre-GLB necessity of adopting inefficient structures to better serve their customers.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among MSB Shares, Inc., the MidSouth Bank, both of Jonesboro, Arkansas, the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, and the Arkansas State Bank Department. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the applications by BNP Paribas, Paris, France, and BancWest Corporation, Honolulu, Hawaii, to acquire all the voting shares of United California Bank, Los Angeles, California. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
Remarks by Governor Edward M. Gramlich Before the International Bond Congress, London, U.K. February 20, 2002 Consumption and the Wealth Effect: The United States and the United Kingdom Besides sharing a common history, language, and legal structure, the United States and the United Kingdom have something else in common. In the past few years, both countries have experienced a significant wealth effect--so significant that understanding the wealth effect has become an important aspect of conducting monetary policy. In the United States, the average ratio of household wealth to disposable income was about 4.5 from 1970 to 1995. Over the next five years, fueled by a modest boom in real estate values and a huge boom in equity values, the wealth-income ratio shot up to more than 6, the highest recorded value in the fifty years for which wealth data are available. Since 2000, equity prices have moderated, but the wealth-income ratio is still above 5. Perhaps because of that, consumption remained strong throughout the downturn of 2001. The experience has been remarkably similar in the United Kingdom. Here the wealth-income ratio has averaged about 4.75 for the past thirty years, and a moderate boom in housing prices and a huge boom in equity values in the late 1990s took the ratio to 6.5 by mid-2000. Again, the wealth-income ratio has fallen off since that time, but consumption spending was strong throughout 2000-01. With numbers like this, it makes sense to probe into the wealth effect more deeply. I begin by summarizing the empirical evidence on the wealth effect, in both the United States and the United Kingdom, and then I move on to some theoretical quandaries. Getting into theoretical quandaries sounds like a bad idea for a wrap-up speech, but I will try to persuade you that these quandaries are indeed puzzling--and also fundamental. Empirical Evidence on Household Wealth and Spending At the aggregate level, the effect of wealth on consumption has been a mainstay of large-scale econometric models for at least thirty years. The econometric model of the U.S. economy used by the Federal Reserve has included a wealth effect for all this time, one that suggests that an additional dollar of household wealth leads, over time, to a permanent rise in household consumption of about three to five cents. A basic question is whether households' net worth summarizes all the information about their balance sheets that is useful in predicting their spending. Does a decomposition of net worth into various asset and liability categories improve forecasts of household spending? For a variety of reasons, this question has proved difficult to answer: Some researchers have found that separating liabilities from assets helps to explain variations in consumption over time; others have not. The current version of the Fed's model uses two categories of wealth: equity wealth and all other wealth, with the latter encompassing housing wealth and also the value of noncorporate businesses and other net financial assets. The estimated marginal propensities to consume out of these two wealth aggregates are virtually indistinguishable. But that has not always been the case. As the model has evolved, the estimated marginal propensity to consume out of non-stock-market wealth has varied substantially relative to the marginal propensity to consume out of stock market wealth. The Bank of England's model for consumption expenditures also incorporates significant effects of household wealth. According to the Bank's model, a 10 percent increase in real net financial wealth boosts consumer spending 0.7 percent in the long run, and a similar rise in real gross housing wealth boosts spending 0.5 percent in the long run. Converting these to pence and pounds at present levels, the effective net worth coefficient on consumption is about 1.5 pence per pound of net worth increase for housing and about 2 pence per pound for financial wealth. Unfortunately, relatively little is known about the household behavior underlying the time-series relationships in the aggregate data. Until recently, economists have been able to marshal little formal evidence that the observed relationship between aggregate spending and aggregate wealth could be traced to changes in spending by those households that actually experienced wealth gains. But that gap in our understanding is now being filled, at least for equity wealth in the United States. Several recent papers--including some by economists at the Federal Reserve Board--have documented a microeconomic relationship corresponding to the relationship that we have long observed in aggregate data. For example, one study that analyzed the response of individual households to changes in stock market wealth found that, over 1983-99, the spending of U.S. households that owned stocks responded to movements in the stock market, whereas the spending of non-holders of stocks had no apparent link to stock prices. A second study estimated that, in the second half of the 1990s, U.S. households in the top income quintile and households that had attained some college education showed larger consumption increases than other households, and also disproportionate increases in consumption compared to disposable income. This is consistent with the fact that these households owned most of the stocks and experienced the largest gains in wealth. But as yet, microeconomic evidence on the link between housing wealth and consumption is much more limited. The predicted effect of wealth on consumption has been put to the test in the United States during the past half-decade, and it has passed that test easily. Between early 1995 and early 2000, the Wilshire 5000 stock-price index (a broad measure of equity prices in the United States) tripled, and nearly $12 trillion was added to the wealth of the U.S. households. Over that same period, saving dropped from 6-1/2 percent of disposable income to roughly 1 percent. The magnitude of this decline is consistent with the run-up in equity prices and the marginal propensity to consume out of equity wealth built into the Fed's model. Since the peak in equity values, the Wilshire 5000 has dropped about one-third, corresponding to a loss in wealth of roughly $6 trillion. The personal saving rate has not yet turned up substantially, but I would not read much into that fact: Previous stock-market gains probably were still supporting spending through the end of 2000, and the low saving rate could be rationalized by the recession and a surge in motor vehicle sales spurred by generous financing offers. The U.S. experience in the past few years has not provided an equivalent test of the effect of housing wealth on consumption, because movements in house prices have been more limited than the striking swings in equity prices. Between early 1995 and late last year, the value of residential real estate in the United States increased about 65 percent--a substantial rise. But the gain in house prices was fairly steady, making isolating its effect on household spending difficult. In the first quarter of 1995, housing wealth was equal to roughly 1.4 times after-tax income, and by the third quarter of 2001 that ratio increased to about 1.6 without ever moving outside that fairly narrow range. In contrast, the ratio of equity wealth to after-tax income soared from 1.1 in early 1995 to 2.6 in early 2000 before subsiding to 1.5 in the third quarter of last year. Developments in the United Kingdom over this same period are consistent with the U.S. experience. British households' equity wealth increased more than G880 billion (thousand million) between 1995 and 2000--a gain in excess of 50 percent--while their housing wealth rose by more than G650 billion. At the same time, household saving fell from 10 percent of income in 1995 to around 4 percent in early 2000. As in the United States, equity prices in the United Kingdom have fallen sharply since 2000. The FTSE 350 index now stands almost 25 percent below its peak in September 2000, and the techMARK 100 index has fallen around 75 percent since its peak. The saving rate appears not to have increased much over this period, in part because house prices have continued to rise at double-digit annual rates and in part because of lagged effects of past wealth increases. These explanations, if correct, could be similar to those for the United States. To be sure, not every analysis of the link between household wealth and spending comes to the same conclusions as in the studies I mentioned. On balance, however, the link between aggregate household wealth and spending has remained one of the sturdier empirical relationships in macroeconomics. The Link between Stock-Market Wealth and Consumption Given the sturdiness of the empirical relationship, it may be bad form to question its theoretical basis; but let me do so anyway. First, on the equity side, the value of equities can change for two reasons: because market participants adopt a new view of future profits or because market participants apply a different set of discount factors to those expected profits, where the discount factors incorporate both risk-free interest rates and equity premiums. Barry Bosworth, Robert Hall, and others have pointed out that, from a theoretical standpoint, stock-price movements should have different effects on household spending depending on whether they derive from changes in expected profits or from changes in discount rates. Suppose, for example, that stock prices increase because of a rise in expected profits, say from a spurt in productivity. An individual household that owns stocks will have higher wealth and will want to consume more, just as predicted by the wealth effect. For the economy as a whole, the story is more complicated because the additional aggregate demand is likely to push up interest rates and limit the rise in stock prices. Both the productivity spurt itself and the induced rise in interest rates will then affect desired investment, international capital flows, and the trade balance. Suppose, instead, that stock prices increase because households are applying a lower discount rate to future profits. Whether an individual household will want to consume more is unclear in this case. Intuitively, households are simply discounting the same stream of profits at a different rate; so it is not obvious that they are truly better off and should increase their consumption. At a more technical level, the increase in wealth might--taken alone--encourage greater consumption, but household spending will also be influenced by the familiar income and substitution effects induced by the change in the discount rate. This second case is far more complicated than the first when one considers the evolution of the economy as a whole. The discount rate for profits--the sum of the risk-free interest rate and the equity premium--depends on other features of the economy. Hence, if the discount rate has changed, some other aspect of the economy must have changed as well--and that change may have effects on consumption separate from the effect of the change in stock prices. Among the myriad of possibilities in this area, I will mention just two. One is that households and investors may have reassessed the riskiness of future profits. Another is that taxes may have been altered, and the move to a different fiscal policy would have changed the risk-free interest rate. Implementing these complicated theoretical relationships in an empirical model is challenging. Because the interaction of stock-market wealth and consumption depends on many other features of the economy, we would need to model not only the household sector but all the rest of the economy as well. In addition, households' expectations of future income, profits, and rates of return play critical roles in this analysis, and modeling those expectations is especially difficult. To summarize the results for equities, there are three main lessons: At least in theory, changes in stock prices can have very different effects on consumption depending on their origin. Changes in expected profits and changes in discount rates generally do not occur independently of each other for the economy as a whole although, of course, they may do so for individual firms. Thus, thinking about profits and discount rates as separate influences on stock prices may be misleading when one considers economywide changes. Capturing the true complexity of the relationship between stock-market wealth and consumption is extremely difficult with existing data and empirical techniques. As in many areas of empirical economics, we currently must be satisfied by models that capture broad patterns in the data. The Link between Housing Wealth and Consumption The task gets no easier when we turn to the relationship between housing wealth and consumption. Because houses are assets similar to corporate capital, much of the previous discussion of stock market wealth applies to housing wealth as well. Thus, changes in house prices that occur for different reasons may also have different effects on consumption. Nonetheless, it makes sense to think about housing specifically. Suppose that house prices increase relative to the prices of other goods and services because individuals become more patient and reduce the discount rate for future housing services. Those who intend to live in their houses forever would have higher wealth, but they would have no additional resources for increasing their consumption of real housing services or other goods and services. Yet, as I noted earlier, most studies based on aggregate time-series data find that changes in housing wealth do affect real consumption. So what is missing from this simple story? One factor is that houses sometimes appreciate because the expected housing services from those houses rise. For example, population growth or immigration may push up the value of land close to major cities. We can interpret this increase in housing wealth as reflecting the greater housing services offered by proximity to more populous urban areas. In this scenario, homeowners would truly be better off, and those who live in their houses forever would consume additional real housing services. However, these households would still have no resources to increase their consumption of other goods, unless they could sell their houses or borrow against their housing equity. This simple example becomes more complicated when we consider that most homeowners do not intend to live in their current houses forever. Instead, many homeowners expect to move to smaller houses, condominiums, or retirement communities as they get older. These so-called "downsizers" are clearly better off when house prices increase relative to other prices, and we can expect them to increase their consumption of nonhousing goods and services. At the same time, however, many individuals who do not currently own homes plan to purchase homes, or many who own small homes plan to trade up to larger homes in the future. These so-called upsizers may respond to an increase in house prices by reducing their consumption of other goods and services. To evaluate the effect of housing wealth on aggregate consumption, one must then determine the relative magnitude of these opposing responses. Economic theory suggests that downsizers may generally have higher marginal propensities to consume out of housing and other forms of wealth than upsizers, which would give consumption a positive impetus from house-price increases. For example, downsizers tend to be older than upsizers, so they will distribute any change in lifetime consumption across fewer years. Moreover, upsizers may be liquidity constrained. If they would like to consume more but cannot because unsecured borrowing is difficult, then at least modest increases in house prices should not reduce their consumption. At the same time, upsizers who are saving for a downpayment may have a relatively short planning horizon. In the end, determining the relative consumption responses of housing upsizers and downsizers becomes an empirical question. A third factor linking housing wealth and consumption is the effect of realized capital gains, accrued either by selling one's house or by borrowing through a home equity loan. As Chairman Greenspan has noted, accumulated home equity is not itself a liquid asset. In addition, its value is somewhat uncertain, although general trends in real estate prices can be easily observed. Selling a house, or getting one's house appraised and taking out a home equity loan, converts this illiquid home equity of uncertain value into liquid funds with known value. This conversion could also induce added consumption, especially if consumers are liquidity constrained. Conclusion There is little empirical doubt that stock-market wealth and housing wealth influence consumption and the macroeconomy. Nevertheless, our understanding of the empirical relationships and of the theoretical underpinnings of those relationships remains incomplete. Substantial progress has been made, but we should hope that future research will help to untangle the remaining puzzles. This research agenda is important for the advancement of economic understanding and the conduct of monetary policy. As you know, both the Federal Reserve and the Bank of England have long-run goals of price stability and sustainable growth. To achieve these goals, these central banks take an active interest in all the factors that affect economic performance, including business and consumer confidence, economic growth abroad, the foreign exchange value of the dollar, fiscal policy, and so on. The experience of the past few years--in the United States and the United Kingdom--has emphasized that the effect of wealth on consumption has an important place on that list. Footnotes Karen E. Dynan and Dean M. Maki, "Does Stock Market Wealth Matter for Consumption?" Finance and Economics Discussion Series, (Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May 2001). Dean M. Maki and Michael G. Palumbo, "Disentangling the Wealth Effect: A Cohort Analysis of Household Saving in the 1990s," Finance and Economics Discussion Series, (Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April 2001).
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced that it would not apply section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act to prohibit a state member bank from acquiring equity securities to hedge the banks customer-driven equity derivative transactions if such purchases are made in accordance with the conditions and restrictions applicable to national banks. Any state member bank that seeks to acquire equity securities to hedge the banks equity derivative transactions must receive the prior approval of the Boards Director of Banking Supervision and Regulation. In addition, a state member bank may engage in equity hedging activities only to the extent permitted by state law, and the bank must comply with any applicable state notice or approval requirements. The Boards statement on this matter is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today the approval of the application of ICICI Bank Limited, Mumbai, India, to establish a representative office in New York, New York. Attached is the Order relating to this action.
Remarks by Vice Chairman Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. At the Canton Forum Speaker Series, Canton, Ohio February 27, 2002 A Review of Economic Developments in 2001 and the Economic Outlook I am pleased to address the Canton Forum today. As always, the views I will be expressing are my own and are not necessarily shared by other members of the Board of Governors or of the Federal Open Market Committee. Review of 2001 A confluence of factors shaped economic developments last year, and I would first like to review these factors, to provide a backdrop for assessing our economic prospects in 2002. A year ago, signs of the recession that eventually unfolded were just beginning to materialize. After several years of booming growth, economic indicators started sending mixed signals. Although consumer sentiment had dropped around the end of 2000, consumers were still spending at a healthy clip. Though consumption growth had decelerated somewhat over the previous year, the modest slowing was consistent with the deceleration of aggregate demand necessary to better align supply and demand. Businesses, however, appeared to be struggling. As data for the end of 2000 became available, it became clear that businesses--amid disappointing sales and earnings--had abruptly curtailed the record-setting expansion of investment spending. Of course, some reduction of investment usually accompanies the recognition of a downshift in the economy, as firms bring their capital stocks in line with a revised outlook for sales. But the severity of the adjustment last year appeared to reflect more than the usual reaction. Businesses seemed to be reassessing the profitability of additional fixed capital in a more fundamental way. New capital, especially capital that embodies new technologies, continues to promise efficiency gains, but expectations seemed to have gotten ahead of even the more favorable reality, resulting in an unsustainable buildup of capital and run-up of equity market values. Capital expenditures on high-tech equipment were especially hard hit. Moreover, the sudden drop-off in business demand, coupled with some slowing in the consumer sector, apparently caught producers off guard. And despite rapid cuts in production, inventories were uncomfortably high relative to sales. Early last year, manufacturers took steps to address the unwanted stocks and began liquidating inventories in earnest by slashing production of all types of goods. Against this backdrop, the Federal Open Market Committee reduced the target for the federal funds rate sharply last January to contain the weakness and head off a more serious slackening. This was to be just the first installment of a series of policy easings to counter the weakness in the economy that emerged over the first half of last year. In the business sector, a serious retrenchment in spending and production was under way. In addition to the initial causes of the pullback, the abruptness of the slowing seemed to jar business confidence, leading firms to postpone spending while they reassessed their situations. In this way, the investment downturn became self-reinforcing. At the same time, financial developments, including a stronger dollar, sharply lower equity prices, and tighter lending standards at banks and in security markets, tended to offset some of the influence of the lower federal funds rate. By midyear, investment--and high-tech investment in particular--was posting some of the largest decline in decades. The weaker job market and lower stock prices also began to weigh on consumers, though to a much lesser extent. With overall sales sagging, inventories remained excessive in many sectors. As the weakness in the economy intensified, policymakers responded. In June, President Bush signed the Economic Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2001 into law. The first installment of the reduction in personal income tax rates went into effect in July. In addition, the act provided tax rebates of $300 to $600 per household that were paid directly to taxpayers. As for monetary policy, between March and June, the FOMC voted to ease monetary policy four more times, bringing the cumulative reduction in the federal funds rate to 275 basis points in the first six months of the year--the most rapid reduction in the funds rate since the early 1980s. Despite both fiscal and monetary efforts to bolster sagging aggregate activity, by late summer only a few hard signs had surfaced that recovery was at hand. The terrorist attacks on September 11--whose worst effects were felt by those people and their families directly touched by the tragedies--were a blow to our already weakened economy. In the weeks immediately following those events, most forecasters expected the damage to the economy to be extensive. The initial effects on the airlines and the travel industry were severe. Also, a rapid deterioration of business and consumer confidence seemed highly probable. In addition to immediate crisis-related injections of liquidity, the Federal Reserve moved to address the perceived shock to the macroeconomy by lowering the federal funds rate 50 basis points on September 17 and an additional 75 basis points by the end of the year. Over the past few months, we have all been watching closely to see how aggregate activity would unfold in the aftermath of the terrorist attacks. No doubt a great deal of pain has been inflicted on the economy. But, given the magnitude of the shock, the economy has proved more resilient than initially anticipated. Though several industries have been hit very hard, the worst-case scenarios spun in late September have not materialized. In particular, households' views of the economy have remained relatively stable, all things considered. In fact, in one of the most recent readings, consumer confidence was not much lower than it had been in August. While spending has surely been buttressed by some temporary factors such as aggressive discounting on motor vehicles and other retail goods, the effect of terrorism on consumer spending has not been as severe as most had feared in late September. To be sure, 2001 was a rough year for the economy--one of the roughest we have faced in a long time. The weak economic outcome despite sizable reductions in the federal funds rate has led some to question the effectiveness of monetary policy. But I believe that monetary policy substantially cushioned the negative forces weighing on the economy. Residential construction has been visibly buoyed by policy easing. Housing activity remained at a high level all year, as lower mortgage rates apparently offset the restraint from declines in employment, smaller gains in income, and lower levels of wealth. Also, although delinquency rates have risen, few restrictions have emerged on the availability of credit to consumers. Indeed, low interest rates have made it attractive to refinance mortgages to reduce mortgage payments, extract some home equity buildup, and pay down more expensive forms of consumer credit. Even businesses, which have been feeling the pinch of lower corporate profits, have benefited from lower interest rates; aggregate interest expense has remained fairly low relative to cash flow, and businesses have moved aggressively to bolster their financial stability by locking in more-certain, longer-term sources of funds. Automakers in particular have been able to offer inexpensive financing to customers because their own funding costs have fallen. In many ways, the mechanism that propagated the weakness last year was quite traditional: A negative demand shock led to unwanted inventories and to an adjustment of production. That, in turn, idled workers and fed back into even weaker demand. But even before the shock of the terrorist attacks, two aspects of last year's slowdown were atypical. First, the main source of the negative hit to demand was a large shock to capital expenditures. In the past fifty years, investment spending has nearly always begun its decline one to four quarters after the peak of the economic cycle, not before it. What started out as a very gradual cooling of an overheated economy became much more serious because of the severe shakeout that hit the high-tech sector. Second, consumer spending on goods and services--which represents about two-thirds of the gross domestic product--held up remarkably well last year. In the past, consumption spending has almost always declined as a recession started. But last year, despite a sharp drop in consumer confidence and a decline in wealth from lower equity values, households kept buying. At this point, it is still too early to classify this recession as mild or severe. In general, economic fluctuations in the past fifteen to twenty years have been tamer than their counterparts in earlier eras. Economists have conjectured that this is so because improved technologies allow businesses to monitor their demand more closely and manage their inventories better. Recent developments ought to give us more evidence on this subject. One thing is certain: Because of the unusual, investment-led nature of this recession, we cannot put too much weight on the shape and profile of past recoveries in trying to predict this one. Current Situation and Near-Term Outlook That said, the data we have received in recent weeks have been encouraging and suggest that economic activity is in the process of turning up. Although payroll employment continued to fall in January, the pace of that decline was slower than in the fourth quarter of last year. Initial claims for unemployment insurance have moved lower over the past two months--another hopeful sign of recovery. Industrial production fell in January, but here, too, the rate of decline was well below the pace in preceding months. As we obtain more information on spending patterns since September, the behavior of households is increasingly proving to be the key stabilizing force on economic activity. Sales of cars and light trucks--though down from the extraordinary rates of the fourth quarter--have continued at quite healthy rates. In addition, retail sales outside motor vehicles were very strong in both December and January. Housing construction, too, has been robust, bolstered in part by favorable weather and low mortgage rates. In the business sector, the very rapid pace at which companies liquidated inventories in the fourth quarter contributed to the weakness in manufacturing output. However, the downward adjustment of stocks to more desired levels now seems well along in most industries, and this drag on production may be diminishing. Business fixed investment has not as yet shown consistent and sustained evidence of a turnaround, although there have been some positive indicators. After a year of dealing with an overhang of capital goods, many firms are being cautious in their capital spending. With corporate profits under pressure and capacity utilization rates near past cyclical lows, many businesses report that their expansion plans remain on hold. However, capital investments that allow businesses to reduce cost might be more attractive. Spending indicators have been more positive in the past few months, particularly with respect to computer equipment. Developments in this sector will importantly influence the strength of our economy in the months ahead, and will therefore warrant careful monitoring. As you know, Chairman Alan Greenspan presented the Board's semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress this morning. As he indicated, the central tendency of the forecasts of the members of the Board of Governors and the Federal Reserve Bank Presidents for real GDP growth this year was between 2-1/2 and 3 percent. I am comfortable with that range of forecasts. As I just noted, recent data indicate that household spending has been reasonably well maintained. In addition, there are some signs that capital spending may be improving, but the strength and durability of that improvement are still uncertain. Until there is a clearer perspective with regard to business investment, I believe that there is still reason for some reservations regarding the contours of the recovery. The Longer-Run Outlook One of the main forces that will lead to the recovery from this temporary slowdown is the confidence of businesses and households that, in the long run, the outlook for the U.S. economy is still bright. Despite our current problems, the fundamentals of this economy are strong. Our workforce is well educated and adaptable. Our banking system is healthy, and our capital markets, which are flexible and multifaceted, are well equipped to handle shocks. Perhaps the most notable feature of our economy in recent years, however, has been the acceleration in productivity. In the second half of the 1990s, output per hour in the nonfarm business sector increased at an annual rate of almost 3 percent per year, well above the pace earlier in the decade. These efficiency gains allowed real GDP to rise 4 percent a year, on average, over the period. With these rapid increases in productivity, business costs were well contained, and the rate of price inflation was stable, despite a fall in the unemployment rate to below 4 percent. Productivity growth continued over the four quarters of 2001. That it increased is impressive, given the historical tendency of productivity growth to turn negative when the economy enters recession. This performance provides additional evidence that the improvements in productivity growth that we have witnessed since the mid-1990s have been largely structural and will persist for a time. But the fundamental factor leading me to be cautiously optimistic that much of the improvement is likely to be sustained is my outlook for the state of technological advancement in the United States. As Fed economists Dan Sichel and Steve Oliner have shown, one major source of the gains in output per hour were the high and rising levels of business investment, which increased the amount of capital per worker, thereby boosting productivity. Booming investment in the 1990s was due importantly to steep declines in prices of high-tech equipment, which largely reflected rapid technical progress. About  percentage point of the increase in productivity growth in the 1995-99 period can be attributed to this so-called capital deepening. Although the extraordinary pace of investment spending in those boom years was not sustainable, I believe that technological progress will continue to drive down the cost of information technology in the coming years, inducing still robust growth of the capital stock. Moreover, businesses have reaffirmed their intentions to improve productivity by substituting cost-saving high-tech capital for labor. Though there are certainly risks to the view that improvements in productivity growth will persist, I do not believe the terrorism of last fall is going to permanently harm increases in output per hour (and thus the health of the economy). Most assuredly, in the aftermath of these attacks, many businesses have been forced to redirect resources from efficiency-enhancing investment to meet greater demands for security. Businesses may also have been compelled to increase redundancy to cope with the greater potential for supply disruption. However, these effects will be mainly a one-time hit to the level of productivity. They are not likely to change the trend growth rate of output per hour. Moreover, their effects will be ameliorated as businesses use new technologies and find creative ways to hold down the cost of enhancing security and providing for contingencies. Conclusion Obviously, 2001 was a challenging year. But the American people once again proved to be up to the challenge, and signs of economic recovery are increasing. At the Federal Reserve, we stand ready to do what is necessary to maintain financial stability, as we did on September 11, and to maintain a monetary policy stance that will foster price stability and promote maximum sustainable growth in output.
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan Saving for retirement At the 2002 National Summit on Retirement Savings, the Department of Labor, Washington, D.C. February 28, 2002 One of the most complex economic calculations that most workers will ever undertake is, without doubt, deciding how much to save for retirement. At every stage of life, individuals ought to make judgments about their likely earnings before retirement and their desired lifestyle in retirement. Also implicit in such decisions are assumptions about prospective rates of return, life expectancy, and the possible accumulation of a nest egg for one's children. The difficulty that individuals face in making these projections and choices is compounded by the need to forecast personal and economic events many years into the future. Insurance companies make some of the same judgments in calculating premiums for annuity contracts or life insurance. Defined-benefit pension plans make similar calculations for large groups of employees. The social security and medicare trustees replicate some of the same calculations in their annual assessments of the actuarial viability of those programs. Aside from these institutionalized forms of retirement saving, of course, is the discretionary saving that each of us does consciously by periodically setting aside portions of our income. All of the above, and more, are required to assess the adequacy of retirement saving for an economy as a whole. Most economic forecasts are subject to significant uncertainty. At least by comparison, one judgment looks to be a reasonably sure proposition: the ratio of retirees to those still working will rise precipitously starting at the end of this decade, and that ratio will continue to climb through the first third of this century and remain high thereafter. In part, this projected development owes to the retirement of the baby boomers. But the phenomenon is broader than that and reflects the aging of our society. Importantly, according to the social security trustees, the demographic challenge will not go away with the passing of the baby-boom generation. This ever-larger retired population will have to be fed, clothed, housed, and serviced by a workforce growing far less rapidly. The retirees may have accumulated a large stock of retirement savings, but the goods and services needed to redeem those savings must be produced by an active workforce assisted by a stock of plant and equipment sufficiently productive to meet the needs both of retirees and of a workforce expecting an ever-increasing standard of living. Though from the point of view of an individual household, saving reflects financial claims adequate to meet future needs, the focus for the economy as a whole, of necessity, must be on producing the real resources needed to redeem the financial assets. The role of finance is to channel saving into investment of the physical capital assets that assist in the production of the gross domestic product, which, in turn, serves both retirees and active workers. Clearly, an efficient system of finance can more effectively deploy a given stock of capital and thus maximize its contribution to supporting the population. Any analysis of the amount and type of saving required to finance the bulge in retirements that is just over the horizon needs to project (1) the number of retirees, (2) the size of our workforce, and (3) the productivity of that workforce. Of the three, productivity is most directly affected by the level of investment, which, of course, is financed by saving. The size of the future workforce, excluding immigrants, and the size of the future retired population are relatively simple to project from today's existing age distribution. The level of immigration, both legal and illegal, will be dominated by public policy decisions and by economic forces, both in the United States and in the countries from which our immigrants are drawn. This forecast is more problematic, and its level matters: Over the past decade, for example, immigration accounted for approximately one-third of the increase in our workforce. The larger our workforce in 2010 and beyond, the easier producing goods and services for both retirees and active workers will be. Immigration policy will, therefore, be a key component of baby-boom retirement policy. The rate of saving--for retirement and other purposes--may not directly affect either the number of retirees or the size of the workforce. But it surely affects capital investment, which it finances, and the productivity that it engenders. Besides the total amount of saving and investment, changes in the allocation of those funds among different types of capital also appear to have some influence on the growth of labor productivity. A dollar of new saving flows through financial markets to firms that allocate it among different types of capital investment. Clearly, firms' choices about the types of investments to make matter crucially for how much labor productivity ultimately is boosted. In the late 1990s, for example, businesses allocated much more of their investment dollars toward high-tech, higher-return capital than they did in earlier years. Businesses made this shift and are continuing to move further in that direction in response to the extremely rapid decline in the prices of high-tech assets and the new opportunities that these assets have afforded. According to one set of calculations, of the roughly 2-1/2 percent annual rate of increase in output per hour, or labor productivity, between 1995 and 2001, perhaps a quarter of that growth could be attributed to on-going shifts in the composition, as distinct from the dollar level, of capital. Improvements in the quantity and quality of education of our workforce enhance workers' skills and contribute importantly to the growth of labor productivity. But far more important over the past six years are the gains in output attributable to technological innovation, especially information technology and improved managerial organization, and as I noted in testimony yesterday, the greater flexibility and resilience of our economy stemming from deregulation, primarily in finance. Notwithstanding these more intangible contributions, the level of saving remains a key ingredient of economic growth. But we need also to know whether the source of that saving is sustainable, and beyond that, whether the type of financial assets in which our saving overall is accumulated affects our productivity. During the past six years, about 40 percent of the total increase in our capital stock in effect has been financed, on net, by saving from abroad. This situation is reflected in our ongoing current account deficit, which, by definition, is a measure of our net investment in domestic plant and equipment financed with foreign funds, both debt and equity. But this deficit is also a measure of the increase in the level of net claims, primarily debt claims, that foreigners have on our assets. As the stock of such claims grows, an ever larger flow of interest payments must be provided to the foreign suppliers of this capital. Countries that have gone down this path invariably have run into trouble, and so would we. Eventually, the current account deficit will have to be restrained. The nation's economic potential will be brighter if that comes about through an increase in domestic saving rather than a reduction in domestic investment. Whether the mix of domestic private and government saving affects the rate of productivity growth is a more contentious issue. Another is whether the form of private saving, for example, whether in stocks or debt instruments including bank deposits, affects productivity growth. Ultimately, the composition of real investment in our economy will reflect--among other influences--the attitudes toward risk of those who own the financial claims against the capital stock. If savers become more risk-tolerant, financial risk premiums will decline. In response to these reduced penalties on risk, firms will eventually adjust the mix of their endeavors toward more-speculative projects--but, importantly, presumably ones that also offer higher prospective rates of return on average, which more often than not translate into higher long-term average economic growth. The nation's savers, daily in the marketplace, exhibit an obvious sensitivity to the association between expected return and risk. Indeed, many are clearly willing to forgo the higher long-term rates of return on equity for the greater tranquility of the lesser risk associated with most debt instruments--in effect forsaking more economic growth for a more stable, less stressful, economic environment. As a consequence, returns on common stocks over rolling twenty-year periods have almost always outpaced the returns on less risky securities. The answer to whether government or private saving does more to foster productivity growth arguably thus comes down to the propensity to take risks by U.S. savers. The less the willingness on the part of the nation's savers to hold risky securities, the more that business enterprises must be induced to undertake less risky endeavors. That inducement will occur as relative preferences shift toward debt instruments and away from equity, thereby driving interest rates lower and earnings price ratios higher. Government saving is largely reflected in a retirement of debt. Having chosen to hold at least a portion of their savings in riskless securities, government debt holders when confronted with debt retirement presumably would chose less risky debt securities over common stocks to rebalance their portfolios. Thus an increased share of saving from the government is a markedly more conservative financial strategy than if the saving were undertaken in the private sector. Obviously, the federal government could invest in higher-risk assets, such as equities. But for reasons that I have expressed many times before the Congress, I do not believe that, other than in defined-contribution plans, such investment can be accomplished free of political pressures that would distort the efficient use of capital. Presumably, most of those who maintain that greater risk-taking would likely produce faster long-term growth would also acknowledge that increased competition and economic growth would bring greater volatility and social stress. Because of the near certainty of a major rise in the retiree-to-worker ratio in the next few decades, we now face the major challenge of setting policies for enhanced economic growth. What level of personal stress, and some argue, increased inequality, which may be a byproduct of a highly competitive, high-octane economy, have we as a nation chosen? Is the level compatible with the level of domestic saving and possibly the risk-taking that is consonant with the elevated level of productivity growth necessary to meet the needs of an aging population? A national consensus on these questions is clearly missing. This is doubtless an area for useful debate. I cannot close a discussion about provisions for retirement without a few words on social security. Although the program replicates a private retirement annuity program in many ways, it is also quite different in several respects. It requires contributions of workers, matched by those of employers. But unlike a privately funded annuity program, the tie between contributions and benefits deliberately is not tight at the individual level. If the Social Security Trust Fund is depleted, the law requires that benefits be paid only to the extent that they can be financed out of current payroll tax receipts. But I cannot imagine a viable political scenario in which full payment of benefits will not be forthcoming. Does anyone doubt that Congress would prevent benefits from being curtailed if the trust fund were depleted? In addressing the impending retirement of those born just after World War II, we will need to consider whether social security should better align itself with the funding provisions of our private pension and annuity system. Policymakers need to consider these issues now if we are to ensure a comfortable retirement for the postwar generation, while at the same time according due consideration to the needs of the later generations that now make up our workforce.