For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced revisions to its policy and procedures for sponsoring private-sector organizations under federal programs that provide priority telecommunications services to entities that are important to national security and emergency preparedness. The Board believes these programs, which are administered by the National Communications System (NCS), will help facilitate the operation and liquidity of banks and the stability of financial markets, particularly during periods of substantial operational disruptions. The Board currently sponsors a number of private-sector financial organizations for priority provision and restoration of telecommunications circuits under the NCS's Telecommunications Service Priority (TSP) program. The sponsorship covers circuits used in large-value interbank funds transfer, securities bidding and transfer, and payment-related services. The Board is announcing an expansion of its sponsorship criteria for the TSP program. In addition, the Board is adopting sponsorship criteria for the Government Emergency Telecommunications Service program, which provides emergency access and priority processing of local and long-distance calls over the terrestrial public switched network, and for the Wireless Priority Service program, which provides priority routing of cellular calls during periods of severe network congestion. The new criteria are effective upon publication in the Federal Register, which is expected shortly. The NCS was established in 1963 to provide priority communications to support critical government functions during emergencies. In 1984, the NCS became an interagency group of twenty-two federal departments and agencies, including the Federal Reserve Board. To be eligible for Board sponsorship, organizations must be essential to the performance of national security and emergency preparedness needed to maintain the national economic posture during a national or regional emergency. The Board's notice is attached.
No content found
For immediate release Michael J. Brown, Sr. President and CEO Harbor Federal Savings Bank Ft. Pierce, FL Richard J. Driscoll President First Savings Bank, FSB Arlington, TX Olan O. Jones, Jr. President and CEO Eastman Credit Union Kingsport, TN D. Tad Lowrey Chairman, President, and CEO Jackson Federal Bank Brea, CA George W. Nise President and CEO Beneficial Savings Bank Philadelphia, PA Robert F. Stoico Chairman, President, and CEO FIRSTFED AMERICA BANCORP, INC. Swansea, MA John B. Dicus President Capitol Federal Savings Bank Topeka, KS Karen L. McCormick President and CEO First Federal Savings and Loan Association Port Angeles, WA Kevin E. Pietrini President and CEO Queen City Federal Savings Bank Virginia, MN William J. Small Chairman and CEO First Federal Bank Defiance, OH David L. Vigren President and CEO ESL Federal Credit Union Rochester, NY
Richard Spillenkothen Director, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation Oversight of investment banks' response to the lessons of Enron Before the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations of the Committee on Governmental Affairs, U.S. Senate December 11, 2002 Introduction Thank you for the opportunity to testify on the continuing efforts of Federal Reserve supervisors to address issues emanating from the excesses of the recent credit cycle, including large corporate defaults and accounting irregularities. I would like to note that my testimony today reflects the views of Federal Reserve supervisory staff, and not necessarily those of the Board of Governors. The focus of today's hearing on how complex structured financial products provided by banks and other financial institutions may have been used by their customers to obscure financial statements and hamper sound analysis by creditors and investors, or to engage in questionable or improper tax strategies, is timely. Events of the past year, such as the bankruptcy of Enron, have focused attention on the need for strong risk management, sound accounting, improved disclosures, and more active corporate governance to avoid the kinds of losses that have been costly both in human and economic terms. Efforts to improve accounting standards and enforce greater accountability from corporate officers have led to important reforms that should improve the meaningfulness and integrity of financial statements. For its part, the Federal Reserve has been reviewing bank participation in the types of structured finance activities that have raised significant legal and accounting questions. As we complete the necessary fact-finding and collaborate with other functional and primary regulators, we will follow up with individual institutions with regard to any appropriate remedial actions. In response to these incidents, we have already revised our examination plans for larger institutions to focus on these particular areas of concern. We are also considering additional supervisory guidance and refinements to our examination and regulatory policies and procedures. With many new products and innovations, excesses in how products are used emerge over time, particularly during periods of lengthy expansion as we have experienced in the past decade. Downturns uncover weaknesses and provide the opportunity to implement reforms and incorporate them into ongoing practice. In this sense, the U.S. financial system is going through an evolutionary process that if managed properly by its participants could result in milder fluctuations of performance in the future, though new manifestations of risks will undoubtedly emerge that will test institutions once again. It is usually the risks that were not clearly apparent at the time they were undertaken that are the most costly. Otherwise they would have been avoided or minimized beforehand. In that regard, banking organizations are actively responding to recent events. From past credit cycles, they have learned the importance of diversification of credit risk and strong capital and reserves, which has paid off recently in much milder levels of credit problems than in the previous recession. However, in this credit cycle banking organizations are now recognizing, like many institutions, that some customer relationships can carry much greater credit, legal and reputational risks than originally anticipated. Management is recognizing the need to evaluate the soundness not only of individual transactions, but the effect of the sum total of the customer relationship on the organization's overall risk. They now have a greater appreciation for the importance of maintaining strong due diligence and of enhancing the legal vetting of transactions by qualified experts. Banking organizations must actively evaluate and incorporate lessons learned from the recent credit cycle to ensure their risk management systems remain relevant to the challenges before them now and throughout the next decade. In addition, bank supervisors are reviewing and enhancing their procedures for addressing the new ways risks are presenting themselves to banking organizations. I will discuss both our supervisory expectations for banks involved in transactions such as those that have recently received much attention, as well as how we are considering amending our procedures and focusing our supervisory reviews. Role of Supervisors At the outset, it is important to provide some background on the Federal Reserve's role as supervisor of financial institutions and our relationship with other supervisory authorities in carrying out our responsibilities. The primary focus of the Federal Reserve's supervision is ensuring an institution's safety and soundness, as well as compliance with banking and consumer laws and regulations, in a way that protects the deposit insurance fund and the consumer, while promoting stability of the financial system. To accomplish these goals, the Federal Reserve's examination program focuses on evaluating the overall adequacy of an institution's internal controls and risk management systems as benchmarked against not only regulatory standards and expectations, but also against the evolving practices of well managed firms. To ensure those systems are functioning properly in practice, examiners review selected transactions across business lines to identify whether policies and procedures are being followed. As part of this risk-based approach to supervision, examiners focus primarily on areas posing the greatest risk to the institution, particularly credit risk. In their review, examiners assess the adequacy of a bank's credit risk analysis and identify whether appropriate due diligence has been followed in evaluating other market or legal risks associated with the transaction. In addition to traditional financial analysis, a bank's evaluation of credit risk also includes an assessment of the trustworthiness of the borrower and the reliability of the financial statements. In the case of more complex transactions, examiners seek to determine whether the banking organization has a process in place for obtaining its own appropriate legal, tax and accounting approvals. As part of the approval process, the bank is expected to gain reasonable assurance that the customer understands the transaction and has the type of legal, tax, accounting and control infrastructure within its corporate governance that is suitable for complex transactions. During the review, examiners do not perform an independent legal, tax or accounting analysis of the transaction from the customer's perspective. Examiners are not qualified to perform such a review and, moreover, it would be inappropriate for them to do so in their role as bank supervisors, by straying into matters that are the responsibility of corporate management outside of regulated financial institutions. In carrying out its responsibilities, the Federal Reserve coordinates its supervisory activities with other federal and state banking and securities agencies, such as the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) and the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), other functional regulators, and the bank regulatory agencies of other nations. As mandated by statute, the Federal Reserve relies as much as possible on the supervisory efforts of an institution's primary bank supervisor and nonbank functional regulators to ensure that risks are maintained at acceptable levels. For example, if in the course of their review examiners have reason to believe that a bank is engaging in questionable activities that might relate to a possible violation of securities laws, then supervisors would refer those matters to the SEC, as the primary interpreter and enforcer of those laws. Supervisory Expectations for Banking Organizations Some basic principles and expectations for banking organizations guide our work in examining complex financial transactions. First, and most obviously, banks must obey the law. In particular they must have policies and procedures in place that are followed by their employees to ensure that they are in compliance with all applicable laws and regulations with regard to a particular activity or product. The laws most commonly applicable include banking, consumer, securities and tax laws, whether federal, state or foreign. Second, banks should perform thorough due diligence on the transactions they are involved in and check with appropriate legal, accounting and tax authorities within their own organizations, as well as their outside experts in this area, and also provide appropriate and relevant information to their customers. However, banks ordinarily should not be held legally responsible for the judgments, actions or malfeasance of their customers. Nor should they be required to second guess their customer's accountants, tax or legal experts or police their customer's activities. Such an expectation would require, inappropriately, banking organizations to assume management responsibility for their customers, place potential legal liability on banking organizations that would compromise their ability to perform their role as financial intermediaries or threaten their safety and soundness, and place significant costs on banking organizations to audit the activities of their customers. Banks, however, must not participate in activities of their customers that the banks know to be illegal or improper. Nor should banks engage in borderline transactions that are likely to result in significant reputational or operational risks to the banks. Third, the role of banks is to assume and manage all the attendant risks related to their activities as financial intermediaries. As banks offer new products and engage in new activities, they should evaluate all the dimensions of risks, including credit, market, legal, operational and reputational risks, before using such products or undertaking such activities. In addition, in light of recent events, banking organizations should be re-evaluating the risks related to both their traditional and new products, recognizing that as financial markets and practices change, legal and reputational risks may manifest themselves in new ways or in magnitudes not previously recognized. Moreover, as practices and products change, banks must build appropriate mitigating controls to manage the evolving risk exposures and ensure that a process is in place to assess the effectiveness of those controls over time. Trends in Structured Finance Markets What then are the issues that have been presented to banks and supervisors over the past year and what are some of the actions that have been undertaken by supervisors and banks in response? First, it may be instructive to discuss the trends that have led to the latest round of reforms and reassessments. Over the past decade, financial markets have grown rapidly and innovations in financial instruments have facilitated the structuring of cash flows and allocation of risks among borrowers and a range of investors in more efficient ways. Financial derivatives for market and credit risk, asset backed securities with customized cash flow features, specialized financial conduits that manage pools of purchased assets, among others, have in the vast majority of cases served the legitimate business purposes of customers. Significantly, banks have played an important role in structuring, arranging or participating in these transactions, which have become an essential part of U.S. capital markets -- the most vibrant and innovative in the world. To the economy's benefit, the structured finance business has led to a lower cost of capital to businesses and consumers, which has helped fuel greater access to credit and longer term growth. A good example is the mortgage-backed-securities business, which over the past two decades has developed a range of complex and sophisticated structured cash flow products that have helped lower the cost of housing finance and improved the range of choices to investors. At the same time, the more complex variations of these instruments within the world of structured finance have placed pressures on the interpretation of accounting rules that were established when times were simpler. While new accounting statements, interpretations and advisories have been issued in recent years to keep up with these innovations, the staggeringly wide variation in features and complexity have severely challenged the ability of traditional accounting measures to reflect the underlying economic substance of the transactions. The new initiatives by the Financial Accounting Standards Board to address these shortcomings are steps in the right direction. In addition to diversifying risks and cash flows and reducing the cost of capital, another consideration of firms that use banks for structured finance transactions may be the extent to which the transactions would affect the appearance of balance sheets to investors or reduce tax liabilities, consistent with applicable laws and accounting rules. In a similar way, a chief financial officer might choose to lease rather than buy equipment to take advantage of both the off-balance-sheet financing characteristics as well as the tax advantages. How such considerations might influence a CFO's selection of traditional or more structured transactions will depend both on the economics of the transaction as well as the firm's particular culture. However, choosing an off-balance sheet or leasing alternative in and of itself should not be viewed in hindsight as being illegal, improper or deceptive, so long as the transactions comport with existing accounting and legal precedents and appropriate disclosures are made in the firm's financial statements. In more extreme and less prevalent cases, a transaction with only a nominal commercial purpose might be driven by accounting, with some firms aggressively exploiting ambiguities in the rules in ways that move the accounting farther and farther away from the underlying economic substance of the transaction. These efforts may be designed not just to improve balance sheet presentations, but also to obscure the firm's underlying performance and condition, while operating within the letter, albeit not the spirit, of the accounting rules. I should note that drawing the line between what is a traditional accounting interpretation and what is "aggressive" is a sometimes difficult and largely subjective judgment. It is also much easier to detect and criticize these practices in hindsight. The new FASB proposals should provide more guidance in drawing this line. Finally, in the most extreme cases, inappropriate accounting might be used in conjunction with fraud to misrepresent the nature of the transaction. For example, despite the requirement that special purpose entities be capitalized with a modest level of outside shareholder's equity for de-consolidation treatment, a firm might use its own employees as nominee shareholders that inject the firm's own money into the subsidiary to receive off-balance-sheet treatment. At this point, investor reaction to alleged accounting fraud at Enron and other firms has fueled a backlash that is now resulting in both reforms and more conservative practices that are contributing to better transparency of corporate financial statements. For example, even in cases where firms could structure transactions to meet existing accounting guidelines, some firms are choosing to put transactions on the balance sheet to provide the greater transparency and clarity demanded by investors. Firms that are suspected of being less than forthcoming with their financial disclosures appear to be subject to stiff penalties by the marketplace in the form of depressed stock prices and higher borrowing expenses. The call by the SEC and recent Congressional legislation for CEOs to certify their financial statements has also helped to ensure that transactions in gray areas of accounting are further scrutinized and verified for appropriateness. Supervisory Responses In response to these events, federal and state supervisors are ascertaining the relevant facts and circumstances, coordinating with other regulatory bodies, and identifying appropriate responses. For its part, the Federal Reserve's ongoing supervisory activities are focused on evaluating how the credit, market, legal and reputational risks related to overall customer relationships were managed in practice, and during the transaction testing phase of our examinations, understanding the nature and risks of individual transactions. There are several transactions that are currently under investigation by the SEC and other enforcement authorities, with whom we have strong working relationships and with whom we have conferred on these matters. We are continuing to collaborate with them and receive their views and conclusions on various matters on an ongoing basis. With regard to risk management issues, some early lessons learned have become clear and will guide our work going forward. Not surprisingly, the lessons hark back to risk management fundamentals. In particular, banks should recognize that a fundamental time-tested element of analyzing credit risk, evaluating a borrower's character, can heavily influence the magnitude of losses, even when significant credit risk is not evident from other factors. In addition, banks should recognize that although they are not directly accountable for the actions of their customers, to the extent their name or product is implicitly associated with their customer's misconduct, additional legal and reputational risks may arise. Such risks may ultimately lead to significant costs. If these risks are not recognized and addressed, they could affect an institution's financial health. In short, banks must decide whether to continue a relationship with a customer that has not shown good faith or integrity in its dealings with the bank or others, given the potential credit, legal and reputational risks. Even more fundamentally, it is also clear that many banks need to strengthen their credit risk analysis of investment grade customers by performing more due diligence and independent analysis while placing less reliance on third parties. There are undoubtedly many other lessons that will come forth as the facts and findings are further digested over time. As part of our supervisory review of complex structured transactions, we are assembling and evaluating the various findings and observations of our examiners, as well as the conclusions of other primary and functional regulators we work with, and identifying any necessary follow up. We will provide institutions with feedback through their reports of examination or inspection on any identified weaknesses and, if warranted, take appropriate supervisory corrective actions, including referrals to other authorities. We will also evaluate the steps banks are taking to address deficiencies they themselves have identified as being in need of remedial action. The initiation of self-corrective steps is encouraging, but at this stage it is probably too early to tell how well reforms laid out on paper will actually perform in practice. More broadly, we are considering additional supervisory guidance or regulatory changes, especially in the area of structured finance. In this connection, we will also evaluate the range of reforms banking organizations are adopting and consider whether there are some sound practices that should be adopted more widely within the industry. The past year has influenced the thinking of supervisors as well as banks on effectively targeting resources toward more vulnerable points within an institution's risk management structure. In particular, it has become clear that in developing the scope of a supervisory review, factors used to prioritize reviews should go beyond standard balance sheet measures of risk to include a customer's overall contribution to a business line's revenue or that of the overall firm. These relationships are the ones for which the adequacy of internal checks and balances needs most to be tested and perhaps reinforced. In cases where a banking organization becomes too dependent on the credit and fee related revenue of individual clients, it may become easier to rationalize away information that is suggestive of growing risk or problems. Consequently, we have already modified our examination plans for larger banking organizations to focus more fully on evaluating the largest customer relationships. These plans also cover areas of concern in the structured finance business and an evaluation of the steps banks are taking to manage credit, legal, and reputational risks in response to events of the past year. Conclusion In closing, the fallout from the recent round of excesses and large corporate defaults appears to be resulting in positive corrective steps by corporations, banks and the capital markets. Supervisors must work to ensure that their ongoing supervisory activities reinforce these corrective actions and help them to endure over the longer term. At the same time, supervisors will be working to maintain their focus on fundamental safety and soundness issues at financial institutions. These efforts include encouraging banking organizations to strengthen their credit risk management practices, to enhance their new product review and approval procedures, and to strengthen their overall approach to identifying, managing and controlling legal, reputational and other operational risks. If banking organizations, corporations, and supervisors are attentive to the lessons learned over the past year and adopt appropriate policies and controls, the risk of repeating similar excesses in the coming years should be substantially reduced.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the application of Cooperatieve Centrale Raiffeisen-Boerenleenbank B.A., Rabobank Nederland, Utrecht, The Netherlands, to become a bank holding company by acquiring VIB Corp, and thereby indirectly acquiring its subsidiary bank, Valley Independent Bank, both in El Centro, California. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
Remarks by Governor Susan S. Bies Before local business owners, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Buffalo Branch, Buffalo, New York December 13, 2002 Credit Availability for Small Business Good morning everyone. I would like to thank Barbara Walter, the manager of the Federal Reserve Branch in Buffalo, for inviting me to speak to this group of local business owners today. I am pleased to be here in my hometown to discuss the importance of small businesses to both the local and national economies. Small businesses--which I will define as firms with less than 500 employees--are an integral part of the U.S. economy. By some estimates, there are more than twenty-five million small businesses in the United States, accounting for more than 99 percent of all firms. Small businesses employ more than half the workforce in the private sector, generate about three-fourths of net new jobs each year, and produce more than one half of the private sector's output. Because of the vital role that small businesses play in our economy, the Federal Reserve is keenly interested in understanding the dynamics of small business development and financing and undertakes various initiatives to achieve this objective. The Federal Reserve also actively supports programs that encourage community development in low- and moderate-income areas and that promote small business development. Through our Community Affairs programs at each of the twelve Reserve Banks, we conduct ongoing outreach and educational activities and provide technical assistance to help financial institutions, their customers, and communities understand and address community credit needs. Our recent activities have focused increasingly on issues related to small business and economic development. In the interest of improving access to funding resources and information in upstate New York, the Federal Reserve's Community Affairs Office in Buffalo provides technical assistance, sponsors conferences, conducts outreach, and produces publications to support small business development. In 2001, it hosted a major regional conference on attracting businesses to inner city markets. Earlier this year, the Community Affairs Office co-hosted a seminar with the National Association of Women Business Owners, the Small Business Administration, and other local partners focusing on the fundamentals of starting and growing a small business. A direct result of this workshop was the development of a publication detailing capital and educational services available in the greater Buffalo-Rochester area. This directory, which is available on the Internet, provides ready access to a large number of funding and technical assistance resources designed specifically for small businesses. In addition, staff members of the Community Affairs Office serve on the board of the Office of Urban Initiatives, a local community economic development organization that assists minority- and women-owned businesses. Given the importance of small businesses to our economy, and their need for credit to facilitate growth, the Federal Reserve has taken a leading role in efforts to better understand the factors that influence the availability of funds to support small business activity. Every five years, the Board of Governors submits a report to the Congress detailing the extent of small business lending by all creditors. Our most recent report to the Congress, submitted this past September, provides an extensive review of developments in recent years. An important input into this analysis is the Board's Survey of Small Business Finances, which is conducted every five years; the most recent was in 1998. This survey provides the most comprehensive and up-to-date information available on small business finance available. The survey shows that among small businesses, larger firms were more likely than smaller firms to use each of the traditional types of credit: credit lines, capital leases, motor vehicle loans, mortgages, equipment loans, and other loans. In addition, small businesses obtain credit from a wide range of sources. Commercial banks are the leading source; they supply 65 percent of the total dollar volume of small business loans outstanding. In contrast, other financial institutions, such as finance companies, supplied about a quarter of outstanding loans. Nonfinancial sources, including government and individuals, supplied less than 10 percent. Over the latter 1990s, business financing flows to both large and small borrowers were strong; but in 2001 and early 2002, the flows moderated along with economic growth. Debt growth appears to have held up better at small firms than at large firms, and small businesses have not reported material difficulties in obtaining credit during the downturn. Indeed, despite a tightening of financial conditions in 2001 and the first three quarters of 2002 and widening credit spreads on commercial and industrial loans in recent months, there is little evidence that creditworthy borrowers of any size faced substantial constraints in credit supply. Concerns about small business financing have stemmed largely from perceptions that small firms have more difficulty gaining access to credit sources than do large businesses or other types of borrowers. The source of this difficulty may be that lending to small business is generally considered riskier and more costly than lending to larger firms. Small businesses are much more susceptible to swings in the economy and have a much higher rate of failure than larger operations. In addition, lenders historically have had difficulty determining the creditworthiness of applicants for some small business loans. The wide variation in the characteristics of small firms has impeded the development of general standards for assessing applications for small business loans and has made evaluating such loans less straightforward and relatively expensive. Concerns about small business financing for minority and women-owned businesses have arisen because of the persistent differences observed in financing patterns by these groups, as well as their underrepresentation in the business population. Minority-owned firms constitute only a small proportion of all small businesses. As of 1998, we estimate that about 15 percent of all small businesses were minority-owned: about 4 percent each were black-owned and Asian-owned, and 6 percent were Hispanic-owned. Only about a quarter of small businesses in the United States are owned by women. On a more positive note, data from the Census Bureau indicate that in recent years the number of minority-owned firms and women-owned firms has been increasing faster than the number of U.S. businesses overall. The increases in small business ownership and equity investment by traditionally underrepresented populations may have resulted from greater access to appropriate financing to fund the start-up and growth of businesses. Still, we must continue to seek ways to promote the creation and expansion of viable firms by lowering barriers to funding and financial services and by ensuring that potential small business owners have the needed management skills to support their businesses. The opportunity to start an enterprise must be open to anyone with a viable business concept. Research based on the Board's survey data has provided many insights on similarities and differences in the characteristics of male-owned and female-owned firms and of white-owned and minority-owned firms. For example, female-owned firms are smaller, younger, more likely to engage in retail sales and services, and more likely to be organized as proprietorships than were male-owned firms. Firms owned by blacks tend to be smaller (whether measured by assets, sales, or employment), newer, and more likely to be located in an urban area than their nonminority counterparts. Black-owned businesses also tend to be owned by younger individuals with fewer years of experience and poorer credit histories. Finally, black-owned businesses are more likely to be sole proprietorships and in the services industry. Differences between other minority-owned firms and white-owned firms have also been identified, but they tend to be less pronounced. Research has also shown that many women- and minority-owned firms differ from male- and white-owned firms in some of their credit market experiences. Female-owned firms are less likely to have outstanding loans, less likely to use business credit cards and trade credit, less likely to borrow using trade credit, and more likely to borrow with credit cards than were male-owned firms. Female-owned firms are also less likely than male-owned firms to have applied for new credit. But for the firms that applied, the research showed no significant differences between female- and male-owned firms in approval rates or loan terms. In fact, virtually all the observed differences in credit use by female- and male-owned businesses appear to be related to factors other than owner sex; they include such characteristics as firm size, age, and industry. The same cannot be said for racial differences in credit experiences. The case of African Americans showed the most striking differences, so I'll focus on this group. The studies indicated that black-owned firms are less likely to have outstanding loans, less likely to use business credit cards, less likely to borrow using trade credit, and more likely to borrow with credit cards than were white-owned firms. Black-owned firms are just as likely as white-owned firms to apply for new credit, but they are significantly less likely to have their loan application approved. In addition, African Americans are more likely not to apply for a business loan when they need credit because they fear their loan application would be denied. In general, studies have concluded that black-owned firms are more likely to be turned down for credit, even after controlling for differences that might affect their application, such as credit history. However, when examined more closely, the general pattern has been found to mask more complex relationships. For example, differences in denial rates are less pronounced in urban markets, which account for a vast majority of firms in the study, than in rural areas. And when small retail firms are considered separately, denial rates for black-owned firms and for white-owned firms are similar. Clearly, additional research is needed to fully understand these complexities. Whether discrimination helps to explain the various credit market experiences of small businesses owned by individuals from different demographic groups--and, if it does, to what extent--is difficult to determine. Many factors are considered in evaluating risk, and legitimate economic factors properly play a central role in credit decisions. These data alone cannot identify discrimination because they do not include all the unique factors involved in each credit-granting decision. This having been said, discrimination in any creditor's decision is disturbing. To the extent that market participants discriminate--consciously or unconsciously--capital does not flow to its most profitable uses. In the end, costs are higher, less real output is produced, and national wealth accumulation is slowed. By removing the non-economic distortions that arise as a result of discrimination, we can generate higher returns to human capital and other productive resources. At its heart, discrimination in granting credit artificially restricts the flow of capital. It means that viable economic activity goes unfunded. The Federal Reserve is committed to enforcing our nation's laws against illegal discrimination in credit decisions. We continue to examine banks to measure and ensure their compliance with the Equal Credit Opportunity Act. And we will continue to sponsor research on credit availability and constraint, including potential illegal discrimination. Moreover, we seek to facilitate the establishment of relationships between the financial services sector and the rapidly growing number of minority- and women-owned businesses. I conclude by emphasizing the importance of small businesses to the Federal Reserve. Small businesses are critical to the strength and vigor of the U.S. economy. We continue in our efforts to understand credit markets and to address issues of credit and capital availability confronting small businesses, including those owned by women and minorities. Through effective monetary policy, we work toward our goal of helping to maintain price stability and to create conditions for sustainable economic growth, which will provide continued opportunities for all small businesses to flourish. It has been a pleasure to be here with you this morning. Thank you for your kind attention. Footnotes The 1998 SSBF gathered data for fiscal year 1998 from 3,561 firms selected to be representative of small businesses operating in the United States in December 1998. The survey gathered details on the characteristics of each business and its primary owner, the firm's income statement and balance sheet, and details of the use and sources of financial services. It also obtained information about the firm's recent borrowing and credit application experience, the use of trade credit, and capital infusions. Such business borrowing on credit cards is carried out by the use of both business credit cards and personal credit cards used for business purposes. Footnotes The 1998 SSBF gathered data for fiscal year 1998 from 3,561 firms selected to be representative of small businesses operating in the United States in December 1998. The survey gathered details on the characteristics of each business and its primary owner, the firm's income statement and balance sheet, and details of the use and sources of financial services. It also obtained information about the firm's recent borrowing and credit application experience, the use of trade credit, and capital infusions. Such business borrowing on credit cards is carried out by the use of both business credit cards and personal credit cards used for business purposes.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Monday requested comment on a proposal to expand the operating hours for the on-line Fedwire® Funds Service. Under the proposal, the Fedwire Funds Service would open three and one-half hours earlier than the current opening time of 12:30 a.m. eastern time (ET). The closing time for the service would remain unchanged at 6:30 p.m. ET. The earlier opening time is expected to further the smooth functioning and continued development of the payments system, as well as to improve efficiency and reduce risk in making payments and settlements. The Fedwire Funds Service is a real-time, large-value electronic funds transfer service, which is provided by the Federal Reserve Banks. Depository institutions and other authorized participants use this service to send and receive large-value, time-critical payments. Each payment transaction is settled individually in central bank money and is final and irrevocable once processed. Depository institutions and other Fedwire users would participate in the expanded operating hours on a voluntary basis. However, Fedwire users that choose not to participate in the earlier hours would still receive any incoming payment transactions sent from participating institutions during the expanded hours. If the proposal is adopted, the suggested timeframe for full implementation of the expanded operating hours is the second quarter of 2004. The Board invites commenters' views on the proposed opening time of 9:00 p.m. ET and on the business, market, risk management, and operational issues that should be considered in evaluating the benefits and drawbacks of a longer Fedwire day. Comment on the proposal is requested within seventy-five days of publication in the Federal Register, which is expected shortly. The Board's notice is attached.
Joint Press Release Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Office of the Comptroller of the Currency Office of Thrift Supervision For Immediate Release December 17, 2002 Agencies Propose Disciplinary Action Rules for Accountants and Accounting Firms Performing Certain Audit Services The federal bank and thrift regulatory agencies today invited public comment on proposed rules governing their authority to take disciplinary actions against independent public accountants and accounting firms that perform audit and attestation services required by section 36 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act. The proposed rules would establish procedures under which the agencies could, for good cause, remove, suspend, or bar an accountant or firm from performing audit and attestation services for insured depository institutions with assets of $500 million or more. They would permit immediate suspensions in limited circumstances. Under the proposed rules, violations of law, certain negligent conduct, reckless violations of professional standards or lack of qualifications to perform auditing services would be considered good cause to remove, suspend or bar an accountant or firm from providing services for such an insured institution. Also, under the proposed rules an accountant or accounting firm may not perform audit services as prescribed under section 36 if the accountant or firm has been removed, suspended, or debarred by one of the agencies, or if the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board, the Securities and Exchange Commission, or a state licensing authority takes certain disciplinary actions against the accountant or firm. The proposed rules are being issued by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the Office of Thrift Supervision. While they would amend each agency’s rules of practice separately, they would have uniform application for each agency. Comments are due 60 days after publication in the Federal Register. Federal Reserve Dave Skidmore 202-452-2955 FDIC David Barr 202-898-6992 OCC Bob Garsson 202-874-5770 OTS Sam Eskenazi 202-906-6677
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Metamora Bancorp, Inc., Metamora, Ohio; The Metamora State Bank, Metamora, Ohio; the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland; and the Ohio Division of Financial Institutions A copy of the Order is attached.
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan Before the Economic Club of New York, New York City December 19, 2002 Issues for Monetary Policy Although the gold standard could hardly be portrayed as having produced a period of price tranquility, it was the case that the price level in 1929 was not much different, on net, from what it had been in 1800. But, in the two decades following the abandonment of the gold standard in 1933, the consumer price index in the United States nearly doubled. And, in the four decades after that, prices quintupled. Monetary policy, unleashed from the constraint of domestic gold convertibility, had allowed a persistent overissuance of money. As recently as a decade ago, central bankers, having witnessed more than a half-century of chronic inflation, appeared to confirm that a fiat currency was inherently subject to excess. But the adverse consequences of excessive money growth for financial stability and economic performance provoked a backlash. Central banks were finally pressed to rein in overissuance of money even at the cost of considerable temporary economic disruption. By 1979, the need for drastic measures had become painfully evident in the United States. The Federal Reserve, under the leadership of Paul Volcker and with the support of both the Carter and the Reagan Administrations, dramatically slowed the growth of money. Initially, the economy fell into recession and inflation receded. However, most important, when activity staged a vigorous recovery, the progress made in reducing inflation was largely preserved. By the end of the 1980s, the inflation climate was being altered dramatically. The record of the past twenty years appears to underscore the observation that, although pressures for excess issuance of fiat money are chronic, a prudent monetary policy maintained over a protracted period can contain the forces of inflation. With the story of most major economies in the postwar period being the emergence of, and then battle against inflation, concerns about deflation , one of the banes of an earlier century, seldom surfaced. The recent experience of Japan has certainly refocused attention on the possibility that an unanticipated fall in the general price level would convert the otherwise relatively manageable level of nominal debt held by households and businesses into a corrosive rising level of real debt and real debt service costs. It now appears that we have learned that deflation, as well as inflation, are in the long run monetary phenomena, to extend Milton Friedman's famous dictum. To be sure, in the short to medium run, many forces are at play that complicate the link between money and prices. The widening globalization of market economies in recent years, for example, is integrating a growing share of previously local capacity into an operationally meaningful world total. That process has, at least for a time, brought substantial new supplies of goods and services to global markets. In addition, the more rapid rate of technological innovation, so evident in the United States, has boosted the pace at which our productive potential is expanding. These shifts in aggregate supply--whether foreign or domestic in origin--influence the relationship between money and prices. Moreover, the tie between money and prices can be altered by dysfunctional financial intermediation, as we have witnessed in Japan. Thus, recent experience understandably has stimulated policymakers worldwide to refocus on deflation and its consequences, decades after dismissing it as a possibility so remote that it no longer warranted serious attention. The meaning of deflation and the characteristics that differentiate it from the more usual experience of inflation are subjects being actively studied inside and outside of central banks. As I testified before the Congress last month, the United States is nowhere close to sliding into a pernicious deflation. Moreover, a major objective of the recent heightened level of scrutiny is to ensure that any latent deflationary pressures are appropriately addressed well before they became a problem. * * * * * Central bankers have long believed that price stability is conducive to achieving maximum sustainable growth. Historically, debilitating risk premiums have tended to rise with both expected inflation and deflation, and they have been minimized during conditions of approximate price stability. Although the U.S. economy has largely escaped any deflation since World War II, there are some well-founded reasons to presume that deflation is more of a threat to economic growth than is inflation. For one, the lower bound on nominal interest rates at zero threatens ever-rising real rates if deflation intensifies. A related consequence is that even if debtors are able to refinance loans at zero nominal interest rates, they may still face high and rising real rates that cause their balance sheets to deteriorate. Another concern about deflation resides in labor markets. Some studies have suggested that nominal wages do not easily adjust downward. If lower price inflation is accompanied by lower average wage inflation, then the prevalence of nominal wages being constrained from falling could increase as price inflation moves toward or below zero. In these circumstances, the effective clearing of labor markets would be inhibited, with the consequence being higher rates of unemployment. Taken together, these considerations suggest that deflation could well be more damaging than inflation to economic growth. While this asymmetry should not be overlooked, several factors limit its significance. In particular, more rapid advances in productivity can make this asymmetry less severe. Fast growth of productivity, by buoying expectations of future advances of wages and earnings and thus aggregate demand, enables real interest rates to be higher than would otherwise be the case without restricting economic growth. Moreover, to the extent that more-rapid growth of productivity shows through to faster gains in nominal wages, there will be fewer instances in which nominal wages will be pressured to fall. One also should not overstate the difficulties posed for monetary policy by the zero bound on interest rates and nominal wage inflexibility even in the absence of faster productivity growth. The expansion of the monetary base can proceed even if overnight rates are driven to their zero lower bound. The Federal Reserve has authority to purchase Treasury securities of any maturity and indeed already purchases such securities as part of its procedures to keep the overnight rate at its desired level. This authority could be used to lower interest rates at longer maturities. Such actions have precedent: Between 1942 and 1951, the Federal Reserve put a ceiling on longer-term Treasury yields at 2-1/2 percent. With respect to potential difficulties in labor markets, results from research remain ambiguous on the extent and persistence of downward rigidity in nominal compensation. Clearly, it would be desirable to avoid deflation. But if deflation were to develop, options for an aggressive monetary policy response are available. * * * * * Fortunately, the ability of our economy to weather the many shocks inflicted on it since the spring of 2000 attests to our market system's remarkable resilience. That characteristic is far more evident today than two or three decades ago. There may be numerous causes of this increased resilience. Among them, ongoing efforts to liberalize global trade have added flexibility to many aspects of our economy over time. Furthermore, a quarter-century of bipartisan deregulation has significantly reduced inflexibilities in our markets for energy, transportation, communication, and financial services. And, of course, the dramatic gains in information technology have markedly improved the ability of businesses to address festering economic imbalances before they inflict significant damage. This improved ability has been further facilitated by the increasing willingness of our workers to embrace innovation more generally. Irrespective of how deflationary forces might influence it, our economy has the benefit of enhanced flexibility, which has, at least to date, allowed us to withstand the potentially destabilizing effects of some substantial negative shocks. * * * * * Certainly, lurking in the background of any evaluation of deflation risks is the concern that those forces could be unleashed by a bursting bubble in asset prices. This connection, real or speculative, raises some interesting questions about the most effective approach to the conduct of monetary policy. If the bursting of an asset bubble creates economic dislocation, then preventing bubbles might seem an attractive goal. But whether incipient bubbles can be detected in real time and whether, once detected, they can be defused without inadvertently precipitating still greater adverse consequences for the economy remain in doubt. It may be useful, as a first step, to consider both the economic circumstances most likely to impede the development of bubbles and the circumstances most conducive to their formation. Destabilizing macroeconomic policies and poor economic performance are not likely to provide fertile ground for the optimism that usually accompanies surging asset prices. Ironically, low inflation, economic stability, and low risk premiums may provide tinder for asset price speculation that could be sparked should technological innovations open up new opportunities for profitable investment. Even in such circumstances, bubble pricing is likely to be inhibited for a company with a history. To be sure, the stock prices of old-line companies do rise somewhat through arbitrage when the market as a whole is propelled higher by stock prices of cutting-edge technologies. But it is difficult to imagine stock prices of most well-established and seasoned old-line companies surging to wholly unsustainable heights. With some prominent exceptions, their capabilities for future profits have been largely tested and delimited. The situation is likely different in the case of a new company that employs an innovative technology. Under these circumstances, the dispersion of rationally imagined possible future outcomes could be wide. If forecasts are unfettered by a need for consistency with the past, investors might take off on unwarranted flights of optimism. Moreover, skeptics find it too expensive or too risky to short sell the shares of such a company, especially when its stock price is rising rapidly. The conditions of extended low inflation and low risk were combined with breakthrough technologies to produce the bubble of recent years. But do such conditions always produce a bubble? It seems improbable that a surge in innovation in the near future would generate a new bubble of substantial proportions. Investors are likely to be sensitive to the need for asset prices to be backed ultimately by an ongoing stream of earnings. Hence, a further necessary condition for the emergence of a bubble is the passage of sufficient time to erode the traumatic memories of earlier post-bubble experiences. * * * * * Most standard macroeconomic models fitted to the experience of recent decades imply that a distortion in valuation ratios induced by a bubble can be offset by adopting a sufficiently restrictive monetary policy. According to such models, a tighter monetary policy, on average, credibly constrains demand and lowers asset prices, all else being equal. These models can also be interpreted to suggest that incremental monetary tightening can gradually deflate stock prices. But that conclusion is a consequence of the model's construction. It is not based on evidence drawn from history. In fact, history indicates that bubbles tend to deflate not gradually and linearly but suddenly, unpredictably, and often violently. In addition, the degree of monetary tightening that would be required to contain or offset a bubble of any substantial dimension appears to be so great as to risk an unacceptable amount of collateral damage to the wider economy. The evidence of recent years, as well as the events of the late 1920s, casts doubt on the proposition that bubbles can be defused gradually. As I related this summer at the annual Jackson Hole symposium sponsored by the Kansas City Federal Reserve Bank, "...our experience over the past fifteen years suggests that monetary tightening that deflates stock prices without depressing economic activity has often been associated with subsequent increases in the level of stock prices....Such data suggest that nothing short of a sharp increase in short-term rates that engenders a significant economic retrenchment is sufficient to check a nascent bubble. The notion that a well-timed incremental tightening could have been calibrated to prevent the late 1990s bubble is almost surely illusion." In short, unless a model can be specified to capture the apparent market tendency toward bidding stock prices higher in response to monetary policies aimed at maintaining macroeconomic stability, the accompanying forecasts will belie recent experience. Faced with this uncertainty, the Federal Reserve has focused on policies that would, as I testified before the Congress in 1999, "...mitigate the fallout [of an asset bubble] when it occurs and, hopefully, ease the transition to the next expansion." The Federal Open Market Committee chose, as you know, to embark on an aggressive course of monetary easing two years ago once it became apparent that a variety of forces, including importantly the slump in household wealth that resulted from the decline in stock prices, were restraining inflation pressures and economic activity. It is too soon to judge the final outcome of the strategy that we adopted. The contractionary impulse from the decline in equity prices appeared to be diminishing around the middle of this year. But then the fallout for stock prices from corporate governance malfeasance, argued by some as having been spawned by the bubble, became more intense. This, in turn, damped capital investment and trimmed inventory plans. More recently, of course, geopolitical risk has risen markedly, further weighing on demand. Though unrelated to the bubble burst of 2000, it has muddied the evaluation of the post-bubble economy. If the postmortem of recent monetary policy shows that the results of addressing the bubble only after it bursts are unsatisfactory, we would be left with less-appealing choices for the future. In that case, finding ways to identify bubbles and to contain their progress would be desirable, though history cautions that prospects for success appear slim. The difficulties that policymakers and private agents face become especially acute as an economic expansion lengthens. The decline in risk premiums under these circumstances presumably results, in part, from rational appraisals. In an economy in which the business cycle has averaged four years in length over a protracted period, households and businesses would doubtless become more cautious in the fourth year of a new cycle. But how do they behave when, as for the past two decades, expansions have been long and cyclical downturns have been exceptionally rare? After five or six years of uninterrupted expansion, is it irrational or even unreasonable to assume that expansion would continue for the subsequent six months? Thus, it was disturbing to observe risk seemingly being priced so cheaply in late 1997 when BBB corporate spreads over ten-year Treasuries sunk to only 70 basis points. That spread is now about 250 basis points, although it has narrowed significantly in recent weeks. * * * * * Weaving a monetary policy path through the thickets of bubbles and deflations and their possible aftermath is not something with which modern central bankers have had much experience. As I noted earlier, it seems ironic that a monetary policy that is successful in inducing stability may inadvertently be sowing the seeds of instability associated with asset bubbles. I trust that the use by the central bank of deliberately inflationary policy as protection against bubbles can be readily dismissed. While the current episode has not yet concluded, it appears that, responding vigorously in a relatively flexible economy to the aftermath of bubbles, as traumatic as that may be, is less inhibiting to long-term growth than chronic high-inflation monetary policy. Moderate inflation might possibly inhibit bubbles, though at some cost of reduced economic efficiency. However, I doubt that such policies could be sustained or well-controlled by central banks. Among our realistically limited alternatives, dealing aggressively with the aftermath of a bubble appears the most likely to avert long-term damage to the economy. Regardless of history's verdict on a policy that addresses only the aftermath of bubbles, we still need to improve our understanding of the dynamics of bubbles and deflation to contain the latter, if not the former. * * * * * Before closing this evening, I would like to take a few minutes to address recent economic developments. As I pointed out earlier, the U.S. economy exhibited considerable resilience to a series of post-boom shocks. The list is rather impressive: First, a halving of stock prices and household equity wealth; second, a dramatic decline in capital expenditures; third, the tragic events of September 11; fourth, the disturbing evidence of corporate malfeasance; and fifth, the recent escalation of geopolitical risks. I would scarcely state that our economy was not shaken by these series of shocks, one on top of the other. But after we experienced a mild recession, real GDP grew in excess of 3 percent over the year ending in the third quarter. The recovery, however, ran into resistance in the summer, apparently as a consequence of a renewed weakening in equity prices, further revelations of corporate malfeasance, and then the heightened geopolitical risks. Concern on our part led the Federal Open Market Committee to reduce its targeted federal funds rate 50 basis points at our early November meeting as some insurance against the possibility that the weakening would gain some footing. Although our most probable forecast already was that growth would pick up, we judged the cost of the insurance provided by additional easing as exceptionally modest because we viewed the risk of an imminent rise in inflation as remote. The limited evidence since the November easing has supported our view that the U.S. economy has been working its way through a soft patch. And the patch has certainly been soft. The labor market has remained subdued, as businesses apparently have been reluctant to add to payrolls. The manufacturing sector remains especially damped, and nonresidential construction has trended lower. By all reports, state and local governments continue to struggle with deterioration in their fiscal conditions. Oil prices have recently risen and, not least, the economies of most of our major trading partners have shown little vigor. Still, low interest rates and rapid advances in productivity have been providing considerable support to economic activity. Those influences have been most evident on consumer spending and new home sales, which have been remarkably firm this year. Motor vehicle sales have been supported by low financing costs, by high levels of customer incentives, and by high rates of vehicle scrappage and multiple car ownership. More broadly, strong growth of labor productivity, supplemented by reduced tax payments, has provided a boost both to incomes and to spending. Meanwhile, new home sales have been buoyed by low mortgage interest rates as well as favorable demographics. Cash borrowed in the process of mortgage refinancing, an important support for consumer outlays this past year, is bound to contract at some point, as average interest rates on households' total mortgage portfolio converges to interest rates on new mortgages. However, applications for refinancing, while off their peaks, remain high. Moreover, simply processing the backlog of earlier applications will take some time, and this factor alone suggests continued significant refinancing originations and cash-outs into the early months of 2003. Corporate risk-taking underwent pronounced retrenchment following the traumatic disclosures of corporate malfeasance this summer. Capital appropriations slowed noticeably across a broad spectrum of American industries. Aggressive accounting practices seemingly disappeared virtually overnight. I would not be surprised if further disclosures of questionable practices were to surface in the months ahead, but I would be quite surprised if such practices were introduced after mid-2002. Since early October, conditions in financial markets have turned less adverse. Stock prices have, on net, moved up, and corporate yield spreads, especially for below-investment-grade debt instruments, have narrowed significantly. Those spreads, nevertheless, remain quite elevated relative to their readings of early 2000. Credit derivative default swaps have improved recently in line with yield spreads. The overall cost of business capital has clearly declined, inducing in recent weeks increased issuance of bonds of all grades and halting the runoff of commercial paper and business bank loans. The recent increase in the expansion of business credit may hint at some stirring in capital investment, but it is simply too early to tell. There is evidence that some corporate managers are beginning to tentatively venture out on the risk scale. New orders for capital goods equipment and software, after falling sharply over the preceding two years, have stabilized and in some cases turned up in nominal terms this year--an improvement, to be sure, but not necessarily the beginnings of a vigorous recovery. In the end, capital investment will be most dependent on the outlook for profits and the resolution of the uncertainties surrounding the business outlook and the geopolitical situation. These considerations at present impose a rather formidable barrier to new investment. Profit margins have been running a little higher this year than last, aided importantly by strong growth in labor productivity. But a lack of pricing power remains evident for most corporations. A more vigorous and broad-based pickup in capital spending will almost surely require further gains in corporate profits and cash flows. A full enumeration of the caveats surrounding the economic outlook would, as usual, be lengthy. But often-cited concerns about the levels of debt and debt-servicing costs of households and firms appear a bit stretched. The combination of household mortgage and consumer debt as a share of disposable income has moved up to a historically high level. But the upward trend in the series reflects, in part, financial innovations that have increased access to credit markets for many households. These innovations include the development of a deep secondary market for home mortgages, along with the advent of credit scoring and automated underwriting models that have enhanced the ability of loan officers and credit card companies to identify good credit risks. These innovations lower the risk level of any given amount of debt. To be sure, the mortgage debt of homeowners relative to their income is high by historical norms. But, as a consequence of low interest rates, the servicing requirement for that debt relative to homeowners' income is roughly in line with the historical average. Moreover, owing to continued large gains in residential real estate values, equity in homes has continued to rise despite very large debt-financed extractions. Adding in the fixed costs associated with other financial obligations, such as rental payments of tenants, consumer installment credit, and auto leases, the total servicing costs faced by households relative to their income appears somewhat elevated compared with longer-run averages. But arguably they are not a significant cause for concern. Some strain from corporate debt burdens became evident as rates of return on capital projects financed with debt fell short of expectations over the past several years. While overall debt has not been paid down, corporations have significantly increased holdings of cash and have reduced their near-term debt obligations by issuing bonds to pay down commercial paper and bank loans. * * * * * In early 2000, as financial imbalances and increased risk brought the surge in capital investment to an end, significant profitable opportunities remained to be exploited. One must presume that they still exist and may well have been enlarged by subsequent technological advances. Indeed, one of the most remarkable features of the performance of the U.S. economy over the past year had been the extraordinary gains in productivity. The increase in output per hour over the year ending in the third-quarter--5-1/2 percent--was the largest increase in several decades. That pace will not likely be sustained, but it suggests that the underlying supports to productivity growth have not yet fully played out. Against that background, any significant fall in the current geopolitical and other risks should noticeably improve capital outlays, the indispensable spur to a path of increased economic growth. * * * * * In summary, as we focus on the dangers of bubbles, deflation, and excess capacity, the marked improvement in the degree of flexibility and resilience exhibited by our economy in recent years should afford us considerable comfort for now. Still, economic policymakers are having to grapple with what seems to be a much larger portfolio of problems than that which our predecessors appeared to face a half-century ago. The ever-growing complexity of our global economic and financial system surely plays a role. Moreover, the very technologies that have helped us reap enormous efficiencies have also presented us with new challenges by increasing our interconnectedness. I venture that future invitees to the Economic Club of New York dinners will not lack interesting problems to address. Footnotes 1. A considerable economics literature in recent years has documented a decline in the volatility of real GDP over the past two decades. Some researchers have argued that the decline in volatility is the result of smaller disturbances to the macroeconomy. Others have argued that improved monetary policy should be credited for the reduction. Another line of work points to structural changes that have increased the flexibility of the economy to respond to shocks. In that vein, I have argued that advances in information technology and the cumulative effects of a quarter century of deregulation have likely played a major role in promoting the increased flexibility of our economy. Of course, these explanations are not mutually exclusive and could, indeed, be interconnected. But to the extent that this resilience reflects increased flexibility of the economy, we should be searching for policies that will further enhance economic flexibility and dismantling policies that contribute to unnecessary rigidity. The more flexible an economy is, the greater is its ability to self-correct to inevitable disturbances, reducing the size and consequences of cyclical imbalances. An implication is that, at any given point in time, the economy is more likely to be producing close to its productive potential. So often, discussion of policies intended to improve macroeconomic performance have focused solely on traditional monetary and fiscal policies. But structural policies intended to promote flexibility may be an important complement to standard macro policies, and they may be important enough to influence both the cyclical performance and long-run growth potential of the economy. This issue surely deserves examination and debate. 2. Alan Greenspan, “Economic Volatility,” August 30, 2002, at a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City in Jackson Hole, Wyoming. 3. Committee on Banking and Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, July 22, 1999. 4. Some argue that bubbles can be prevented or defused by financial regulatory initiatives. It is observed that asset bubbles have often been associated with rapid credit expansion, and hence it is claimed that restraining credit growth could quash nascent bubbles. A bubble could conceivably be defused by restrictive credit regulations that stifle economic growth. It is by no means clear, however, that such a regime would be more conducive to wealth creation over time than our current regulatory system. Also of relevance, in a vibrant financial system, such as exists in the United States, there will always be many avenues available to investors for financing a bubble. Furthermore, many analysts maintain that stocks are priced at the margin by institutions with little or no financing needs.
No content found
For immediate release