For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among The First State Bank of West Manchester, West Manchester, Ohio, the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, and the Ohio Division of Financial Institutions. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
Joint Press Release Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation New York State Banking Department For Immediate Release May 5, 2003 Regulators Announce Termination of Enforcement Orders Against Daiwa Bank Federal and state banking regulators on Monday announced the termination of two enforcement orders issued in 1995 against Daiwa Bank, Limited, of Osaka, Japan. The first, the Order Issued Upon Consent, was issued by the Federal Reserve Board on October 2, 1995 and amended on March 18, 1996. The second, the Order to Terminate United States Banking Activities Issued Upon Consent, was issued on November 1, 1995, and amended on February 2, 1996, by the Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the New York State Banking Department and bank supervisory agencies in California, Florida, Georgia, Illinois, and Massachusetts. The federal and state bank supervisory agencies issued enforcement orders to terminate Daiwa Bank's U.S. activities in 1995 due to the concealment from the regulators by the banking organization's senior management and some directors of losses of more than $1 billion that were associated with unreported trading activities. Since the supervisors ordered Daiwa Bank to terminate its U.S. activities, the bank has been operating in the United States under a liquidation plan. Media Contacts: Federal Reserve Board Dave Skidmore 202-452-2955 FDIC David Barr 202-898-6993 N.Y. State Banking Dept. Bethany Blankley 212-709-1691
No content found
Remarks by Governor Susan Schmidt Bies At the Institute of Internal Auditors Conference, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania May 7, 2003 Corporate Governance Good morning. Thank you for the invitation to speak to the Institute of Internal Auditors (IIA) membership at this timely and important conference. My remarks this morning will focus on issues relating to corporate governance and underscore the critical role of internal auditors in the Sarbanes-Oxley era. Introduction Over the past two years, we have been shocked by the headlines announcing corporate governance or accounting problems at a variety of companies, such as Enron, Worldcom, and HealthSouth. As we read these headlines, the question that comes to mind is, "What were the underlying deficiencies in the internal control processes of these companies that rendered their governance practices ineffective?" As the details about the scandals have been made public, it has become clear that they are examples of breakdowns in internal controls that all of us learned about in Accounting and Auditing 101. Why, then, have we seen so many headlines highlighting corporate governance and accounting problems? The explanation is that these companies lost track of the basics of effective corporate governance--internal controls and a strong ethical compass to guide the organization. While most companies have effective governance processes in place, these events remind all of us of the importance of doing the basics well. Internal Control Framework After an earlier series of corporate frauds, the National Commission on Fraudulent Financial Reporting, also known as the Treadway Commission, was created in 1985 to make recommendations to reduce the incidence of these frauds. The Committee of Sponsoring Organizations (COSO) of the Treadway Commission issued a report titled Internal Control--Integrated Framework that has become the most referred to standard on internal control. If one re-reads that report, the lesson of returning to focus on the basics becomes clear. The report defines internal control as a process, effected by an entity's board of directors, management and other personnel, designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the achievement ofï¿½: Effectiveness and efficiency of operations Reliability of financial reporting Compliance with applicable laws and regulations. The COSO framework was the model considered when the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act was enacted in 1991. FIDICIA 112 requires that management report annually on the quality of internal controls and that the outside auditors attest to that control evaluation. Control Assessments COSO requires all managers to, at least once a year, step back from their other duties and evaluate risks and controls. Each manager should consider the current and planned operational changes, identify the risks, determine the appropriate mitigating controls, establish an effective monitoring process, and evaluate the effectiveness of those controls. Managers are then supposed to report their assessment up the chain of command to the chief executive officer, with each new level of management in turn considering the risks and controls under their responsibility. The results of this process are ultimately to be reported to the audit committee of the board of directors. In the case of banks, management publicly reports on its assessment of the effectiveness of controls over financial reporting and the external auditor is required to attest to this self-assessment. Thus, the process helps managers communicate among themselves and with the board about the dynamic issues affecting risk exposures, risk appetites, and risk controls throughout the company. Risk assessments such as the one outlined in COSO presumably could also be useful in assessing the risks and controls from various lines of business when formulating business strategies. But not all corporations and boards consider risk as a part of their annual strategic planning or other evaluation processes. The 2002 survey of 178 corporate directors conducted jointly by you (the IIA) and the National Association of Corporate Directors showed that directors are not focusing on risk management. I was surprised to learn that 45 percent of directors surveyed said their organization did not have a formal enterprise risk management process--or any other formal method of identifying risk. An additional 19 percent said they were not sure whether their company had a formal process for identifying risks. These percentages indicate that there are companies out there that have directors who don't understand their responsibilities as the representatives of shareholders. The shareholders of those companies should be asking the directors how they govern an organization without a good understanding of the risks the company is facing and without knowledge of a systematic approach to identifying, assessing, monitoring, and mitigating excessive risk-taking. I trust that none of the directors who participated in the survey were on the board of a financial services company. Although directors are not expected to understand every nuance of every line of business or to oversee every transaction, they do have the responsibility for setting the tone regarding their corporations' risk-taking and establishing an effective monitoring program. They also have the responsibility for overseeing the internal control processes, so that they can reasonably expect that their directives will be followed. They are responsible for hiring individuals who have integrity and can exercise sound judgment and are competent. In light of recent events, I might add that directors have a further responsibility for periodically determining whether their initial assessment of management's integrity was correct. The COSO framework and FDICIA annual report can be an effective tool for the auditor to communicate risks and control processes to the audit committee. Members of that committee should use the reports to be sure their understanding of business strategy, changing business processes, management reorganizations, and positioning for future growth are done within the context of a sound system of internal controls and governance. The report should identify those areas for which priorities should be established to strengthen the effectiveness of internal controls. Indeed, beyond legal requirements, boards of directors of all firms should periodically assess where management, which has stewardship over shareholder resources, stands on ethical business practices. They should ask, for example, Are we getting by on technicalities, adhering to the letter but not the spirit of the law? Are we compensating ourselves and others on the basis of contribution, or are we taking advantage of our positions? Would our reputation be tainted if word of our actions became public? Internal auditors should ensure that processes are in place for employees to raise ethical and control concerns in an environment that protects them from retribution from affected managers. Internal Controls Risk management clearly cannot be effective within a company if we forget about the basics of internal controls. It is worth stating that many of the lessons learned from those headline cases cited violations of the fundamental tenets of internal control, particularly those pertaining to operating risks. Based on the headlines, it seems that boards of directors, management, and auditors desperately need a remedial course in Internal Controls 101. As corporations grow larger and more diverse, internal controls become more, not less, important to the ability of management and the board to monitor activity across the company. The basics of internal controls for directors and management are simple. Directors do not serve full time, so it is important that the auditor establish an annual agenda for boards and audit committees to focus their attention on the high-risk and emerging risk areas while ensuring that there are effective preventive or detective controls over the low-risk areas. The challenge of the auditor is to ensure that the internal audit staff has the expertise and ongoing training to meet the specific and changing risks of the organization. Before a company moves into new and higher risk areas, the boards of directors, management, and the auditors need assurances that they have the tools in place to ensure that the basics of sound governance are being adhered to. Many of the organizations that have seen their reputations tarnished in the past two years have also neglected to consider emerging conflicts of interest when the organization adds new products and lines of business. It is important that if a customer service or control function must be done in an independent, fiduciary, or unbiased manner relative to other activities, appropriate firewalls are in place before the product or activity begins, to ensure that the integrity of the process is not compromised. Boards of directors are responsible for ensuring that their organizations have an effective audit process and that internal controls are adequate for the nature and scope of their businesses. The reporting lines of the internal audit function should be such that the information that directors receive is impartial and not unduly influenced by management. Internal audit is a key element of management's responsibility to validate the strength of internal controls. Internal controls are the responsibility of line management. Line managers must determine the acceptable level of risk in their line of business and must assure themselves that the combination of earnings, capital, and internal controls is sufficient to compensate for the risk exposures. Supporting functions such as accounting, internal audit, risk management, credit review, compliance, and legal should independently monitor the control processes to ensure that they are effective and that risks are measured appropriately. The results of these independent reviews should be routinely reported to executive management and boards of directors. Directors should be sufficiently engaged in the process to determine whether these reviews are in fact independent of the operating areas and whether the auditors conducting the reviews can speak freely. Directors must demand that management fix problems promptly and provide appropriate evidence to internal audit confirming this. While we have been focused on mid-sized and larger organizations, internal controls are also important to smaller organizations. Many failures of community banks are due to breakdowns in internal controls, thus increasing operational risk. In smaller organizations, the segregation of duties and ability to hire expertise for specialized areas is more difficult. But smaller organizations still must go through the process of assessing risks and controls and ensuring that they are appropriate for the culture and business mix of the organization. A faster growing financial services company in riskier lines of business will need a stronger, more formalized system of internal controls than a well-established company engaged broadly in traditional financial services. Internal Audit The Federal Reserve is very supportive of independent internal audit functions at financial services companies. Earlier this year, along with the other federal banking agencies, we issued an amended policy statement on the internal audit function that called for each regulated institution to have an internal audit function that is appropriate to its size and the nature and scope of its activities. This amended policy statement addresses several different areas of internal audit in general, including Director and senior management responsibilities. In our view, the board of directors and senior management cannot delegate the responsibility for having an effective system of internal control. Certain portions of the implementation of the control system may be conducted by more junior management, but this does not relieve the board and senior management of responsibility for the design and effectiveness of the system. We also describe the four areas that we believe must be included in the internal audit function. Those areas address the structure, management, scope, and communications of the internal audit function. Structure. The internal audit function must be independent from day-to-day operations. The structure section of the policy statement specifically states, "The manager of internal audit should report directly to the board of directors or its audit committee, which should oversee the internal audit function." It also states that the board should develop objective performance criteria to evaluate the work of internal audit. The auditor should meet periodically with the chair of the audit committee outside of formal meetings to review audit plans and the results of audits, determine issues of concern to the committee, and create an agenda that engages audit committee members in effective oversight of the internal audit process. Management, staffing, and audit quality. Directors should assign responsibility for the internal audit function to an internal audit manager. The audit manager should be responsible for control risk assessments, audit plans, audit programs, and audit reports. The management section states that institutions should follow professional standards, such as the IIA's standards. One of the most important roles of the auditor is to identify emerging areas of risk and report management's progress in implementing mitigating controls and monitors of changing exposures. Scope. We take the position that frequency and extent of internal audit review and testing engaged in during the audit "should be consistent with the nature, complexity, and risk of the institution's on- and off-balance-sheet activities." We also state that the audit committee should at least annually review and approve the internal audit manager's control risk assessment, the scope of the audit plan, including how much the manager relies on the work of an outsourcing vendor, and adherence to the audit plan. At the end of each audit plan year, a critical assessment of the validity of the initial assumptions should be made and appropriate re-allocations of resources scheduled for the new plan. Communications. We advise the board and senior management to foster communication with the internal auditors so that they are aware of pertinent issues and the board is aware of all significant matters. Just as the auditor should have regular communications with the audit committee, the auditor should have senior-enough stature within the organization to be aware of significant initiatives and be able to influence management as needed to adopt appropriate control processes. The policy statement advises banking organizations that the auditor independence rules of the Securities and Exchange Commission apply to institutions covered by FDICIA 112. As a result, internal audit outsourcing to the external auditor is prohibited for such institutions. Nonpublic, non-FDICIA 112 institutions are encouraged to adhere to this prohibition. Sarbanes-Oxley Act Now let's turn to Sarbanes-Oxley. At its core, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act is a call to get back to the basics that we have been discussing. Since you have other speakers on the program who are planning to provide you with an update on the status of rulemakings currently under way, I won't cover the act's provisions in any detail. However, as I'm sure you know, the IIA research foundation published a Sarbanes-Oxley status report just last month. The summary was entitled Assessment Guide for U.S. Legislative, Regulatory, and Listing Exchanges: Requirements Affecting Internal Auditing . As I recall, the guide compares the key requirements of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, Proposed and final Securities and Exchange Commission rules and interpretations related to the Act, and Regulations proposed by the listing exchanges and associations. Although the guide identifies 58 separate provisions that affect internal auditing, I think it is also important to stress the fundamental underlying sentiment of the act. Simply stated, the current status quo for corporate governance is unacceptable and must change. This message is applicable to both public and private companies alike and affects everyone within a company. The message for boards of directors is: Uphold your responsibility for ensuring the effectiveness of the company's overall governance process. The message for audit committees is: Uphold your responsibility for ensuring that the company's internal and external audit processes are rigorous and effective. The message for CEOs, CFOs, and senior management is: Uphold your responsibility to maintain effective financial reporting and disclosure controls and adhere to high ethical standards. This requires meaningful certifications, codes of ethics, and conduct for insiders that, if violated, will result in fines and criminal penalties, including imprisonment. The message for external auditors is: Focus your efforts solely on auditing financial statements and leave the add-on services to other consultants. The message for internal auditors is: You are uniquely positioned within the company to ensure that its corporate governance, financial reporting and disclosure controls, and risk-management practices are functioning effectively. Although internal auditors are not specifically mentioned in the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, they have within their purview of internal control the responsibility to examine and evaluate all of an entity's systems, processes, operations, functions, and activities. If you are feeling a little sensitive or uneasy right now as an internal auditor, that's good. Because the question you should be asking yourself is whether you are up to this challenge presented by Sarbanes-Oxley. What Are the Challenges for Internal Auditors in the Sarbanes-Oxley Era? First, internal auditors must step up to the plate and help corporate risk officers and managers reinvigorate the risk assessment and control process over financial reporting and now, under Sarbanes-Oxley, other public disclosures. Before becoming a Federal Reserve Governor, I was at various times the auditor and the CFO of a bank. As a result of this experience, I'm very familiar with the types of internal control risk assessments that are required by FDICIA 112. For the past decade, I've worked with both internal and external auditors to ensure that the risk management and reporting functions at banks produce reliable and accurate information. Recently, the Fed has been looking at the management reports on internal controls for several banks that have had significant breaks in internal controls. From these banks, we have identified several whose FDICIA 112 processes were not effective. A closer look at these situations indicates that management had essentially put this process on autopilot. Further, the external auditor had not done an effective review of the basis of management's report. Before you say, "That could not happen at my company," let me remind you how we started our discussion today. In each of the cases involving banks, the internal auditor seemed to be content with the loss of vigor in the process and the external auditor was apparently satisfied to simply collect a fee. This type of situation is totally unacceptable. Further, as the organization evolves over time by offering new products, changing processes, outsourcing services, complying with new regulations, or growing through mergers, the controls need to be modified to reflect the changes in risks. In some cases, the controls failed with respect to newer risk exposures that were not identified, or growth put strains on existing control processes that were not suitable for a larger organization. Section 302 of Sarbanes-Oxley requires senior management to assess and report on the effectiveness of disclosure controls and procedures as well as on internal controls for financial reporting. This broader certification addresses controls and procedures related to public disclosure, including financial information, such as Management's Discussion and Analysis, that is reported outside of the financial statements. To address these new disclosure control certifications, companies are undertaking steps to Set up disclosure committees composed of the CFOs, the corporate risk officers, in-house counsels, chief internal auditors, and other members of senior management, Identify the controls and procedures necessary for gathering information and preparing periodic reports, Determine whether the controls and procedures capture the appropriate information for disclosures and enable the necessary information to be recorded, processed, summarized, and reported on a timely basis, and Establish an audit program that includes quarterly evaluations of the assessment, control activities, information and communication, and monitoring elements of the disclosure control framework. We have not had enough experience to assess the effectiveness of these new certifications. However, for any framework to be successful, the CEOs and CFOs need to establish strong controls for maintaining and enforcing procedures for collecting, processing, and disclosing information in their securities filings. Now here's the challenge for you. First, as the company's internal auditor, you should be proactive in ensuring that your company's risk assessment and control process over financial reporting and disclosures are vigorous. In this regard If you are an internal auditor of a financial services company that is subject to FDICIA 112, you should seize this opportunity to take a fresh, objective look at the risk assessment and control process in your company's internal control framework. If you are an internal auditor of a publicly traded financial services company, you now have the same responsibility, since section 404 of Sarbanes-Oxley is modeled after FDICIA 112. However, don't assume that what was acceptable in the past is good enough for the future. Remember, there is a tendency for an organization to go on autopilot if the internal auditor is not vigilant. As for the certifications required by section 302 of Sarbanes-Oxley, you should be part of the disclosure committee. You should also establish a robust audit program for the company's disclosure controls framework. If you are an internal auditor of a nonpublic financial services company, you should view this as an opportunity to convince the board and management to adopt a rigorous self-assessment process for controls covered by sections 302 and 404 of Sarbanes-Oxley as a best practice. Second, internal auditors must be willing to sacrifice everything to maintain their independence within the organization. You are not going to be effective unless you report directly to the audit committee. Your company's entire quality assurance and monitoring program will be tainted if you are not accountable to the audit committee. Most audit committees already know this and are looking for ways to strengthen this area. If the audit committee asks you for recommendations on how to improve independence, your typical response should be that the test for any recommended change is whether it makes management more accountable for the ongoing effectiveness of internal controls and makes the internal audit function more effective in monitoring and process validation. If the audit committee is not ready to accommodate you on this point, you should raise the issue to the full board of directors and the outside auditor. If needed changes do not occur, then your professional standards should compel you to look for a new employer. In this regard, there are several ways that you as the internal auditor can demonstrate independence (not just in appearance) from management and your loyalty to the audit committee: If you are an internal auditor of a financial services company that is subject to FDICIA 112, you should already have a good working relationship with the audit committee. But if that relationship has grown cold over the years, it is time to break the ice. Explain to the committee how this level of independence reduces the chances of the company's becoming the next headline. If you are an internal auditor of a publicly traded financial services company, Sarbanes-Oxley will make management very sensitive to your request for greater independence, given the threat of fines and possible imprisonment. If you are an internal auditor of a nonpublic financial services company, you should view this as an opportunity to convince the board to establish an audit committee with authority similar to that established for audit committees under Sarbanes-Oxley as a best practice. Further, for all financial institutions, your primary federal banking regulator supports a strong, independent internal audit process at your company. Examinations of the internal audit process, organization structure, and audit committee agenda can provide outside support to the importance of a strong, independent internal audit function. Third, internal auditors must abandon the idea of becoming the roaming general management consultant within the company. Many of the proposed revisions to the IIA's professional standards focus on adding value by meeting the needs of management and the board. The focus needs to be on making sure the board has no surprises. Internal auditors add value by being effective, independent assessors of the quality of the internal control framework and processes. Auditors lose their independence when they perform management consulting roles for which they later will have to render an opinion. You are one of the few corporate officers that has both the ability and the responsibility to look across all of the management silos within the corporation and make sure that the system of internal controls has no gaps and that the control framework is continually reviewed to keep up with corporate strategic initiatives, reorganizations, and process changes. When an auditor becomes part of management, the independent view is lost. Further, you are the independent eyes and ears of the audit committee around the organization. As you work throughout the organization, you know which managers and which projects are likely to entail greater weaknesses in controls. By helping senior management address these risks before losses occur, you can help protect the reputation of managers and the bank and increase your credibility. Prompt reporting to the audit committee and timely resolution of audit findings will build your credibility with the committee, provided that you follow through on their behalf to ensure that managers are taking control and governance issues seriously. Conclusion My objective in talking to you today was to exhort you to take a stand and make a difference for the better in the corporate governance of your company. The Institute of Internal Auditors is the recognized world leader for the internal auditing profession. You should use the resources of this organization to support your efforts to make the internal audit division an even more effective force to improve the quality of internal controls in your organization. And you should take a leadership role in shaping the dialogue on corporate governance. Although I recognize that some of you are internal auditors of companies that are not subject to Sarbanes-Oxley, I believe the act is a wake-up call more generally for the internal auditing profession.
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan Corporate governance At the 2003 Conference on Bank Structure and Competition, Chicago, Illinois (via satellite) May 8, 2003 Corporate governance, the subject of our conference, has evolved over the past century to more effectively promote the allocation of the nationï¿½s savings to its most productive uses. And, generally speaking, the resulting structure of business incentives, reporting, and accountability has served us well. We could not have achieved our current level of national productivity if corporate governance had been deeply flawed. Yet, our most recent experiences with corporate malfeasance suggest that governance has strayed from the way we think it is supposed to work. By law, shareholders own our corporations, and corporate managers ideally should be working on behalf of shareholders to allocate business resources to their optimum use. But as our economy has grown and our business units have become ever larger, de facto shareholder control has diminished: Ownership has become more dispersed, and few shareholders have sufficient stakes to individually influence the choice of boards of directors or chief executive officers. The vast majority of corporate share ownership is for investment, not for operating control of a company. Thus, corporate officers, especially chief executive officers, have increasingly shouldered the responsibility for guiding businesses in what one hopes they perceive to be the best interests of shareholders. Not all CEOs have appropriately discharged their responsibilities and lived up to the trust placed in them, as the events that led to the passage of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act demonstrated. In too many instances, some CEOs, under pressure to meet elevated short-term expectations for earnings, employed accounting devices for the sole purpose of obscuring adverse results. A change in behavior, however, may already be in train. The sharp decline in stock and bond prices after the collapse of Enron and WorldCom has chastened many of those responsible for questionable business practices. Corporate reputation is emerging out of the ashes of the debacle as a significant economic value. I hope that we will return to the earlier practices of firms competing for the reputation of having the most conservative and transparent set of books. * * * It is hard to overstate the importance of reputation in a market economy. To be sure, a market economy requires a structure of formal rules--a law of contracts, bankruptcy statutes, a code of shareholder rights--to name but a few. But rules cannot substitute for character. In virtually all transactions, whether with customers or with colleagues, we rely on the word of those with whom we do business. If we could not do so, goods and services could not be exchanged efficiently. Even when followed to the letter, rules guide only a small number of the day-to-day decisions required of corporate management. The rest are governed by whatever personal code of values corporate managers bring to the table. Market transactions are inhibited if counterparties cannot rely on the accuracy of information. The ability to trust the word of a stranger still is an integral part of any sophisticated economy. A reputation for honest dealings within a corporation is critical for effective corporate governance. Even more important is the reputation of the corporation itself as seen through the eyes of outsiders. It is an exceptionally important market value that in principle is capitalized on a balance sheet as goodwill. Reputation and trust were particularly valued assets in freewheeling nineteenth-century America. Throughout much of that century, laissez-faire reigned and caveat emptor was the prevailing prescription for guarding against the wide-open trading practices of those years. A reputation for honest dealings was thus a particularly valued asset. Even those inclined to be less than scrupulous in their private dealings were forced to adhere to a more ethical standard in their market transactions, or they risked being driven out of business. To be sure, the history of business is strewn with Fisks, Goulds, and numerous others treading on, or over, the edge of legality. But they were a distinct minority. If the situation had been otherwise, the United States at the end of the nineteenth century would never have been poised to displace Great Britain as the worldï¿½s leading economy. Reputation was especially important to early U.S. bankers. It is not by chance that in the nineteenth century many bankers could effectively issue uncollateralized currency. They worked hard to develop and maintain a reputation that their word was their bond. For these institutions to succeed and prosper, people had to trust their promise of redemption in specie. The notion that ï¿½wildcat bankingï¿½ was rampant before the Civil War is an exaggeration. Certainly, crooks existed in banking as in every business. Some banks that issued currency made redemption inconvenient, if not impossible. But they were fly-by-night operators and rarely endured beyond the first swindle. In fact, most bankers competed vigorously for reputation. Those who had a history of redeeming their bank notes in specie, at par, were able to issue substantial quantities, effectively financing their balance sheets with zero-interest debt. J.P. Morgan marshaled immense power on Wall Street in large part because his reputation for fulfilling his promises was legendary. Today, most banks rely partly on deposit insurance in lieu of reputation to hold below-market-rate deposits. And a broad range of protections provided by the Securities and Exchange Commission, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, and myriad other federal and state agencies has similarly partially crowded out the value of trust as a competitive asset. * * * Trust still plays a crucial role in one of the most rapidly growing segments of our financial system--the over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives market. This market has played an important and successful role in the management of risk at financial institutions, a major element of their corporate governance. I do not say that the success of the OTC derivatives market in creating greater financial flexibility is due solely to the prevalence of private reputation rather than public regulation. Still, the success to date clearly could not have been achieved were it not for counterpartiesï¿½ substantial freedom from regulatory constraints on the terms of OTC contracts. This freedom allows derivatives counterparties to craft contracts that transfer risks in the most effective way to those most willing and financially capable of absorbing them. Benefits of Derivatives Although the benefits and costs of derivatives remain the subject of spirited debate, the performance of the economy and the financial system in recent years suggests that those benefits have materially exceeded the costs. Over the past several years, the U.S. economy has proven remarkably resilient in the face of a series of severe shocks--the collapse of equity values, terrorist attacks, and geopolitical turmoil. To be sure, economic growth has been subpar for some time, but we seem to have experienced a significantly milder downturn than the long history of business cycles and the severity of the shocks to the economy would have led us to expect. Although no single factor can account for this resilience, one striking feature that differentiates this cycle from earlier ones is the continued vitality of most U.S. banks and nonbank financial institutions. In past cycles, economic downturns often produced credit losses that were so severe that the capacity of those institutions to intermediate financial flows was impaired. As a consequence, recessions were prolonged and deepened. This time, the economic downturn has not significantly eroded the capital of most financial intermediaries, and the terms and availability of credit have not tightened to such an extent as to be significant factors in deepening the contraction or impeding the recovery. The use of a growing array of derivatives and the related application of more-sophisticated methods for measuring and managing risk are key factors underpinning the enhanced resilience of our largest financial intermediaries. Derivatives have permitted financial risks to be unbundled in ways that have facilitated both their measurement and their management. Because risks can be unbundled, individual financial instruments now can be analyzed in terms of their common underlying risk factors, and risks can be managed on a portfolio basis. Concentrations of risk are more readily identified, and when such concentrations exceed the risk appetites of intermediaries, derivatives can be employed to transfer the underlying risks to other entities. As a result, not only have individual financial institutions become less vulnerable to shocks from underlying risk factors, but also the financial system as a whole has become more resilient. Individual institutionsï¿½ portfolios have become better diversified. Furthermore, risk is more widely dispersed, both within the banking system and among other types of intermediaries and institutional investors. Even the largest corporate defaults in history (WorldCom and Enron) and the largest sovereign default in history (Argentina) have not significantly impaired the capital of any major financial intermediary. Likewise, record amounts of home mortgage refinancing and accompanying declines in mortgage asset durations have not imperiled the principal intermediaries in the mortgage markets, in substantial part because these institutions were able to use derivatives to transfer a significant portion of the convexity risk associated with prepayments of fixed-rate mortgages to investors in callable debt and issuers of putable debt. Risks Associated with the Use of Derivatives If derivatives and the techniques for risk measurement and management that they have facilitated have produced all these benefits, why do they remain so controversial? The answer is that the use of these instruments and the associated techniques pose a variety of challenges to risk managers. Inevitably, risk-management failures occur, and in two instances--the highly publicized cases of Barings and Long Term Capital Management--they proved destabilizing. Those that question the net benefits of derivatives see daunting risk-management problems and thus foresee catastrophic outcomes. In particular, they fear that common deficiencies in risk management will result in widespread failures or that the failure of a very large derivatives participant will impose heavy credit losses on its counterparties and yield a chain of failures. Others, like myself, who see the benefits of derivatives exceeding the costs, do not deny that their use poses significant risk-management challenges. But we see ample evidence that the risks are manageable in principle and generally have been managed quite effectively in practice, at least to date. Indeed, credit losses on derivatives have occurred at a rate that is a small fraction, for example, of the loss rate on commercial and industrial loans. Market discipline in the largely unregulated derivatives markets has provided strong incentives for effective risk management and has the potential to be even more effective in the future. To be sure, there undoubtedly will be further risk-management failures. But the largest market participants have such diversified businesses that a risk-management failure involving a single product line is unlikely to be a threat to solvency. Furthermore, risk-management failures are more likely to be idiosyncratic than to reflect common deficiencies in procedure or technique among market participants. In the case of the management of market risk, our bank examiners observe significant differences in approach across the largest U.S. banks, even in the measurement of such a basic concept as value-at-risk. I do not wish to suggest, however, that I am entirely sanguine with respect to the risks associated with derivatives. One development that gives me and others some pause is the decline in the number of major derivatives dealers and its potential implications for market liquidity and for concentration of counterparty credit risks. I also fear that the potential contribution of market discipline to stability in the derivatives markets is not being fully realized because, in our laudable efforts to improve public disclosure, we too often appear to be mistaking more extensive disclosure for greater transparency. This is an issue to which I shall shortly return. Concentration and Market Liquidity In recent years, consolidation has reduced the number of firms that provide liquidity to the OTC derivatives markets by acting as dealers in the more standardized or ï¿½plain vanillaï¿½ contracts. To be sure, the resulting concentration sometimes is overstated because of the failure to recognize that the OTC derivatives markets are global markets in which major banks and securities firms from more than half a dozen countries compete. For example, measures of concentration based on data reported by U.S. banks overstate concentration significantly because they ignore the competitive activities of U.S. securities firms and foreign banks. Nonetheless, not all major dealers make markets in all products, and concentration is substantial for certain important types of OTC contracts. Examples include U.S. dollar interest rate options and credit default swaps. In each case, a single dealer seems to account for about one-third of the global market, and a handful of dealers together seem to account for more than two-thirds. When concentration reaches these kinds of levels, market participants need to consider the implications of exit by one or more leading dealers. Such an event could adversely affect the liquidity of types of derivatives that market participants rely upon for managing the risks of their core business functions. Exit could be voluntary. In particular, losses incurred in making markets could lead a dealer to conclude that the returns from market-making are not commensurate with the risks. Alternatively, downgrades of a dealerï¿½s credit rating could force the dealer to exit. Counterparties in the OTC derivatives market are quite concerned about the potential credit risks inherent in such contracts and generally are unwilling to transact with dealers unless their credit rating is A or higher. If a major dealer exited and other dealers were unwilling to fill the void, the liquidity of the market likely would be impaired. Market participants need to consider what their alternatives would be in such circumstances. Are there other liquid markets in which they could manage their risks? In some cases market participants may be able to manage risks reasonably effectively in cash markets or exchange-traded derivatives markets. But in other cases managing risks may become more difficult with the exit of some dealers. If market participants perceive that they are vulnerable to such exit by a liquidity provider, they will tend to redirect some of their risk-management activity to other, more liquid markets or seek out new dealers in the market in which exit is a concern. If enough participants perceive the concentration of dealers as entailing market-liquidity risk, their actions to mitigate the risk should over time reduce that degree of concentration. Concentration and Counterparty Risk Perhaps the more obvious way in which concentration in OTC derivatives markets creates risks for market participants is through its implications for counterparty credit risks. Concentration of market-making has the potential to create concentrations of credit risks between the dealers and the end-users of derivatives as well as between the dealers themselves. This latter concentration of risk results from dealers frequently managing their market risks through derivatives transactions with a limited number of other dealers. As mentioned earlier, critics of derivatives often raise the specter of the failure of one dealer imposing debilitating losses on its counterparties, including other dealers, yielding a chain of defaults. However, derivatives market participants seem keenly aware of the counterparty credit risks associated with derivatives and take various measures to mitigate those risks. The vast majority carefully evaluate the creditworthiness of counterparties before entering into transactions and monitor their credit quality over the life of the transactions. As I indicated earlier, users of derivatives have been reluctant to transact with dealers that are not perceived as solid investment-grade credits. Market participants also establish credit limits for their counterparties and actively monitor their exposures to ensure that they remain within the limits established. Such monitoring, parenthetically, relies heavily on trust in the accuracy of the information forthcoming from the counterparties. Counterparty risk management has been materially assisted by the widespread use of master agreements for derivatives transactions. In the event of a counterpartyï¿½s default, such agreements permit the termination of all transactions with the counterparty and the netting of the resulting gains and losses. For many years, market participants have been putting such master agreements in place and working with legislatures to ensure that national laws support the enforceability of netting. Data reported by U.S. banks indicate that, on average, netting now reduces counterparty exposures by almost three-fourths. Even with wider use of netting, however, the outsized growth of derivatives markets has resulted in ever-larger counterparty exposures. Market participants have increasingly responded by entering into collateral agreements to further mitigate counterparty credit risks. Such agreements typically permit counterparties to derivatives transactions to demand collateral if their net credit exposure exceeds a negotiated threshold amount. The threshold often varies with the credit rating of the counterparty: The lower a counterpartyï¿½s credit rating, the smaller the threshold. If its credit rating falls below investment grade, a counterparty is often required to overcollateralize its counterpartiesï¿½ exposures. In effect, it becomes obligated to meet a margin requirement. Collateral agreements are a very effective means of limiting counterparty credit risks. At the same time, they increase market participantsï¿½ exposures to other types of risk, especially funding-liquidity risks. Once a counterparty has agreed to collateralize its derivatives contracts, day-to-day declines in the value of those contracts expose it to immediate demands for more collateral. Furthermore, the practice of tying the size of thresholds and margin requirements to credit ratings exposes a counterparty to extraordinary demands for collateral if its rating is downgraded. Collateral demands arising from rating downgrades may be especially costly to meet because a downgrade would reduce the availability of funding and increase its costs at the same time. Incentives for Effective Risk Management As this discussion of the risks associated with derivatives makes clear, effective risk management by market participants is the key to ensuring that the benefits of derivatives continue to exceed their costs. Some may see government regulation of OTC derivatives dealers as essential to ensuring efficacious risk management. This view presumes that government regulation can address the challenges these types of markets engender and that it can do so without lessening the effectiveness of market discipline supplied by counterparties. Market participants usually have strong incentives to monitor and control the risks they assume in choosing to deal with particular counterparties. In essence, prudential regulation is supplied by the market through counterparty evaluation and monitoring rather than by authorities. Such private prudential regulation can be impaired--indeed, even displaced--if some counterparties assume that government regulations obviate private prudence. We regulators are often perceived as constraining excessive risk-taking more effectively than is demonstrably possible in practice. Except where market discipline is undermined by moral hazard, owing, for example, to federal guarantees of private debt, private regulation generally is far better at constraining excessive risk-taking than is government regulation. The very modest credit losses that have appeared in derivatives portfolios at U.S. banks are a testament to the effectiveness of market discipline in this area. Indeed, credit losses on OTC derivatives also have been quite modest at derivatives affiliates of U.S. broker-dealers, which are subject to very limited government regulation. This is further evidence of the powerful effects on behavior that result when market participants recognize that they bear the bottom-line consequences of their risk-taking decisions. A key support for market discipline is the information that market participants have for evaluating the creditworthiness of counterparties. Over the past decade, enormous attention has been given to disclosures market participants make with regard to their risk exposures, particularly those associated with derivatives activities. Both public authorities and private-sector working groups have recommended ways to enhance market discipline through improved public disclosures. The result of these efforts, however, has been mixed. Clearly, we have made great strides in expanding the volume of publicly disclosed information related to risk exposures and derivatives. A more complex question is whether this greater volume of information has led to comparable improvements in the transparency of firms. In the minds of some, public disclosure and transparency are interchangeable. But they are not. Transparency implies that information allows an understanding of a firm's exposures and risks without distortion. The goal of improved transparency thus represents a higher bar than the goal of improved disclosures. Transparency challenges market participants not only to provide information but also to place that information in a context that makes it meaningful. Transparency challenges market participants to present information in ways that accurately reflect risks. Much disclosure currently falls short of these more demanding goals. Despite the substantial room for progress with regard to transparency, we should not underestimate the barriers to achieving it. Managers no doubt have to struggle with selecting and organizing data in a meaningful way. The difficulties are well illustrated by the annual reports of large institutions that routinely exceed one hundred pages; pressures are enormous to update existing tables and charts as well as to provide even more. In addressing this challenge, however, both managers of firms and makers of public policy would do well to be mindful of the ultimate goal--a clear understanding of a firm's activities that fosters market discipline. Conclusion In conclusion, the benefits of derivatives, in my judgment, have far exceeded their costs. Derivatives unquestionably do pose risk-management challenges to market participants. But those challenges are manageable and thus far have generally been managed quite well. The best way to ensure that those challenges continue to be met is to preserve and strengthen the effectiveness of market discipline. Market incentives, in particular, reinforce the importance of reputation and trust as sources of market value. Just as market discipline has fostered effective risk management in the derivatives markets, so too it is now being brought to bear on corporate governance generally. Once market discipline firmly reestablishes reputation and trust as corporate values, the incidence of corporate malfeasance should be greatly reduced.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the termination of the following enforcement action: U.S. Trust Corporation and the United States Trust Company of New York New York, New York Cease and Desist Order dated July 11, 2001-- terminated May 13, 2003
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan Redesigned U.S. $20 note At the Bureau of Engraving and Printing, Washington, D.C. May 13, 2003 Thank you, Tom. On behalf of the Federal Reserve, I am pleased to be with you all as we unveil the newly designed $20 note. The soundness of a nation's currency is essential to the soundness of its economy. And to uphold our currency's soundness, it must be recognized and honored as legal tender and counterfeiting must be effectively thwarted. The Federal Reserve was founded nearly ninety years ago to provide the nation with a safer, more flexible and more stable monetary and financial system. Although the Fed does not print the currency, we put it into circulation through the nation's banking system. To ensure confidence in the authenticity of our currency, we verify each note as it passes through the Federal Reserve System. This action, combined with aggressive law enforcement, is part of our ongoing commitment to protect our notes from counterfeiting. We check all older notes to determine if they are in good enough condition to be re-circulated. If they are too worn or too soiled, they are replaced. Since the average circulation life of a new $20 bill is only about two years, we expect that within a few years a high proportion of the $20s in circulation will be of the new series. All existing notes of course will continue to be legal tender. The United States has always honored its currency after issuance at its full face value. That is part of the reason our currency continues to be trusted and accepted by people throughout the world. I am gratified that the last redesign of U.S. currency was a success and I trust we will repeat that success when we begin circulation of the new $20 notes later this year. The Federal Reserve is deeply committed to protecting our currency from counterfeiting, ensuring it is always accepted as legal tender and preserving its soundness. We are pleased to join with the Treasury, the Bureau of Engraving and Printing, the Secret Service and everyone represented here today in meeting those commitments. Thank you very much.
Joint Press Release Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Bureau of Engraving and Printing U.S. Secret Service Office of Public Affairs For Immediate Release May 13, 2003 U.S. Unveils New $20 Note With Background Colors The New Color of Money: Safer, Smarter, More Secure. U.S. government officials today unveiled a new $20 note design with enhanced security features and subtle background colors. The new design is part of an ongoing effort to stay ahead of the counterfeiting of U.S. currency. ï¿½The soundness of a nationï¿½s currency is essential to the soundness of its economy. And to uphold our currencyï¿½s soundness, it must be recognized and honored as legal tender, and counterfeiting must be effectively thwarted,ï¿½ said Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve Board of Governors. Snow and Greenspan were joined today in unveiling the new $20 note by U.S. Treasurer Rosario Marin; Tom Ferguson, director of the Treasuryï¿½s Bureau of Engraving and Printing, which produces U.S. currency; and W. Ralph Basham, director of the United States Secret Service, the law enforcement agency responsible for combating counterfeiting. The new $20 note will be issued in the fall, with new designs for the $50 and $100 following in 2004 and 2005. Redesign of the $5 and $10 notes is under consideration, but the $1 and $2 notes will not be redesigned. Even after the new money is issued, older-design notes will remain legal tender. ï¿½U.S. currency is a worldwide symbol of security and integrity. This new design will help us keep it that way, by protecting against counterfeiting and making it easier for people to confirm the authenticity of their hard-earned money,ï¿½ U.S. Treasury Secretary John W. Snow said. ï¿½In addition to keeping our currency safe from counterfeiters, we are working to ensure that more of those dollars stay in the pockets of American families. The swift enactment of the Presidentï¿½s Jobs and Growth package should do just that.ï¿½ ï¿½This is The New Color of Money ; it is safer because it is harder to fake and easier to check, smarter to stay ahead of tech-savvy counterfeiters, and more secure than ever,ï¿½ said the Bureau of Engraving and Printingï¿½s Ferguson. ï¿½The security features are easier than ever to use, and we want the public to learn how to use them, to protect their hard-earned money.ï¿½ The New Color of Money The most noticeable difference in the notes is the subtle green, peach and blue colors featured in the background. Different colors will be used for different denominations, which will help everyone--particularly those who are visually impaired--to tell denominations apart. While consumers should not use color to check the authenticity of their currency (relying instead on user-friendly security features--see below), color does add complexity to the note, making counterfeiting more difficult. The new bills will remain the same size and use the same, but enhanced portraits and historical images of Andrew Jackson on the face of the note and the White House on the back. The redesign also features symbols of freedom--a blue eagle in the background, and a metallic green eagle and shield to the right of the portrait in the case of the $20 note. Security Features The new $20 design retains three important security features that were first introduced in the late 1990s and are easy for consumers and merchants alike to check: The watermark --the faint image similar to the large portrait, which is part of the paper itself and is visible from both sides when held up to the light. The security thread --also visible from both sides when held up to the light, this vertical strip of plastic is embedded in the paper. ï¿½USA TWENTYï¿½ and a small flag are visible along the thread. The color-shifting ink --the numeral ï¿½20ï¿½ in the lower-right corner on the face of the note changes from copper to green when the note is tilted. The color shift is more dramatic and easier to see on the new-design notes. Because these features are difficult for counterfeiters to reproduce well, they often do not try. Counterfeiters are hoping that cash-handlers and the public will not check their money closely. Counterfeiting: Increasingly Digital Counterfeiters are increasingly turning to digital methods, as advances in technology make digital counterfeiting of currency easier and cheaper. In 1995, for example, less than 1 percent of counterfeit notes detected in the U.S. was digitally produced. By 2002, that number had grown to nearly 40 percent, according to the U.S. Secret Service. Yet despite the efforts of counterfeiters, U.S. currency counterfeiting has been kept at low levels, with current estimates putting the level of counterfeit notes in circulation worldwide at between 0.01 and 0.02 percent, or about 1-2 notes in every 10,000 genuine notes. Secret Service Director Basham credits a combination of factors in keeping counterfeiting low: ï¿½Improved worldwide cooperation in law enforcement; improvements in currency design, like those in the new $20 notes unveiled today; and a better-informed public all contribute to our success in the fight against counterfeiting.ï¿½ Public Education Because the improved security features are more effective if the public knows about them, the U.S. government is undertaking a broad public education program. This program will ensure that people all over the world know the new currency is coming, and help them recognize and use the security features. The outreach will include cash-handlers, merchants, business and industry associations and the media. With roughly two-thirds of all U.S. currency held outside the U.S., the public education program will extend worldwide. ï¿½From Wall Street to Fleet Street, from St. Petersburg, Florida, to St. Petersburg, Russia, our goal is the seamless, smooth introduction of The New Color of Money ,ï¿½ Treasurer Marin said. To learn more about the new currency and to download an image of the new $20 design, visit U.S. government officials today unveiled a new $20 note design with enhanced security features and subtle background colors. The new design is part of an ongoing effort to stay ahead of the counterfeiting of U.S. currency. ï¿½The soundness of a nationï¿½s currency is essential to the soundness of its economy. And to uphold our currencyï¿½s soundness, it must be recognized and honored as legal tender, and counterfeiting must be effectively thwarted,ï¿½ said Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve Board of Governors. Snow and Greenspan were joined today in unveiling the new $20 note by U.S. Treasurer Rosario Marin; Tom Ferguson, director of the Treasuryï¿½s Bureau of Engraving and Printing, which produces U.S. currency; and W. Ralph Basham, director of the United States Secret Service, the law enforcement agency responsible for combating counterfeiting. The new $20 note will be issued in the fall, with new designs for the $50 and $100 following in 2004 and 2005. Redesign of the $5 and $10 notes is under consideration, but the $1 and $2 notes will not be redesigned. Even after the new money is issued, older-design notes will remain legal tender. ï¿½U.S. currency is a worldwide symbol of security and integrity. This new design will help us keep it that way, by protecting against counterfeiting and making it easier for people to confirm the authenticity of their hard-earned money,ï¿½ U.S. Treasury Secretary John W. Snow said. ï¿½In addition to keeping our currency safe from counterfeiters, we are working to ensure that more of those dollars stay in the pockets of American families. The swift enactment of the Presidentï¿½s Jobs and Growth package should do just that.ï¿½ ï¿½This is The New Color of Money ; it is safer because it is harder to fake and easier to check, smarter to stay ahead of tech-savvy counterfeiters, and more secure than ever,ï¿½ said the Bureau of Engraving and Printingï¿½s Ferguson. ï¿½The security features are easier than ever to use, and we want the public to learn how to use them, to protect their hard-earned money.ï¿½ The New Color of Money The most noticeable difference in the notes is the subtle green, peach and blue colors featured in the background. Different colors will be used for different denominations, which will help everyone--particularly those who are visually impaired--to tell denominations apart. While consumers should not use color to check the authenticity of their currency (relying instead on user-friendly security features--see below), color does add complexity to the note, making counterfeiting more difficult. The new bills will remain the same size and use the same, but enhanced portraits and historical images of Andrew Jackson on the face of the note and the White House on the back. The redesign also features symbols of freedom--a blue eagle in the background, and a metallic green eagle and shield to the right of the portrait in the case of the $20 note. Security Features The new $20 design retains three important security features that were first introduced in the late 1990s and are easy for consumers and merchants alike to check: The watermark --the faint image similar to the large portrait, which is part of the paper itself and is visible from both sides when held up to the light. The security thread --also visible from both sides when held up to the light, this vertical strip of plastic is embedded in the paper. ï¿½USA TWENTYï¿½ and a small flag are visible along the thread. The color-shifting ink --the numeral ï¿½20ï¿½ in the lower-right corner on the face of the note changes from copper to green when the note is tilted. The color shift is more dramatic and easier to see on the new-design notes. Because these features are difficult for counterfeiters to reproduce well, they often do not try. Counterfeiters are hoping that cash-handlers and the public will not check their money closely. Counterfeiting: Increasingly Digital Counterfeiters are increasingly turning to digital methods, as advances in technology make digital counterfeiting of currency easier and cheaper. In 1995, for example, less than 1 percent of counterfeit notes detected in the U.S. was digitally produced. By 2002, that number had grown to nearly 40 percent, according to the U.S. Secret Service. Yet despite the efforts of counterfeiters, U.S. currency counterfeiting has been kept at low levels, with current estimates putting the level of counterfeit notes in circulation worldwide at between 0.01 and 0.02 percent, or about 1-2 notes in every 10,000 genuine notes. Secret Service Director Basham credits a combination of factors in keeping counterfeiting low: ï¿½Improved worldwide cooperation in law enforcement; improvements in currency design, like those in the new $20 notes unveiled today; and a better-informed public all contribute to our success in the fight against counterfeiting.ï¿½ Public Education Because the improved security features are more effective if the public knows about them, the U.S. government is undertaking a broad public education program. This program will ensure that people all over the world know the new currency is coming, and help them recognize and use the security features. The outreach will include cash-handlers, merchants, business and industry associations and the media. With roughly two-thirds of all U.S. currency held outside the U.S., the public education program will extend worldwide. ï¿½From Wall Street to Fleet Street, from St. Petersburg, Florida, to St. Petersburg, Russia, our goal is the seamless, smooth introduction of The New Color of Money ,ï¿½ Treasurer Marin said. To learn more about the new currency and to download an image of the new $20 design, visit CONTACT : Bureau of Engraving and Printing (202) 874-3545 Dawn Haley Federal Reserve Board (202) 452-2955 Rose Pianalto or Susan Stawick New Color of Money Media Support (202) 530-4887 Penny Kozakos U.S. Secret Service Office of Public Affairs (202) 406-5708
No content found
Commencement address by Vice Chairman Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. Expectations At the Olin School of Business, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri May 16, 2003 Dean Greenbaum, distinguished trustees and faculty, and honored guests, I am pleased to be at the Olin School today to congratulate this accomplished group of graduates. I hope today represents but one among many successful milestones to come. And my advice to the graduates is that they look back, not just forward, and thank the family and friends who supported them in school and helped to make today's achievement possible. I intend to do more than just wish the graduates success this afternoon. In fact, I will take a few minutes on this happy occasion for a discussion of economic conditions and policy. I will first explain what the Federal Reserve will be doing to ensure the best possible performance of the economic system that you are about to enter. Then, I will discuss some steps that you can take to navigate better in that wider world. Before I proceed, I should note that the views I will be expressing are my own and do not necessarily represent the views of other members of the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve Board. What to Expect from the Central Bank Let me first explain what you, and others graduating during this season, can expect from the central bank. To my mind, the most important potential contribution of monetary policymakers is to anchor inflation expectations so that private-sector decisions can be made as efficiently as possible. We can do this because, as with any central bank, our control over the size of our balance sheet determines the value of our country's money and the general price level in the long run. We must do it because our enabling legislation directs the Federal Reserve to seek monetary conditions fostering "maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates." The economics profession has learned, in part from the bitter experience of the 1970s, that those three objectives collapse into one in the long run. That is, only in an environment of stable prices will households and firms be able to direct their complete attention to producing, investing, and saving so that employment will be at its maximum over the long run. And at the same time, when investors are not concerned about a generally rising level of prices for goods and services, inflation premiums will be compressed and long-term interest rates will be moderate. However, an environment of price stability is not one in which measured price indexes do not change. In fact, price indexes of consumer goods and services suffer from a variety of statistical biases that imply that the indexes overstate actual inflation. That is why, following Federal Reserve tradition, I speak of an environment of price stability, or a situation in which concerns about variations in the general price level do not materially influence the decisions of households and firms. In my view, we are in such an environment. The four-quarter growth in the core personal consumption deflator is currently running at a 1-1/2 percent rate, the slowest sustained pace in thirty years and 8 percentage points below its peak recorded in 1980. Think of it: Inflation has declined over the years--that is, we have experienced disinflation--to the point that increases in prices are now at a rate not seen on a sustained basis in the lifetimes of most of today's graduates. This disinflation represents an impressive victory for the disciplined monetary policy of the Federal Reserve under the guidance first of Paul Volcker and then Alan Greenspan. But having won the war, we at the Federal Reserve also have to win the peace. We will do that by always remembering that our mandate to foster price stability imposes a symmetric responsibility. Because resources are misused whenever the economy operates outside the zone of price stability, measured inflation can be too low at times as well as too high. In the quarters ahead and as noted at the conclusion of our policy meeting earlier this month, the Federal Reserve has to guard against further declines from the already low prevailing level of inflation. And we shall be on guard against such a development. Nonetheless, the possibility that the process of disinflation will cumulate to the point that price levels actually decline for a sustained stretch of time--that is, we enter into deflation--remains quite remote. Quite simply, the United States has too many good things going for it to make a forecast of deflation credible, including the stimulus imparted by prior monetary policy easings, the marked decline in oil prices associated with decisive victory in the war against Iraq, the progress many households and firms have made in repairing their balance sheets, and the fact that inflation expectations remain well anchored. In discussing the fundamentals supporting economic expansion, I particularly want to single out the impressive growth of labor productivity. These increases in output per hour worked have been made possible by the harnessing of advances in technology in every aspect of business life. The lessons learned at institutions such as the Olin School are being applied everywhere to trim inventories, shorten supply chains, and enhance firms' responsiveness to their customers' needs. Faster productivity growth implies that workers can look forward to more rapidly rising real wages over time. Because the economic pie will be getting larger, those wage gains will not come at the expense of profits. But we must also remember the unpleasant arithmetic attached to those gains in productivity of late. Thus far in the economic recovery and expansion, firms have been able to meet increased demand for their products without adding workers. I would not be credible before this audience if I did not recognize that some may have had trouble finding employment and a few may still be uncertain of their next job opportunity. Indeed, over the past year, about one-half million private payroll jobs in the nonfarm sector have been lost. Because aggregate supply can increase rapidly, aggregate demand also has to grow faster than its recent pace to ensure that economic slack does not build up. Indeed, given the existing level of slack in labor and product markets, the economy should be able to enjoy above-trend growth for some time without putting undue pressure on resources. Recognizing that the economy is experiencing price stability, I also accept that the central bank should work to create conditions conducive to closing the gap between output and the ability of our economy to produce, thereby fostering utilization of resources, including labor. With the sound fundamentals that are now in place, I believe that such an outcome will be achieved. That said, an economic system such as ours that relies on the separate decisions of millions of people working to further their self-interest will be sensitive to expectations and sentiment. As a result, economic outcomes can change quickly and are thus difficult to predict. The difficulties of prediction pose a challenge to monetary policymakers: We prefer to act in advance of, rather than in reaction to, economic developments so as to minimize disruptions to economic activity. We cope with the challenge of prediction as best we can by devoting substantial resources to economic forecasting, by monitoring developments in financial markets, by speaking regularly with an extensive network of business contacts, and by being flexible with our policy actions. But the reality is that the private sector cannot look to the central bank to eliminate all risk. Real decisions have uncertain outcomes, and sometimes the result is adverse. But businesses and households must be prepared to take the reasonable risks associated with modern economies. And I am certain that businesses will return to a more normal pace of investment, although I am less certain of the timing. What to Expect of Yourselves Let me now offer a few thoughts about the world you are entering and the key professional challenges you face. Frankly, you will join the business world at a time when many have lost confidence in the integrity and ethics of our institutional leadership. Questions have been raised in the corporate and nonprofit sectors about the quality and reliability of information that is made available and about the personal ethics of those who had responsibility for managing the business risks that all organizations face. A disregard for ethics, vague accountability, and weak systems of internal control have resulted in unexpected levels of risk in credit or market exposures, in legal liability, and in tarnished reputations and careers. But the damage is not necessarily limited to those situations in which wrongdoing was discovered. The threat is more fundamental: Capital cannot be allocated efficiently if market participants do not have reliable information with which to make reasoned judgments. Many investors, businesspeople, policymakers and regulators understand this and have successfully promoted a needed emphasis on independence, oversight, and accountability. Corporate governance is now properly understood to be the keystone in risk management. Reputation is a critical competitive necessity, as you know, because reputation certainly weighed heavily in your educational selection process. Reputation risk should not be underestimated; I believe, for example, that Enron ceased to be a viable business because the value of its name was severely reduced well before any liability had been found in any court of law. How can the organizations you will soon join manage legal risks and protect their reputations? It is here that I believe a well-crafted ethics policy and the means to monitor compliance can serve as a foundation. A solid program in support of ethical behavior, along with sound corporate governance, can act as an early warning system that raises concerns to senior managers and directors before they ripen into legal liability. A rigorous compliance program can also identify behavior that, while within the law, could tarnish the company's reputation with very tangible consequences on equity value. It would please me thoroughly to say that with your entry into the profession of management the need for these kinds of programs will be reduced. And your educational experience has no doubt included some thoughtful and perhaps heartfelt discussions of business ethics. But one of the constants of human commerce is that a certain proportion of those involved will succumb to the urge to subordinate ethics to the desire for personal gain, however fleeting. I believe that most of you will live up to the highest ethical standards. Some of you will be able to profoundly influence your communities and businesses for the good. I will celebrate that kind of outcome, but my more modest hope is that as a group you will enter the business world as energetic advocates for the careful management of reputation risk and that throughout your careers you will use the lessons of our current experience. My final thought on managing the challenges ahead is one that will be familiar to you. As a person who was privileged, as you are, to attend some of the world's finest educational institutions, and as someone who currently serves in an institution that is heavily dependent on analysis, I know that knowledge matters. Knowing a business plan or an issue or an analytical technique is an absolute requirement. Recognizing that knowledge is fleeting is the beginning of deeper understanding. Thus, my hope for you is a continuing commitment to working through difficult problems, a professional life characterized by the highest commitment to ethical behavior, a lifelong love of learning, and a few moments--days like today--for celebration of your success. Congratulations and good luck. We are rooting for you.
For immediate release Federal Reserve Board Chairman Alan Greenspan will stress the benefits of economic and financial education in a public service announcement and during a visit to a Washington, D.C., school. The events are part of a broad initiative throughout the Federal Reserve System to provide consumers with more resources for making smart financial decisions.
For immediate release
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced it will expand the operating hours for the online Fedwire® Funds Service. The Fedwire Funds Service will open three and one-half hours earlier (9:00 p.m. Eastern Time the prior calendar day) than the current opening time of 12:30 a.m. ET. The closing time for the service will remain 6:30 p.m. ET. The scheduled timeframe for full implementation of the expanded operating hours is the second quarter of 2004. Fedwire participants will be notified at least sixty days before the specific effective date of the new hours. The impetus for the expansion of the Fedwire operating hours was industry requests to achieve greater overlap of U.S. wholesale payments system operating hours with those of the Asia-Pacific markets, including Australia, Hong Kong, Japan, and New Zealand. The Fedwire Funds Service is a real-time, large-value electronic funds transfer service, which is provided by the Federal Reserve Banks. Depository institutions and other authorized participants use this service to send and receive large-value, time-critical payments. Each payment transaction is settled individually in central bank money and is final and irrevocable once processed. The Board's notice is attached.
Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan The economic outlook Before the Joint Economic Committee, U.S. Congress May 21, 2003 Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the opportunity to testify before the Joint Economic Committee. As you will recall, when I appeared here last November, I emphasized the extraordinary resilience manifested by the United States economy in recent years--the cumulative result of increased flexibility over the past quarter century. Since the middle of 2000, our economy has withstood serious blows: a significant decline in equity prices, a substantial fall in capital spending, the terrorist attacks of September 11, confidence-debilitating revelations of corporate malfeasance, and wars in Afghanistan and Iraq. Any combination of these shocks would arguably have induced a severe economic contraction two or three decades ago. Yet remarkably, over the past three years, activity has expanded, on balance--an outcome offering clear evidence of a flexible, more resilient, economic system. Once again this year, our economy has struggled to surmount new obstacles. As the tensions with Iraq increased early in 2003, uncertainties surrounding a possible war contributed to a softening in economic activity. Oil prices moved up close to $40 a barrel in February, stock prices tested their lows of last fall, and consumer and business confidence ebbed. Although in January there were some signs of a post-holiday pickup in retail sales other than motor vehicles, spending was little changed, on balance, over the following three months as a gasoline price surge drained consumer purchasing power and severe winter weather kept many shoppers at home. Businesses, too, were reluctant to initiate new projects in such a highly uncertain environment. Hiring slumped, capital spending plans were put on hold, and inventories were held to very lean levels. Collectively, households and businesses hesitated to make decisions, pending news about the timing, success, and cost of military action--factors that could significantly alter the outcomes of those decisions. The start of the war and its early successes, especially the safeguarding of the Iraqi oilfields, were greeted positively by financial and commodities markets. Stock prices rallied, risk spreads narrowed, oil prices dropped sharply, and the dour mood that had gripped consumers started to lift, precursors that historically have led to improved economic activity. The quick conclusion of the conflict subsequently added to financial gains. We do not yet have sufficient information on economic activity following the end of hostilities to make a firm judgment about the current underlying strength of the real economy. Incoming data on labor markets and production have been disappointing. Payrolls fell further in April, and industrial production declined as well. Because of the normal lags in scheduling production and in making employment decisions, these movements likely reflect business decisions that, for the most part, were made prior to the start of the war, and many more weeks of data will be needed to confidently discern the underlying trends in these areas. One reassuring development that has been sustained through this extended period of economic weakness has been the performance of productivity. To the surprise of most analysts, labor productivity has continued to post solid gains. Businesses are apparently continuing to discover unexploited areas of cost reduction that had accumulated during the boom years of 1995 to 2000 when the projected huge returns from market expansion dulled incentives for seemingly mundane cost savings. The ability of business managers to reduce costs, especially labor costs, through investment or restructuring is, of course, one reason that labor markets have been so weak. Looking ahead, the consensus expectation for a pickup in economic activity is not unreasonable, though the timing and extent of that improvement continue to be uncertain. The stance of monetary policy remains accommodative, and conditions in financial markets appear supportive of an increased pace of activity. Interest rates remain low, and funds seem to be readily available to creditworthy borrowers. These factors, along with the ability of households to tap equity accrued in residential properties, should continue to bolster consumer spending and the purchase of new homes. The recent declines in energy prices are another positive factor in the economic outlook. The price of West Texas intermediate crude oil dropped back to below $26 per barrel by the end of April, but as indications of a delay in the restoration of Iraqi oil exports became evident and geopolitical risks crept back in, prices have risen to near $30 a barrel--a worrisome trend if continued. Nonetheless, the price of crude oil is still about $10 per barrel below its peak in February. This decline has already shown through to the price of gasoline in May. Some modest further declines in gas prices are likely in coming weeks, as marketersï¿½ profit margins continue to back off from their elevated levels of March and April to more normal levels. In contrast, prices for natural gas have increased sharply in response to very tight supplies. Working gas in storage is presently at extremely low levels, and the normal seasonal rebuilding of these inventories seems to be behind the typical schedule. The colder-than-average winter played a role in producing todayï¿½s tight supply situation as did the inability of heightened gas well drilling to significantly augment net marketed production. Canada, our major source of gas imports, has little room to expand shipments to the United States. Our limited capacity to import liquified natural gas effectively restricts our access to the worldï¿½s abundant supplies of natural gas. The current tight domestic natural gas market reflects the increases in demand over the past two decades. That demand has been spurred by myriad new uses for natural gas in industry and by the increased use of natural gas as a clean-burning source of electric power. On balance, recent movements in energy prices seem likely to be a favorable influence on the overall economy. In the short run, lower energy bills should give a boost to the real incomes of households and to business profits. To be sure, world energy markets obviously remain susceptible to politically driven supply disruptions, as has been evident recently from the events in Venezuela and Nigeria. But, even taking account of these risks, futures markets project crude oil prices to fall over the longer run, consistent with the notion that current prices are above the long-term supply price of oil. As has been the case for some time, the central question about the outlook remains whether business firms will quicken the pace of investment now that some, but by no means all, of the geopolitical uncertainties have been resolved. A modestly encouraging sign is the backlog of orders for nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft, which has been moving up in recent months. Moreover, recent earnings reports suggest that the profitability of many businesses is on the mend. That said, firms still appear hesitant to spend and hire, and we need to remain mindful of the possibility that lingering business caution could be an impediment to improved economic performance. One new uncertainty in the global economic outlook has been the outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) in Southeast Asia and elsewhere. This epidemic has hit the economies of Hong Kong and China particularly hard, as tourism and business travel have been severely curtailed and as measures to contain the spread of the virus have held down retail sales. To date, the effects of SARS on the U.S. economy have been minimal. Airlines have obviously suffered another serious blow, and some U.S. multinational corporations are reporting reduced foreign sales. But the effects on other industries have been small. Initially, there had been some concern that SARS would disrupt the just-in-time inventory systems of U.S. manufacturers. Many of those systems rely on components from Asia, and any disruption in the flow of these goods has the potential to affect production in the United States. So far, however, U.S. manufacturing output has not been noticeably affected. In recent months, inflation has dropped to very low levels. As I noted earlier, energy prices already are reacting to the decline in crude oil prices, and core consumer price inflation has been minimal. Inflation is now sufficiently low that it no longer appears to be much of a factor in the economic calculations of households and businesses. Indeed, we have reached a point at which, in the judgment of the Federal Open Market Committee, the probability of an unwelcome substantial fall in inflation over the next few quarters, though minor, exceeds that of a pickup in inflation. Mr. Chairman, the economic information received in recent weeks has not, in my judgment, materially altered the outlook. Nonetheless, the economy continues to be buffeted by strong cross currents. Recent readings on production and employment have been on the weak side, but the economic fundamentals--including the improved conditions in financial markets and the continued growth in productivity--augur well for the future.
Joint Press Release Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Office of the Comptroller of the Currency For Immediate Release May 22, 2003 Banking Agencies Issue Host State Loan-to-Deposit Ratios The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency today issued the host state loan-to-deposit ratios that the banking agencies will use to determine compliance with section 109 of the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act of 1994. These ratios update data released on June 24, 2002. In general, section 109 prohibits a bank from establishing or acquiring a branch or branches outside of its home state primarily for the purpose of deposit production. Section 109 also prohibits branches of banks controlled by out-of-state bank holding companies from operating primarily for the purpose of deposit production. Section 109 provides a process to test compliance with the statutory requirements. The first step in the process involves a loan-to-deposit ratio screen that compares a bankï¿½s statewide loan-to-deposit ratio to the host state loan-to-deposit ratio for banks in a particular state. A second step is conducted if a bankï¿½s statewide loan-to-deposit ratio is less than one-half of the published ratio for that state or if data are not available at the bank to conduct the first step. The second step requires the appropriate banking agency to determine whether the bank is reasonably helping to meet the credit needs of the communities served by the bankï¿½s interstate branches. A bank that fails both steps is in violation of section 109 and is subject to sanctions by the appropriate banking agency. The updated host state loan-to-deposit ratios are attached. Federal Reserve Susan Stawick 202-452-2955 FDIC David Barr 202-898-6992 OCC Dean DeBuck 202-874-5770
Remarks by Governor Mark W. Olson Before the Chambers of Commerce of Bloomington, Eden Prairie, and Edina Bloomington, Minnesota May 22, 2003 Assessing Prospects for Economic Growth in the United States Thank you for the invitation to be with you today. I would like to focus my remarks largely on what I think will, over time, lead the U.S. economy back to a path of solid economic expansion. In particular, I want to explain to you why I believe that, although the economy still faces substantial risks and although the timing and the extent of a pickup in activity remain uncertain, the stage has been set for an improvement in the economic climate. To lay the groundwork for that discussion and to put the current situation into perspective, I will briefly step back and touch on some recent economic history. I should note that my comments today reflect my own opinions and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve or the Federal Open Market Committee. As you know, the latter half of the 1990s was a time of remarkable economic performance. Businesses added workers and expanded output at a rapid clip. The unemployment rate fell from over 7-1/2 percent in the middle of 1992 to just under 4 percent by the end of 2000. In Minnesota, the unemployment rate fell from 5.2 percent to 3.4 percent over the same period. The stock market soared, and--remarkably enough--core inflation moderated. Much of this performance was fueled by an investment boom that also contributed importantly to rapid growth in labor productivity. To be sure, some of the acceleration in productivity over that period was cyclical in nature; but more critical for our longer-run economic performance is that at least a portion of the pickup now appears sustainable. By late 2000, the boom had come to an end. The stock market began to retreat in early 2000, and by the end of the year, analysts were revising down their expectations for future earnings. Many businesses were cutting back sharply on capital investment--particularly in high-tech equipment--as demand and profits weakened and many companies, such as those in the telecommunications industry, found that they had overspent on equipment during the boom. The downturn in the economy, which began in 2000, had two distinct characteristics. First, and thankfully, it turned out to be one of the shallowest in our economic history. Second, it was one of the few business-led recessions in the United States since the end of the Second World War. Most recessions since then have been brought on by sharp cutbacks in spending by households, with housing and consumer durables among the most sensitive sectors. The recent experience was clearly different. Consumer spending and residential investment were both relatively well maintained throughout 2001, even as firms cut employment and stock market losses eroded household wealth. Despite only modest increases in nominal wages and salaries, households' real disposable income was supported by tax cuts and lower inflation. In addition, low interest rates helped promote spending. As you know, consumers took advantage of falling mortgage rates to buy new homes, to refinance their existing mortgage debt, and to tap into their increasing home equity to pay off more expensive debt or to finance spending on other things. As a result, the contraction in real GDP during the first three quarters of 2001 turned out to be quite shallow despite the disruptive economic fallout from the horrific events of September 11. By early last summer, economic recovery appeared to be under way. Real GDP increased at an annual rate of roughly 3-1/2 percent over the first three quarters of the year. Businesses seemed to have brought their inventories into better alignment with sales, and employment began to rise again, though the gains were too small to make a dent in the unemployment rate. A particularly encouraging development, given the nature of the downturn, was that the contraction in business investment appeared to be slowing while household spending, still supported by low interest rates and gains in real disposable income, continued to trend up. Although the government statistics were looking a bit better, signs appeared over the summer that the economy's resilience would be tested by several new shocks. As a banker who experienced several previous economic downturns, I know that whatever weaknesses exist in our economy become problematic at the low point of the economic cycle. At such times, we typically see loan losses and evidence of weak business models. What emerged in early 2002 was not what I had expected. The Enron and WorldCom scandals raised serious concerns about the adequacy of the corporate governance system and tended to cloud the outlook for business expansion. Abroad, mounting tensions with Iraq were beginning to take their toll on consumer and business confidence. The stock market moved down again, conditions eroded in corporate debt markets, and risk spreads widened. As we moved into the fall, industrial production faltered, and business investment posted only modest and uneven gains. By the final quarter of 2002, real GDP growth had slowed to a pace of 1-1/2 percent, and heightened caution in the business sector showed through to renewed layoffs and a sharp cutback in inventory investment. That brief review brings us to this year, which began with a few bright spots: Concerns about corporate governance were apparently receding, employment and industrial production moved up solidly in January, and the unemployment rate edged down a bit. Unfortunately, these improvements were short-lived. In late February and early March, as the confrontation with Iraq heated up, uncertainty was pervasive. No one knew if or when the war would start, or end. The possibilities that chemical or biological weapons might be used, that the war might spread, or that terrorists might again attack on U.S. soil seemed to be quite real. There was a risk that Iraq's oil fields might be damaged. The ranges of possible outcomes and of their economic consequences were extremely wide. The uncertainty hit consumer confidence hard. The University of Michigan's survey of consumer attitudes reported that, by the middle of March, confidence had fallen to its lowest level since the early 1990s and was below what we would have expected given the state of the economy. The oil, equity, and financial markets all showed signs of strain. Oil prices rose to nearly $40 per barrel in early March, though civil strife in Venezuela undoubtedly played a role in the increase. Broad stock market indexes moved down about 10 percent in the two months leading up to the war, and the equity risk premium widened. Measures of implied volatility in stocks edged up. All in all, the economy's performance in the first quarter of 2003 ended up little better than it was in the fourth quarter of 2002. Real GDP again rose at an annual rate of about 1-1/2 percent as both households and businesses reined in spending. Our overall economic performance would have been even weaker had housing markets not remained vibrant. Fortunately, the range of plausible outcomes narrowed significantly even before the official conclusion of hostilities with Iraq. As the onset of the war became imminent, financial markets rallied. Oil prices fell sharply during the week that ended with coalition missile attacks on Baghdad. Two months have passed since the war began, and we do not yet have a clear understanding of how strongly the economy is emerging from this most recent shock. The most positive signs are responses from energy and equity markets. The price of crude oil has returned to levels that prevailed at the end of last year, and both households and businesses should welcome the lower energy bills. Equity values, with additional support from generally favorable earnings reports, are up substantially. Spreads have narrowed significantly, continuing the downward trend that began last fall. Other positive signs include further reductions in mortgage interest rates and the rebound in consumer confidence. All told, these indicators point to a noticeable reduction in the economic tensions that built up earlier this year. Though markets can respond instantly to positive news, business investment decisions adjust more slowly, and that distinction is evident in current production and employment data. Businesses cut another 80,000 jobs in April, the jobless rate moved up to 6 percent, and new claims for unemployment insurance in recent weeks remain at levels associated with little net change in jobs. (In Minnesota, the jobless rate moved up to 4.4 percent in March, and about 28,000 workers filed claims for unemployment compensation in April.) Industrial production fell 1/2 percent in both March and April, and capacity utilization is under 75 percent. Retail sales have been, on balance, lackluster in recent months. Turning briefly to inflation, last week's report on the consumer price index showed, as expected, that consumer energy prices had begun to retreat noticeably last month, reversing about one-third of the run-up over the first three months of the year. In April, prices of core goods and services--that is, consumer prices excluding food and energy--were unchanged for a second month. As a result, the core CPI was up just 1-1/2 percent from last April. On balance, these indicators suggest that the economy will probably remain soft in the near future and that inflation will remain low. Nonetheless, I continue to believe that the pieces are in place for future robust growth. Looking back over the past three years, I am struck by how much the U.S. economy has had to contend with. For much of the period since mid-2001, large negative wealth effects from the falling stock market, the shakeout in the high-tech sector, and the slowdown in economic activity abroad have combined to restrain economic activity. Outside shocks, such as September 11, corporate scandals, and the war with Iraq, provided additional drag to renewed expansion. The economy, however, proved to be remarkably resilient. Looking forward, one must ask, what will lead to economic growth? The best way to start answering that question is to look at the fundamental forces shaping economic activity. In that regard, a first consideration is that financial conditions should prove conducive to stronger economic growth over the next year or so. Monetary policy is very accommodative. The nominal federal funds rate is currently 1-1/4 percent, a level that, using standard measures of core consumer price inflation, implies a real funds rate that is at or below zero, as compared with the real rate's long-run average of about 2-3/4 percent. With corporate risk spreads having narrowed considerably, borrowing terms are now quite favorable. Business financing needs have been very limited recently, and demand for credit has been weak. But the financial sector is well capitalized and under little stress, and lenders should be well positioned to fund a pickup in business demand for credit. In addition, as I noted earlier, equity prices have moved up again. Fiscal policy, like monetary policy, has been providing fundamental stimulus to economic growth over the past two years, through both tax cuts and higher outlays for defense. The tax proposals currently under consideration by the Congress could add to that stimulus, either by accelerating some of the tax cuts enacted previously or by excluding some portion of dividends from taxable income. A third factor underpinning longer-run prospects for growth is the sustained strong uptrend in labor productivity. Labor productivity rose 2 percent in 2001, a remarkable showing for a recession year, and it was up an additional 4 percent in 2002. Productivity appears to have a strong underlying trend, which could support overall income growth even if the weakness in the labor market continues for a while longer. In assessing how these factors will play out over time, I find it useful to consider separately how they translate into a pickup in demand among households and among businesses. From the perspective of households, the combination of lower energy prices and tax cuts should help bolster real disposable income in the near term. In addition, the drag on household spending from the earlier declines in stock market wealth should gradually diminish, especially if the stock market holds on to its recent gains. Low interest rates should allow consumers to continue to finance their purchases relatively cheaply, whether through home equity loans or through more standard instruments. The outlook for the business sector is perhaps a more critical consideration. Here, too, the fundamentals look favorable. In the near term, lower oil prices should reduce the costs of production for many businesses and free funds for other uses. Also, with interest rates low, the incentives for capital expenditure in the tax code in place until late 2004, and prices for high-tech goods still falling, the cost of capital should remain low. Over the longer run, the continuing rapid pace of technological innovation implies that there are many potential investments that offer attractive returns. In the uncertain business environment that has prevailed for some time, many businesses have probably been making do with their existing equipment, stretching out their normal replacement cycles, especially for rapidly depreciating high-tech equipment. Overall, though shifts in business attitudes are difficult to measure, I believe that markets reward businesses that outperform their competitors and that, as demand picks up, companies will respond to opportunities to incorporate technological advances in production, communication, and organization. Because of the uncertainties that have been restraining investment, predicting exactly when firms will act is difficult; but I do believe that they will act. As you can see, I remain generally optimistic about the longer-run prospects for the U.S. economy. However, I want to mention some significant questions about the outlook. Perhaps the most significant is whether the slump in capital spending will be more prolonged than expected. Such a slump could occur if firms remain so uncertain about the outlook for a pickup in sales that they continue to shelve plans for upgrading or expanding their businesses. Given the very low levels of capacity utilization both in our factories and in service-providing industries such as telecom and air transportation and the high vacancy rates in many office buildings, this risk is not trivial. For example, here in the Twin Cities metro area, one-fifth of available office space sat empty at the end of last year. Another question that is frequently asked is whether financial stress in the household sector might restrain growth. Specifically, some argue that the high level of consumer debt might mean that households will be unable to increase spending substantially for some time to come. To be sure, the debt service burden is quite high by historical standards, and personal bankruptcies moved up in 2001 and 2002. However, households have been converting their more expensive, non-tax-deductible debt into mortgage debt, which has helped keep the debt service burden fairly stable during the past few years. What is more, banks are not experiencing broad weakness in their consumer loan portfolios as most of the increase in delinquencies has been in a narrow spectrum of households. On the whole, looking at the available evidence, I tend to give less weight to the questions concerning the financial situation of households than I do to the risks of continued uncertainty in the business sector. A third question bearing on the outlook for the U.S. economy regards prospects for a pickup in activity among our major trading partners. Concerns about the strength of the global economy remain, and the emergence of SARS poses a threat to the economic prospects of several emerging-market economies in Asia. To date, however, we have no evidence that the new disease has affected U.S. economic activity. Nonetheless, continued slow growth abroad could have a damping effect on our recovery here. To summarize, the recent news from oil and financial markets and about consumer confidence clearly suggests that the reduction in risks associated with the situation in Iraq has had a number of favorable effects. At the same time, the available indicators of production and employment suggest that the pace of economic activity may remain slow for a while longer, likely restrained by lingering uncertainty about the timing of economic recovery. Looking ahead, however, it seems likely that, at some point the combined effects of a fundamentally solid financial sector, sustained consumer spending power, and improving consumer confidence will demonstrate sufficient demand potential to stimulate increased levels of capital investment.
For immediate release
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced that it is seeking public comment on a proposal to amend Regulation K to require Edge and Agreement corporations and U.S. branches, agencies, and other offices of foreign banks supervised by the Board to establish and maintain procedures reasonably designed to ensure and monitor compliance with the Bank Secrecy Act and related regulations. Comments on the Board’s proposal should be submitted by June 30, 2003. The Bank Secrecy Act generally requires a financial institution doing business in the United States to keep records and make reports that have a high degree of usefulness in criminal, tax, or regulatory proceedings. Domestic financial institutions, such as state member banks subject to the Board’s Regulation H, already have been required to establish and maintain such procedures. The Board’s proposal to amend Regulation K is designed to require Edge and Agreement corporations and U.S. branches, agencies, and other offices of foreign banks to implement and maintain similar compliance programs. The Board’s proposal is designed to be consistent with regulations recently issued by the Department of the Treasury under section 352 of the USA PATRIOT Act, which requires all financial institutions to maintain effective anti-money-laundering programs. The Board believes that the proposed regulation will not impose any material administrative burden for affected institutions because, in supervising these institutions to ensure safety and soundness, the Board has consistently expected such entities to maintain programs to ensure compliance with all applicable provisions of the Bank Secrecy Act. Attached is the Board's Notice of Proposed Rulemaking.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among the NAB Bank, Chicago, Illinois, the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, and the State of Illinois Office of Banks and Real Estate. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the approval of the application of HSH Nordbank Aktiengesellschaft of Hamburg and Kiel, Germany, to establish a branch in New York, New York. Attached is the Order relating to this action.
Remarks by Governor Susan Schmidt Bies Before the Conference of State Bank Supervisors, Asheville, North Carolina May 30, 2003 Restoring Our Confidence in Bank Controls and Financial Statements This conference is always an important gathering, but not simply because of what we discuss over these few days. It serves as an annual reminder of the remarkable strength of the dual banking system in the United States. The diversity and flexibility of our banking system are unique. Bankers can make charter choices on the basis of their business needs and particular circumstances. Thousands of community banks coexist comfortably--indeed, thrive--alongside a much smaller number of very large regional and global institutions, regardless of charter. Our system provides a rich menu of choices to the marketplace, encouraging financial institutions to innovate and respond dynamically to the changing economic needs of depositors and borrowers. Under the dual banking system states have fostered innovations that likely would not have occurred as rapidly--if at all--had only federal regulation existed. The dual banking system also helps to safeguard against regulatory excesses. In short, this structure has been critical in producing a banking system that is the most innovative, responsive, and flexible in the world. U.S. banks have developed those characteristics to survive in a market economy that is subject to rapid change and periodic stress. Our banking system is thus better able to finance growth and serve customer needs and has demonstrated its ability to rebound from crises that have, from time to time, devastated more rigid systems. This conference also reminds us of the long history of close and successful cooperation among state and federal regulators that allows state-chartered banks to flourish in the marketplace while remaining safe and sound. As you know, the Federal Reserve has consistently been a strong supporter of the dual banking system, and that will continue. We understand, as you do, the importance of a safe and sound banking system to the proper functioning of the economy, and the role of effective supervision in ensuring sound banks. Supervising these state-chartered banks is a very significant responsibility, considering the scope and vitality of these institutions. State-chartered banks continue to represent about half of the commercial banking industry by assets--$3.41 trillion, or 47.6 percent of the industry at year-end 2002. By number of institutions, roughly three-fourths of banks operate under a state charter--6,311 institutions or 75.2 percent of the industry as of December. Perhaps most significant, over the past three years the vast majority of new bank charters--once again, about three-fourths of them--have been granted by states. We have a long history of working with the states to coordinate our supervisory programs and achieve quality results. We rely on state supervisors as equal partners to ensure consistent, effective, and high-quality supervision. Together with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, we believe we have a strong relationship with the states, bolstered by our common effort to develop the supervisory protocols of the last decade and, more recently, by our work with the states and the FDIC to foster consistent examination processes and procedures. I believe the flexibility and dynamism of our banking system contributes to the financial soundness and performance of U.S. banks. The banking industry continues to be strong and profitable despite a tepid economy and corporate governance issues. After a record year in 2002, insured commercial banks in the United States earned $24.6 billion in the first quarter of 2003--a quarterly record. Robust growth in core deposits and vibrant activity in mortgage lending have been the key forces behind recent strong earnings, which have been offset in part by weak loan demand from businesses. Aggregate nonaccrual loans and foreclosed assets remain at about 1.2 percent of loans while credit costs have declined, as first-quarter net charge-offs dropped to 0.91 percent of average loans--the lowest level since June 2001. Although all the facts are not yet in, it appears that this credit cycle hasn't tested us nearly as significantly as we have been tested in the past. Community banks have also remained strongly profitable through this period, although over the past two years they experienced far less of a run-up in problem assets and charge-offs than their larger counterparts. The number of problem banks remains at about 120, but actual failures remain quite low, only ten in all of last year. Corporate Governance Based on the current condition of the industry, you might ask what's on the supervisory agenda and where should we focus our attention? Although there are a number of supervisory issues that require our attention, there are two specific areas--corporate governance and quality assurance in the audit process--where I believe we should focus some of our supervisory attention. Over the past two years, corporate scandals have focused our attention on the deficiencies in corporate governance at major companies. The reforms of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 focused on the need to enhance the governance, accounting, and disclosure practices at public companies, and the resulting dialogue has focused attention on the need to improve governance practices at other companies. The Securities and Exchange Commission has launched significant regulatory reforms and initiatives to address these issues, and the banking agencies have been actively involved in a dialogue with the SEC on matters of mutual interest. The focal point of this dialogue is to implement practical steps to move the corporate governance practices of public and nonpublic companies forward, particularly with regard to the adequacy of internal controls and audits. I want to focus the rest of my remarks on steps that we can take to improve the quality assurance process surrounding internal controls and audits. Internal Controls The essence of corporate governance is ensuring that the company is operated, at all times, in a manner that manages risk, achieves the company's stated operating objectives, and protects the best interests of the shareholders. The Internal Control-Integrated Framework of the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations (COSO) of the Treadway Commission is the most-often-mentioned standard on internal control at banking organizations. The COSO framework defines internal control as "a process, effected by an entity's board of directors, management and other personnel, designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the achievement ofï¿½: Effectiveness and efficiency of operations Reliability of financial reporting Compliance with applicable laws and regulations." Based on this definition, it is clear that boards of directors are responsible for ensuring that their organizations' internal controls are adequate for the nature and scope of their businesses and that line management is responsible for ensuring that internal controls are functioning on a day-to-day basis. Thus, the board of directors and management need to have a quality assurance process in place for internal controls. So, how do we know that the quality assurance process surrounding the internal controls at banking organizations is working? With respect to this quality assurance process, the Federal Reserve conducted reviews of the documentation and support for management's assessment of internal controls and the auditor's related attestations at a few problem institutions that are subject to section 112 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act. What we found was evidence that notable deficiencies had crept into the quality of the work performed by management over time as the businesses grew and new products were added. Management became less vigilant in the internal control area because of increased performance pressures. This behavior is actually counterintuitive when dealing with internal controls. As the business grows and new products are added, that is precisely the time when management needs to ensure that adequate controls are in place to mitigate risks. We are talking to the other banking agencies about these concerns and are considering the need for more detailed guidance for management that will strengthen banks' internal control practices. Internal Audit Recent corporate governance events clearly demonstrate the importance of the internal audit function. While Sarbanes-Oxley does not focus on the role of the internal auditor, bank supervisors have long recognized the importance of an effective internal audit function to the control environment. With respect to the quality of internal audit, the audit committee must pave the way for quality assurance. As we indicated in a recently amended interagency policy statement on the internal audit function, the committee should provide for the utmost independence, objectivity, and professionalism of the internal audit process. The audit committee sets the tone, and our role as supervisors is to reinforce it. The goal for internal audit should be to have no internal control surprises. To support this goal, internal audit should have an effective quality assurance process. Risk-focused audit programs should be reviewed regularly to ensure audit resources are focused on the higher-risk areas as the company grows and produces and processes change. As lower-risk areas come up for review, auditors should do enough transaction testing to be confident in their risk rating. Audit committees should receive reports on all breaks in internal controls to determine where the auditing process can be strengthened. Before a company moves into new or higher-risk areas, the board of directors and management should receive assurances from internal audit that the tools are in place to ensure that the basics of sound governance will be adhered to. The audit committee should actively engage the internal auditor to ensure that the bank's risk assessment and control process over financial reporting are vigorous. Many of the organizations that have seen their reputations tarnished in the past two years have simply neglected to consider emerging conflicts of interest when adding new products and lines of business. It is important to make sure that appropriate firewalls are in place before the product or activity begins. As supervisors, we can focus attention on this area and watch for signs of any internal audit deficiencies at our institutions. The audit committee should also require the highest possible level of independence for the internal audit process and eliminate any threats to this independence, such as the tendency for some internal auditors to act as management consultants within the organization. Many of the proposed revisions to the Institute of Internal Auditors' professional standards focus on adding value by meeting the needs of management and the board. Internal auditors add value by being effective independent assessors of the quality of the internal control framework and processes. Auditors lose their independence when they perform management consulting roles for which they later will have to render an opinion. Internal audit is one of the few corporate functions that has both the ability and the responsibility to look across all of the management silos within the corporation and make sure that the system of internal controls has no gaps and that the control framework is continually reviewed to keep up with corporate strategic initiatives, reorganizations, and process changes. When an auditor becomes part of management, the independent view is lost. External Audit Let's turn to the topic of quality assurance in the external audit process. As supervisors, we must take steps to encourage a high standard of professionalism among auditors. In some cases, this may mean undertaking an enforcement action against an accountant. The agencies are finalizing the accountant debarment rule, which will be one more tool we can use to correct errant behavior. However, before we do that, we should look at the lessons learned from some recent audit failures. The typical fact pattern in these failures indicates that some auditors are focusing on the form rather than the substance of transactions when making critical audit judgments. Moreover, when looking at assurance services, such as the FDICIA 112 auditor attestations, some auditors have a tendency to gloss over internal control deficiencies or simply ignore significant control deficiencies because they are "immaterial." It is not meaningful for auditors to apply a financial statement concept of materiality to an attestation engagement on internal controls. From a supervisory perspective, we would consider the existence of a series of such immaterial deficiencies to be useful information in assessing the quality of the internal and external audit process. We need to change this mindset in the auditing community. Some of this can be done through dialogue with the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants and the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board, which we are doing. Once auditors start to routinely report known deficiencies in internal controls, we should begin to eliminate the gap between what we expect an audit or attestation engagement to include and actual services provided by auditors. However, if we continue to find significant internal control deficiencies in safety and soundness examinations that the auditor knows about but fails to disclose, because they are judged to be immaterial, then we should discuss the auditor's lack of action with the banking organization's audit committee. Furthermore, in appropriate circumstances, we may need to refer the auditor to the PCAOB or subject the auditor to sanctions under the agencies' debarment regulations if the bank is subject to FDICIA 112. A secondary cause of the audit failures was lax professional standards. Examples in the banking area are the professional standards for attestation engagements. Currently, the standards don't require auditors to perform any independent testing of controls. Under the current standards, auditors can simply rely on the work of internal audit as the basis for issuing an attestation report on management's report on the effectiveness of internal controls. There is virtually no guidance on the criteria auditors should use to issue a qualified opinion. We have long argued that the professional standards in this area need to be more robust. In response to our criticisms and those of others, the AICPA recently proposed revisions to their professional standards to address some of these issues. However, the AICPA no longer has the authority to issue standards or to administer the quality assurance (peer review) function for audit or attestation engagements of public companies. The newly created Pubic Company Accounting Oversight Board has this authority and is just beginning to develop a framework for quality assurance. So, this may take a little time to correct. However, as supervisors, we will continue to work with the AICPA and the PCAOB to ensure that high-quality professional standards are created for public and nonpublic companies and that a robust process for ensuring audit quality is implemented. Conclusion In closing, I would like to simply encourage all of us to be vigilant about sound corporate governance and internal control processes at banking organizations. To accomplish this, we need to insist on effective attestations on internal controls by external auditors and encourage bankers to improve the quality assurance process and independence of the internal audit function. Finally, supervisors from all regulatory agencies need to continually work together to ensure a consistent, high-quality examination process throughout our banking system.
Remarks by Governor Ben S. Bernanke Before the Japan Society of Monetary Economics, Tokyo, Japan May 31, 2003 Some Thoughts on Monetary Policy in Japan I am delighted to address this meeting of the Japan Society of Monetary Economics. I would particularly like to thank Professor Shimizu both for inviting me and for helping to arrange a series of meetings with officials at the Bank of Japan, the Ministry of Finance, and the Financial Services Agency. Those meetings have given me a first-hand look at the difficult challenges that the current economic situation poses for Japan's leaders and for the Japanese people. The economic situation here is indeed enormously complex. It involves not only structural, monetary, and fiscal problems but also underlying political and social forces, which have at times limited the flexibility of policy. The sometimes frustratingly slow pace of change in Japan is all the more reason, however, for this nation's economists to speak out and present clear, persuasive arguments that will help guide the policy debate and urge leaders to effective action. At stake is not only the economic health of your country but also, to a significant degree, the prosperity of the rest of the world. From my side of the ocean, it seems that many people are looking to the United States to take the responsibility for leading the world into economic recovery. Clearly, however, faster growth in Japan and other major industrial countries would support a stronger, more balanced, and more durable recovery than one driven by U.S. growth alone. Although changes in macroeconomic policy in Japan during the past decade have generally been slow and deliberate, there has also been some willingness to experiment, not least by the Bank of Japan (BOJ). For this reason, the recent appointment of a new leadership team at the BOJ has stimulated considerable interest and expectation around the world. Although Governor Fukui and his colleagues have so far not made radical breaks with previous BOJ policies, there is reason to hope that they will be open to fresh ideas and approaches. In that spirit, my remarks today will be focused on opportunities for monetary policy innovation in Japan, including specifically the possibility of more-active monetary-fiscal cooperation to end deflation. In focusing primarily on macroeconomic policies and the deflation problem, however, I do not wish to imply that more microeconomic measures--such as bank restructuring and recapitalization, development of more liquid capital markets, revitalization of the distressed corporate sector, and broader structural reform--are not essential and urgent. Indeed, all these elements are crucial if Japan's economy is to return to a more satisfactory rate of growth. However, I do think that ending deflation and carrying out banking, financial, corporate, and structural reforms can and should be pursued on parallel tracks, with progress being made wherever possible. Indeed, a definitive end to the deflation in consumer prices--by restoring confidence and stimulating spending--would do much to help moderate the unemployment and financial distress that might otherwise arise as the results of aggressive programs of reform and restructuring. I preface the body of my remarks with two important caveats. First, the opinions I give today are strictly my own and should not be attributed to my colleagues on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve or on the Federal Open Market Committee; nor do they reflect any official position of the United States government. Second, the remarks that follow were prepared before my visit to Japan and therefore do not reflect the discussions that I held this week with Japanese officials. Obviously, then, no inference should be made about those meetings from the comments to follow. Today I would like to consider three related issues that bear on contemporary monetary policy in Japan. First, I will discuss the option of asking the Bank of Japan to announce a quantitative objective for prices, as well as how such an objective might best be structured. Rather than proposing the more familiar inflation target, I will suggest that the BOJ consider adopting a price-level target, which would imply a period of reflation to offset the effects on prices of the recent period of deflation. Second, I would like to consider an important institutional issue, which is the relationship between the condition of the Bank of Japan's balance sheet and its ability to undertake more aggressive monetary policies. Although, in principle, balance-sheet considerations should not seriously constrain central bank policies, in practice they do. However, as I will discuss, relatively simple measures that would eliminate this constraint are available. Finally, and most important, I will consider one possible strategy for ending the deflation in Japan: explicit, though temporary, cooperation between the monetary and the fiscal authorities. What Objective for Japanese Monetary Policy? Before setting off on a trip, one should know one's destination. In that spirit, a discussion of Japanese monetary policy should begin with some discussion of the policy objective. I leave until later how the objective can be achieved. The Bank of Japan Law, passed in 1998, sets price stability as a primary objective for the central bank. As with our own Federal Reserve Act, price stability is not, however, precisely defined in the Law. Currently, the BOJ has promised that the zero-interest-rate policy will be maintained until deflation is brought to an end, a policy that might be deemed consistent with the price stability objective. Two objections to this conclusion might be raised, however. First, the BOJ's statement seems to imply that the current level of policy stimulus might start to be withdrawn as soon as measured inflation returns to zero; in particular, no explicit commitment has been made to maintain inflation at zero, much less at some positive rate, in the longer run. But the presence of measurement bias in Japanese price indexes suggest that a measured inflation rate of at least one percent is likely required in order to achieve true price stability in the long run. Moreover, inflation above zero will be needed if real interest rates in Japan are to be negative for a period, as many observers think is necessary for full recovery. In short, it would be helpful if the zero-interest-rate policy were more explicit about what happens after the deflationary period ends. Second, over the past five years, since the onset of the current deflationary episode--and, incidentally, since the passage of the new Bank of Japan Law--the price level has trended down, registering a cumulative decline (depending on the price index) of between 4 and 9 percent. For example, over this period the GDP deflator has dropped nearly 9 percent, the private consumption deflator has fallen 5-1/2 percent, and wages and salaries are down 4-1/2 percent. One might argue that the legal objective of price stability should require not only a commitment to stabilize prices in the future but also a policy of actively reflating the economy, in order to restore the price level that prevailed prior to the prolonged period of deflation. As you may know, I have advocated explicit inflation targets, or at least a quantitative definition of price stability, for other leading central banks, including the Federal Reserve. A quantitative inflation target or range has been shown in many countries to be a valuable tool for communication. By clarifying the objectives of the central bank, an explicit inflation target can help to focus and anchor inflation expectations, reduce uncertainty in financial markets, and add structure to the policy framework. For Japan, given the recent history of costly deflation, however, an inflation target may not go far enough. A better strategy for Japanese monetary policy might be a publicly announced, gradually rising price-level target . What I have in mind is that the Bank of Japan would announce its intention to restore the price level (as measured by some standard index of prices, such as the consumer price index excluding fresh food) to the value it would have reached if, instead of the deflation of the past five years, a moderate inflation of, say, 1 percent per year had occurred. (I choose 1 percent to allow for the measurement bias issue noted above, and because a slightly positive average rate of inflation reduces the risk of future episodes of sustained deflation.) Note that the proposed price-level target is a moving target, equal in the year 2003 to a value approximately 5 percent above the actual price level in 1998 and rising 1 percent per year thereafter. Because deflation implies falling prices while the target price-level rises, the failure to end deflation in a given year has the effect of increasing what I have called the price-level gap (Bernanke, 2000). The price-level gap is the difference between the actual price level and the price level that would have obtained if deflation had been avoided and the price stability objective achieved in the first place. A successful effort to eliminate the price-level gap would proceed, roughly, in two stages. During the first stage, the inflation rate would exceed the long-term desired inflation rate, as the price-level gap was eliminated and the effects of previous deflation undone. Call this the reflationary phase of policy. Second, once the price-level target was reached, or nearly so, the objective for policy would become a conventional inflation target or a price-level target that increases over time at the average desired rate of inflation. Although restoration of the pre-deflation price level by means of a price-level target might be a reasonable interpretation of the BOJ's price stability objective, I would not want to push the purely legal argument too far. For example, based on a mandate for price stability, I would not ask either the BOJ or the Federal Reserve to restore the price level prevailing in their respective nations in 1950! Rather, I think the BOJ should consider a policy of reflation before re-stabilizing at a low inflation rate primarily because of the economic benefits of such a policy. One benefit of reflation would be to ease some of the intense pressure on debtors and on the financial system more generally. Since the early 1990s, borrowers in Japan have repeatedly found themselves squeezed by disinflation or deflation, which has required them to pay their debts in yen of greater value than they had expected. Borrower distress has affected the functioning of the whole economy, for example by weakening the banking system and depressing investment spending. Of course, declining asset values and the structural problems of Japanese firms have contributed greatly to debtors' problems as well, but reflation would, nevertheless, provide some relief. A period of reflation would also likely provide a boost to profits and help to break the deflationary psychology among the public, which would be positive factors for asset prices as well. Reflation--that is, a period of inflation above the long-run preferred rate in order to restore the earlier price level--proved highly beneficial following the deflations of the 1930s in both Japan and the United States. Finance Minister Korekiyo Takahashi brilliantly rescued Japan from the Great Depression through reflationary policies in the early 1930s, while President Franklin D. Roosevelt's reflationary monetary and banking policies did the same for the United States in 1933 and subsequent years. In both cases, the turnaround was amazingly rapid. In the United States, for example, prices fell at a 10.3 percent rate in 1932 but rose 0.8 percent in 1933 and more briskly thereafter. Moreover, during the year that followed Roosevelt's inauguration in March 1933, the U.S. stock market rallied by 77 percent. Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) have advanced a second argument for a price-level target for Japan in an important recent paper on monetary policy at the zero bound. These authors point out (as have many others) that, when nominal interest rates are at or near zero, the central bank can lower the real rate of interest only by creating expectations of inflation on the part of the public. Eggertsson and Woodford argue that a publicly announced price-level target of the type just described is more conducive to raising near-term inflation expectations than is an inflation target. One way to understand their argument is to imagine that the public expects the leaders of the central bank to take more aggressive actions, the further they are from their announced objective. Now suppose that, in an economy experiencing a stable deflation, the central bank leadership announces a fixed inflation target but then makes no progress toward that target during a given period. Then in the next period, the central bank is in the same position as previously, in terms of its distance from its objective; hence, by hypothesis, the central bank has no incentive to increase its effort to meet the announced target, and the public has no reason to expect it to do so. In this respect the inflation target is too "forgiving" an objective; failure is not penalized, nor is greater effort demanded. In contrast, under a price-level-targeting scheme, continuing deflation combined with an upward-sloping path for the price-level target causes the size of the price-level gap to increase over time. Thus, failure by the central bank to meet its target in a given period leads to expectations of (and public demands for) increased effort in subsequent periods--greater quantities of assets purchased on the open market, for example. So even if the central bank is reluctant to provide a time frame for meeting its objective, the structure of the price-level objective provides a means for the bank to commit to increasing its anti-deflationary efforts when its earlier efforts prove unsuccessful. As Eggertsson and Woodford show, the expectation that an increasing price level gap will give rise to intensified effort by the central bank should lead the public to believe that ultimately inflation will replace deflation, a belief that supports the central bank's own objectives by lowering the current real rate of interest. A concern that one might have about price-level targeting, as opposed to more conventional inflation targeting, is that it requires a short-term inflation rate that is higher than the long-term inflation objective. Is there not some danger of inflation overshooting, so that a deflation problem is replaced with an inflation problem? No doubt this concern has some basis, and ultimately one has to make a judgment. However, on the other side of the scale, I would put the following points: first, the benefits to the real economy of a more rapid restoration of the pre-deflation price level and second, the fact that the publicly announced price-level targets would help the Bank of Japan manage public expectations and to draw the distinction between a one-time price-level correction and the BOJ's longer-run inflation objective. If this distinction can be made, the effect of the reflation program on inflation expectations and long-term nominal interest rates should be smaller than if all reflation is interpreted as a permanent increase in inflation. A Barrier to More Aggressive Policies: The BOJ's Balance Sheet Discussing the optimal objectives for Japanese monetary policy is all very well, but what of the argument, advanced by some officials, that the Bank of Japan lacks the tools to achieve these objectives? Without denying the many difficulties inherent in making monetary policy in the current environment in Japan, I believe that not all the possible methods for easing monetary policy in Japan have been fully exploited. One possible approach to ending deflation in Japan would be greater cooperation, for a limited time, between the monetary and the fiscal authorities. Specifically, the Bank of Japan should consider increasing still further its purchases of government debt, preferably in explicit conjunction with a program of tax cuts or other fiscal stimulus. Before going into more detail about this possibility, however, I want to discuss a specific institutional factor that currently constrains--somewhat artificially, I would argue--the ability of the Bank of Japan to pursue more aggressive policies, including both so-called non-conventional and more-orthodox policies. This institutional constraint, often cited by BOJ officials, is the condition of the BOJ's balance sheet, and the fear, in particular, that a successful program of reflation might inflict capital losses on the BOJ and thereby weaken its institutional position. Like other central banks, the Bank of Japan has a balance sheet, with assets, liabilities, and capital. Also like other central banks, the BOJ purchases interest-bearing assets with money that it creates and thus typically earns significant profits, or seignorage. Some of these profits are used to cover the expenses of the BOJ itself, subject to review by the Ministry of Finance (MOF). The BOJ also has reserves for possible losses on securities and foreign exchange transactions and is permitted by the Article 53 of the Bank of Japan Law to retain 5 percent of the surplus from the settlement of profits and losses as a reserve fund. The portion of the surplus not retained by the Bank is paid to the national treasury. From the point of view of conventional private-sector accounting--which, as I will discuss, is not necessarily the correct standard in this case--the BOJ's balance sheet has become noticeably riskier in recent years. For example, the BOJ's most recent financial statement showed that of the 68 percent of its assets held in the form of government securities, about two-thirds are long-term Japanese government bonds (JGBs). This represents a very substantial increase over customary levels in the BOJ's holdings of long-term government debt. Because yields on government bonds are currently so low, these holdings expose the BOJ's balance sheet to considerable interest-rate risk (although any losses would be partly offset by unrealized capital gains on earlier acquisitions of bonds). Indeed, ironically, if the Bank of Japan were to succeed in replacing deflation with a low but positive rate of inflation, its reward would likely be substantial capital losses in the value of its government bond holdings arising from the resulting increase in long-term nominal interest rates. With such concerns in mind, BOJ officials have said that a strengthening of the Bank's capital base is needed to allow it to pursue more aggressive monetary policy easing. In fact, the BOJ recently requested that it be allowed to retain 15 percent (rather than 5 percent) of the surplus for the 2002 fiscal year that just ended to increase its capital, and the Ministry of Finance has indicated that it will approve the request. Even with this additional cushion, however, concerns on the part of the BOJ about its balance sheet are likely to remain. The public debate over the BOJ's capital should not distract us from the underlying economics of the situation. In particular, the private shareholders notwithstanding, the Bank of Japan is not a private commercial bank. It cannot go bankrupt in the sense that a private firm can, and the usual reasons that a commercial bank holds capital--to reduce incentives for excessive risk-taking, for example--do not directly apply to the BOJ. Indeed, putting aside psychological and symbolic reasons, important as these may be in some circumstances, there appear to be only two conceivable effects of the BOJ's balance sheet position on its ability to conduct normal operations. First, if the BOJ's income were too low to support its current expenditure budget, the Bank might be forced to ask the MOF for supplemental funds, which the BOJ might fear would put its independence at risk. This consideration by itself should not necessarily make the BOJ less willing to undertake more aggressive monetary policies, however, because purchasing additional assets with non-zero yields, even if these assets are risky or illiquid, normally increases the Bank's current income. Second, an imaginable, though quite unlikely, possibility is that the Bank could suffer sufficient capital losses on its assets to make it unable to conduct open-market sales of securities on a scale large enough to meet its monetary policy objectives. In short, one could make an economic case that the balance sheet of the central bank should be of marginal relevance at best to the determination of monetary policy. Rather than engage in what would probably be a heated and unproductive debate over the issue, however, I would propose instead that the Japanese government just fix the problem, thereby eliminating this concern from the BOJ's list of worries. There are many essentially costless ways to fix it. I am intrigued by a simple proposal that I understand has been suggested by the Japanese Business Federation, the Nippon Keidanren. Under this proposal the Ministry of Finance would convert the fixed interest rates of the Japanese government bonds held by the Bank of Japan into floating interest rates. This "bond conversion"--actually, a fixed-floating interest rate swap--would protect the capital position of the Bank of Japan from increases in long-term interest rates and remove much of the balance sheet risk associated with open-market operations in government securities. Moreover, the budgetary implications of this proposal would be essentially zero, since any increase in interest payments to the BOJ by the MOF arising from the bond conversion would be offset by an almost equal increase in the BOJ's payouts to the national treasury. The budgetary neutrality of the proposal is of course a consequence of the fact that, as a matter of arithmetic, any capital gains or losses in the value of government securities held by the BOJ are precisely offset by opposite changes in the net worth of the issuer of those securities, the government treasury. Although the MOF could insulate, without budgetary cost, the BOJ's balance sheet from interest-rate risk on its holdings of government bonds, a similar program offered by the MOF to private-sector holders of bonds, such as commercial banks, would not be costless from the MOF's point of view, if inflation and interest rates were subsequently to rise. However, if the MOF entered into the proposed swap agreement with the BOJ, new purchases of government bonds from the private sector by the Bank of Japan would be costless to the national treasury. Thus, conditional on the swap arrangement being in force, open-market purchases of government bonds by the BOJ would combine an expansionary monetary policy with a reduction of interest-rate risk in the banking system at no budgetary cost. The simple step of immunizing the BOJ's balance sheet thus opens a number of interesting policy options. The bond conversion (or interest-rate swap) just described is all that would be needed to protect the BOJ's balance sheet against any side effects from operations in government bonds. Incidentally, the approach could be extended to insulate the BOJ's balance sheet against potentially adverse effects of other types of asset purchases that the government might want to encourage. For example, to facilitate expanded purchases of asset-backed commercial paper, the government might agree, on request of the BOJ, to exchange government debt of the same maturity for the commercial paper. The net effect would be that the fiscal authority would assume the credit risk flowing from the nonstandard monetary policy action, as seems appropriate. What should the Bank of Japan give up in exchange for the Ministry of Finance's removing a significant amount of risk from the BOJ's balance sheet? One option would be for the Bank to use its increased ability to bear risk to undertake new policy actions that would entail accepting other types of risk onto its balance sheet. Today I will argue for a different approach and suggest that the Bank of Japan cooperate temporarily with the government to create an environment of combined monetary and fiscal ease to end deflation and help restart economic growth in Japan. To do this, the BOJ might have to scrap rules that it has set for itself--for example, its informal rule that the quantity of long-term government bonds on its balance sheet must be kept below the outstanding balance of banknotes issued. Monetary and Fiscal Cooperation There is no unique solution to the problem of continuing declines in Japanese prices; a variety of policies are worth trying, alone or in combination. However, one fairly direct and practical approach is explicit (though temporary) cooperation between the monetary and the fiscal authorities. Let me try to explain why I think this direction is promising and may succeed where monetary and fiscal policies applied separately have not. Demand on the part of both consumers and potential purchasers of new capital equipment in Japan remains quite depressed, and resources are not being fully utilized. Normally, the central bank would respond to such a situation by lowering the short-term nominal interest rate, but that rate is now effectively zero. Other strategies for the central bank acting alone exist, including buying alternative assets to try to lower term or liquidity premiums and attempting to influence expectations of future inflation through announcements or commitments to expand the monetary base. The Bank of Japan has taken some steps in these directions but has generally been reluctant to go as far as it might, in part because of the difficulty in determining the quantitative impact of such actions and in part because of the Bank's view that problems in the banking system have "jammed" the usual channels of monetary policy transmission. Ironically, this obvious reluctance on the part of the BOJ to sail into uncharted waters may have had the effect of muting the psychological impact of the nonstandard actions it has taken. Likewise the Bank of Japan has resisted calls to manage the value of the yen (see, for example, McCallum, 2000, or Svensson, 2001), citing its lack of authority to do so as well as the prospect of retaliation from trading partners. The alternative approach to stimulating aggregate demand is fiscal policy--government spending increases or tax cuts. Here again the perception is that policy has been less than successful, although Posen (1998)--in a criticism reminiscent of those who have complained that the Bank of Japan should just "do more"--has argued that the problem is less that fiscal policy is ineffective than that it has not been used to the extent that one might gather from official plans and announcements. In Posen's view, Japan's debt problem is primarily the result of slow economic growth rather than active fiscal policies. However, besides possibly inconsistent application of fiscal stimulus, another reason for weak fiscal effects in Japan may be the well-publicized size of the government debt. The severity of the government debt problem may be overstated in some respects--95 percent of the outstanding debt is domestically held, for example, and 59 percent is held by public institutions, so that the Japanese people truly "owe the debt to themselves"--but that the government's annual deficit is now about 8 percent of GDP is nevertheless a serious concern. Moreover, an aging Japanese population will add to the government's budgetary burden in coming decades. In addition to making policymakers more reluctant to use expansionary fiscal policies in the first place, Japan's large national debt may dilute the effect of fiscal policies in those instances when they are used. For example, people may be more inclined to save rather than spend tax cuts when they know that the cuts increase future government interest costs and thus raise future tax payments for themselves or their children. (It is striking that, despite low interest rates, about 20 percent of the Japanese central government budget, or about 16.8 trillion yen this year, is devoted to servicing the national debt.) In economics textbooks, the idea that people will save rather than spend tax cuts because of the implied increase in future tax obligations is known as the principle of Ricardian equivalence. In general, the evidence for Ricardian equivalence in real economies is mixed, but it seems most likely to apply in a situation like that prevailing today in Japan, in which people have been made highly aware of the potential burden of the national debt. The principle of Ricardian equivalence does not apply exactly to increases in government purchases (for example, road building) but it may apply there approximately. If, for example, people think that government spending projects are generally wasteful and add little to national wealth or productivity, then taxpayers may view increased government spending as simply increasing the burden of the government debt that they must bear. If, as a result, they react to increases in government spending by reducing their own expenditure, the net stimulative effect of fiscal actions will be reduced. In short, to strengthen the effects of fiscal policy, it would be helpful to break the link between expansionary fiscal actions today and increases in the taxes that people expect to pay tomorrow. My thesis here is that cooperation between the monetary and fiscal authorities in Japan could help solve the problems that each policymaker faces on its own. Consider for example a tax cut for households and businesses that is explicitly coupled with incremental BOJ purchases of government debt--so that the tax cut is in effect financed by money creation. Moreover, assume that the Bank of Japan has made a commitment, by announcing a price-level target, to reflate the economy, so that much or all of the increase in the money stock is viewed as permanent. Under this plan, the BOJ's balance sheet is protected by the bond conversion program, and the government's concerns about its outstanding stock of debt are mitigated because increases in its debt are purchased by the BOJ rather than sold to the private sector. Moreover, consumers and businesses should be willing to spend rather than save the bulk of their tax cut: They have extra cash on hand, but--because the BOJ purchased government debt in the amount of the tax cut--no current or future debt service burden has been created to imply increased future taxes. Essentially, monetary and fiscal policies together have increased the nominal wealth of the household sector, which will increase nominal spending and hence prices. The health of the banking sector is irrelevant to this means of transmitting the expansionary effect of monetary policy, addressing the concern of BOJ officials about "broken" channels of monetary transmission. This approach also responds to the reservation of BOJ officials that the Bank "lacks the tools" to reach a price-level or inflation target. Isn't it irresponsible to recommend a tax cut, given the poor state of Japanese public finances? To the contrary, from a fiscal perspective, the policy would almost certainly be stabilizing, in the sense of reducing the debt-to-GDP ratio. The BOJ's purchases would leave the nominal quantity of debt in the hands of the public unchanged, while nominal GDP would rise owing to increased nominal spending. Indeed, nothing would help reduce Japan's fiscal woes more than healthy growth in nominal GDP and hence in tax revenues. Potential roles for monetary-fiscal cooperation are not limited to BOJ support of tax cuts. BOJ purchases of government debt could also support spending programs, to facilitate industrial restructuring, for example. The BOJ's purchases would mitigate the effect of the new spending on the burden of debt and future interest payments perceived by households, which should reduce the offset from decreased consumption. More generally, by replacing interest-bearing debt with money, BOJ purchases of government debt lower current deficits and interest burdens and thus the public's expectations of future tax obligations. Of course, one can never get something for nothing; from a public finance perspective, increased monetization of government debt simply amounts to replacing other forms of taxes with an inflation tax. But, in the context of deflation-ridden Japan, generating a little bit of positive inflation (and the associated increase in nominal spending) would help achieve the goals of promoting economic recovery and putting idle resources back to work, which in turn would boost tax revenue and improve the government's fiscal position. Conclusion The Bank of Japan became fully independent only in 1998, and it has guarded its independence carefully, as is appropriate. Economically, however, it is important to recognize that the role of an independent central bank is different in inflationary and deflationary environments. In the face of inflation, which is often associated with excessive monetization of government debt, the virtue of an independent central bank is its ability to say "no" to the government. With protracted deflation, however, excessive money creation is unlikely to be the problem, and a more cooperative stance on the part of the central bank may be called for. Under the current circumstances, greater cooperation for a time between the Bank of Japan and the fiscal authorities is in no way inconsistent with the independence of the central bank, any more than cooperation between two independent nations in pursuit of a common objective is inconsistent with the principle of national sovereignty. I have argued today that a quid pro quo , in which the MOF acts to immunize the BOJ's balance sheet from interest-rate risk and the BOJ increases its purchases of government debt, is a good way to attack the ongoing deflation in Japan. I would like to close by reiterating a point I made earlier--that ending deflation in consumer prices is only part of what needs to be done to put Japan back on the path to full recovery. Banking and structural reform are crucial and need to be carried out as soon and as aggressively as possible. Although the importance of reforms cannot be disputed, however, I do not agree with those who have argued that deflation is only a minor part of the overall problem in Japan. Addressing the deflation problem would bring substantial real and psychological benefits to the Japanese economy, and ending deflation would make solving the other problems that Japan faces only that much easier. For the sake of the world's economy as well as Japan's, I hope that progress will soon be made on all of these fronts. Footnotes 1. A number of Board staff provided useful comments and assistance for this talk. Special thanks are due to Linda Kole and Dave Small for their help. 2. Of course, the choice of 1998 as the benchmark year is somewhat arbitrary. It seems however a good compromise choice between the more aggressive tack of trying to make up for the extensive unanticipated disinflation that occurred in the half decade prior to 1998 and the strategy of ignoring past deflation altogether and using 2003 as the base year. 3. Some differences between inflation targeting and price-level targeting are interesting but they need not detain us here. See Cecchetti and Kim (2003) for a comparison. In my view, most contemporary inflation-targeting regimes actually practice a combination of inflation targeting and price-level targeting (or price-path targeting), in that overshoots or undershoots of inflation are usually partly, but not entirely, subsequently reversed. 4. Wolman (1998) provides an earlier analysis with a similar conclusion. 5. There does not appear to be any provision in the Bank of Japan Law that addresses whether the Bank can or cannot have negative net worth, or what would happen if it were to report negative net worth. 6. An alternative approach would be for the MOF to offer the fixed-floating swap to the BOJ only for its holdings of government bonds above some specified level. An advantage of this approach is that it would provide more current income to meet BOJ expenditure needs. 7. However, these losses would be offset to some degree if nominal GDP were to grow with inflation, raising tax revenues. As an historical note, the U.S. Treasury initiated a bond conversion program at the time of the Treasury-Federal Reserve Accord in 1951, which allowed some private holders of long-term bonds as well as the Federal Reserve to avoid capital losses implied by the un-pegging of long-term nominal rates at that time. Because some private bondholders were assisted as well as the central bank, the budgetary cost to the government was not zero; most of the costs of protecting private long-term bondholders were absorbed by the Treasury. See, for example, Eichengreen and Garber (1991) for a discussion. 8. I assume here that the BOJ does not sterilize the effects of its purchases of bonds, that is, it allows current account balances to rise by the amount of its purchases. 9. The BOJ's announcement of a price-level target should be credible: It is feasible, and it is in the interest of the BOJ, the government, and the public. References Bernanke, Ben (2000). "Japanese Monetary Policy: A Case of Self-Induced Paralysis?" in R. Mikitani and A. S. Posen, eds., Japan's Financial Crisis and Its Parallels to U.S. Experience , Washington: Institute for International Economics.. Cecchetti, Stephen, and Junhan Kim (2003). "Inflation Targeting, Price-Path Targeting, and Output Variability," National Bureau of Economic Research working paper no. 9672, May. Eggertsson, Gauti, and Michael Woodford (2003). "The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy," working paper, International Monetary Fund and Princeton University, May. Eichengreen, Barry, and Peter Garber (1991). "Before the Accord: U.S. Monetary-Financial Policy, 1945-51," in R. Glenn Hubbard, ed., Financial Markets and Financial Crises , Chicago: University of Chicago Press for NBER. McCallum, Bennett (2000). "Theoretical Analysis Regarding a Zero Lower Bound on Nominal Interest Rates," Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking , November, vol. 32, pp. 870-904. Posen, Adam S. (1998). Restoring Japan's Economic Growth , Washington: Institute for International Economics. Svensson, Lars (2001). "The Zero Bound in an Open Economy: A Foolproof Way of Escaping from a Liquidity Trap," in Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies, Bank of Japan, Monetary and Economic Studies , Special Edition, February, vol. 19, pp. 277-312. Wolman, Alexander (1998). "Staggered Price Setting and the Zero Bound on Nominal Interest Rates," Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, Economic Quarterly , Fall, vol. 84, pp. 1-24.