Joint Press Release Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Office of the Comptroller of the Currency Office of Thrift Supervision National Credit Union Administration For Immediate Release June 3, 2003 Federal Financial Regulatory Agencies Seek Comment on Interagency Effort to Reduce Regulatory Burden WASHINGTON - The federal financial regulatory agencies announced today that they will publish a joint notice and request for comments on a plan to identify and eliminate outdated, unnecessary or unduly burdensome regulations imposed on insured depository institutions. The request from the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (Federal Reserve), the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) and the Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS) is being made pursuant to section 2222 of the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act of 1996 (EGRPRA). The National Credit Union Administration (NCUA) will be issuing a separate notice and request for comments pursuant to EGRPRA. Under the 1996 law, the agencies are required to review their regulations at least once every 10 years. The publication of the notice and request for comments in a forthcoming issue of the Federal Register will mark the beginning of a three-year joint effort by the agencies to obtain suggestions from the industry and public on more streamlined and less burdensome ways to regulate. EGRPRA requires the agencies to categorize the regulations, publish the categories for comment, report to Congress on any significant issues raised by the comments and eliminate unnecessary regulations. The agencies will publish the categories for which they are seeking comments twice a year. For this first publication, comments are requested for the following three categories of regulations: Applications and Reporting, Powers and Activities, and International Operations. To encourage full participation in the EGRPRA review, the agencies have scheduled five roundtable discussions with bankers and other interested parties. The sessions will be held as follows: June 11, Orlando, FL June 26, St. Louis, MO July 15, Denver, CO September 18, San Francisco, CA October 15, New York, NY For more information, please contact: FDIC: Claude Rollin, Project Manager, EGRPRA, at (202) 898-8741 Federal Reserve: Pat Robinson, Senior Counsel, at (202) 452-3005 NCUA: Mary Rupp, Attorney, at (703) 518-6540 OCC: Lee Walzer, Counsel, at (202) 874-5090 OTS: Robyn Dennis, Manager, Thrift Policy, at (202) 906-5751 Media Contacts : Federal Reserve: Dave Skidmore (202) 452-2955 OCC: Bob Garsson (202) 874-5770 FDIC: David Barr (202) 898-6993 OTS: Sam Eskenazi (202) 906-6677 NCUA: Cherie Umbel (703) 518-6337
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the issuance of a consent Order of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty against the Citizens Bank and Trust Company, Van Buren, Arkansas, a state member bank. Citizens Bank and Trust Company, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order in connection with its alleged violations of the Board's Regulations implementing the National Flood Insurance Act. The Order requires Citizens Bank and Trust Company to pay a civil money penalty of $7,000, which will be remitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency for deposit into the National Flood Mitigation Fund. A copy of the Order is attached.
Dolores S. Smith Director, Division of Consumer and Community Affairs Fair Credit Reporting Act Before the Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit, Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives June 4, 2003 Mr. Chairman and members of the Subcommittee, I appreciate the opportunity to testify before this Subcommittee on the role of federal banking regulators under the Fair Credit Reporting Act ("FCRA") and on how the FCRA promotes the national operations of entities under our jurisdiction. I commend the Subcommittee for holding this hearing to gather information and solicit the views of interested parties concerning this important topic. I. The Fair Credit Reporting Act A. Background When Chairman Greenspan testified before the House Financial Services Committee earlier this year, he noted that there was a time in this country when local banking institutions knew the credit capacity of the individual consumers in their community. As the financial system became larger and more complex and the mobility of the population increased, particularly after World War II, it was no longer feasible for institutions to evaluate the credit standing of consumers on a strictly local basis. Centralized credit bureaus, or consumer reporting agencies, evolved to provide a repository of credit history information that could be accessed by creditors to evaluate the creditworthiness of prospective borrowers. The credit reporting system has had, as Chairman Greenspan put it, "a dramatic impact . . . on consumers and households and their access to credit in this country at reasonable rates." Today, each of the three national consumer reporting agencies--Experian, Equifax, and Trans Union--maintains records on as many as 1.5 billion credit accounts held by approximately 190 million individuals. Each of the consumer reporting agencies receives more than 2 billion items of information per month and issues roughly 2 million credit reports each day. The information gathered by the consumer reporting agencies is obtained from banks, savings associations, credit unions, finance companies, retailers and other creditors, collection agencies, and public records. A consumer report generally consists of five types of information: identifying information, such as the consumer's name and address; detailed information reported by creditors regarding individual credit accounts; public record information, such as records of bankruptcies, foreclosures, and tax liens; information reported by collection agencies, mostly regarding non-credit related accounts; and information regarding inquiries about a consumer's credit record. Consumer reports are used for credit, insurance, employment, and certain other limited purposes. B. Overview of the FCRA The Congress adopted the FCRA in 1970 to regulate the credit reporting system in the United States, and passed significant amendments in 1996. The primary purposes of the FCRA are to ensure fair and accurate credit reporting and to protect consumers' privacy. Among other things, the FCRA imposes certain obligations on consumer reporting agencies, on users of consumer reports, and, since 1996, on furnishers of information. The major provisions of the FCRA are as follows. Under the FCRA, a person may obtain a consumer report only if that person has a permissible purpose. The statute specifies the permissible purposes for obtaining a consumer report, which include the intended use of the information from a consumer report for a transaction involving an extension of credit to a consumer. If a creditor takes any action that is adverse to a consumer based on information in a consumer report, the creditor generally must give the consumer a notice of the adverse action. This notice informs consumers about their rights under the FCRA. Participation in the U.S. credit reporting system is voluntary. Creditors are not required to obtain consumer reports before making credit decisions, although most creditors rely on consumer reports for risk-management purposes. There also is no requirement that creditors furnish information to consumer reporting agencies. But if they do, they must ensure that the information they furnish is accurate. They must correct and update erroneous information, and must investigate any disputed information. Consumer reporting agencies have extensive responsibilities under the FCRA. Those responsibilities include: maintaining reasonable procedures to ensure that consumer reports are furnished only to persons having a permissible purpose; following reasonable procedures to ensure the maximum possible accuracy of consumer reports; reinvestigating the accuracy or completeness of any disputed information and notifying the consumer of the results of the reinvestigation; omitting certain obsolete information from consumer reports after specified periods of time; and providing a consumer with a copy of his or her consumer report upon request. C. Consumer Protection under the FCRA The FCRA contains important consumer rights and protections. Several are designed to promote accuracy in consumer reports. As mentioned above, a consumer must receive notice if information in a consumer report has resulted in adverse action against the consumer. An adverse action notice must inform the consumer of the name, address, and telephone number of the consumer reporting agency that furnished the report, the consumer's right to obtain a free copy of the consumer report, and the consumer's right to dispute the accuracy or completeness of any information in the consumer report. Consumers have a right to obtain a copy of their consumer reports, except for credit scores, upon request. Consumers also have the right to dispute the accuracy or completeness of any information in their consumer reports with a consumer reporting agency, to have such information deleted or corrected, and to include a statement of dispute in the report if the dispute is not resolved. Consumers may also dispute inaccurate items with the furnisher of the information. Other consumer rights and protections are designed to protect consumer privacy. Consumers have a right to be excluded from prescreened solicitation lists. The three national consumer reporting agencies maintain a toll-free telephone number that consumers can call to exercise what is, in effect, a right to opt out of receiving most prescreened solicitations for a period of two years. Consumer privacy is also protected by the limitation on access to consumer reports to persons that have certified a permissible purpose under the FCRA. In general, the FCRA restricts the sharing of certain information among affiliates unless the consumer is given the opportunity to opt out of that sharing. Additional privacy protections cover specific circumstances where consumer reports are provided to prospective employers, consumer reports contain medical information, or investigative consumer reports are prepared or obtained. D. The Role of the Federal Reserve Board Under the FCRA The Federal Reserve Board and the other banking agencies play an important role in interpreting and enforcing the FCRA as it relates to credit. The agencies have the statutory authority to jointly prescribe regulations necessary to carry out the purposes of the FCRA with respect to financial institutions subject to their jurisdiction. The Board also has authority to prescribe regulations (consistent with the interagency regulations) with respect to bank holding companies and their affiliates (other than depository institutions and consumer reporting agencies). The FCRA specifically authorizes the Board to enforce compliance with the Act with respect to state member banks, branches and agencies of foreign banks (other than federal branches, federal agencies, and insured state branches of foreign banks), commercial lending companies owned or controlled by foreign banks, and organizations operating under sections 25 or 25A of the Federal Reserve Act. The Board has adopted examination procedures for entities subject to its jurisdiction and routinely examines for compliance with the FCRA. The other banking agencies have substantially similar examination procedures for entities subject to their jurisdiction. The entities subject to the Board's jurisdiction primarily are users of consumer reports and furnishers of information. Typically, entities regulated by the Federal Reserve Board are not consumer reporting agencies. E. Preemption under the FCRA In the 1996 amendments to the FCRA, the Congress preempted the states from enacting laws or regulations dealing with seven key areas regulated by the FCRA: the procedures for furnishing information from consumer reports for the purpose of offering credit through prescreened solicitations, such as the procedures through which consumers may elect to have their names and addresses excluded from any prescreened list; the time for completing reinvestigations of disputed consumer report information; the duties of creditors that take adverse action, such as the duty to give the consumer notice of the adverse action and the consumer's rights under the FCRA; the informational contents of consumer reports, such as the time periods within which consumer reporting agencies must omit from consumer reports certain obsolete information; the duties of furnishers of information, such as the duty to investigate the accuracy and completeness of information furnished to a consumer reporting agency upon receipt of notice from the consumer reporting agency that the information is disputed; the rules regarding the sharing of information among affiliated companies, such as when a consumer may have the opportunity to opt out of certain information sharing among affiliates; and the form and content of the written disclosure summarizing the consumer's rights under the FCRA that consumer reporting agencies must provide to consumers along with a copy of the consumer's credit report. These preemption provisions are scheduled to sunset on January 1, 2004. After that date, states would be permitted to enact laws in these seven areas if those laws explicitly provide that they are intended to supplement the FCRA and give greater protection to consumers than is provided under the FCRA. Preemption under the FCRA is limited to these seven areas, and states are not precluded from enacting supplementary laws or regulations in other subject areas addressed by the FCRA. Some states have enacted laws requiring consumer reporting agencies to provide free copies of credit reports to consumers annually, even though the FCRA only requires free copies after adverse action has been taken based on information in a consumer report. Some states also require consumer reporting agencies to disclose credit scores to consumers, even though the FCRA does not require the disclosure of credit scores. The Chairman has stated that he would support making permanent the provision currently in the FCRA "that provides for uniform federal rules governing various matters covered by the FCRA." In an appearance before the House Financial Services Committee in April of this year, Chairman Greenspan spoke of the importance of having "national standards" under the FCRA. II. Discussion of the National Credit Reporting System A. The FCRA and the Nationwide Operations of Financial Institutions The FCRA promotes the interstate operations of banks and other financial entities subject to the Board's jurisdiction in important ways. Perhaps most significantly, the ability of financial institutions to obtain standardized consumer reports--that contain robust, nationally uniform data--allows banks to make prudent credit decisions quickly and inexpensively wherever they do business and wherever their customers live and work. The FCRA's national standards governing furnisher responsibilities and duties of users taking adverse action--the two primary areas of responsibility for most financial institutions--promote efficiency by enabling banks to comply with a single set of rules for all of their domestic credit operations. The FCRA's provisions regarding firm offers of credit or prescreened solicitations have enabled banks to effectively market their products to consumers most likely to want them. Without prescreened solicitations, the cost of acquiring new customers, particularly in the credit card market, could be considerably higher. The FCRA's affiliate-information sharing provisions enable bank holding companies and other large financial enterprises to efficiently manage and use consumer information across multiple account relationships. B. The FCRA and the National Credit Reporting System On the question of whether the preemption provisions of the FCRA should be extended or made permanent, today's hearing offers Subcommittee members an opportunity to obtain input from various interested parties and to assess the likely impact that state-by-state differences in the seven areas could have on the national credit reporting system and the credit granting process. A key consideration in this reexamination of federal preemption of state law is the impact that different state laws may have on the availability and cost of consumer credit. Maintaining a reliable and robust national credit reporting system is essential to ensure the continued availability of consumer credit at reasonable costs. As Chairman Greenspan observed, "there is just no question that unless we have some major sophisticated system of credit evaluation continuously updated, we will have very great difficulty in maintaining the level of consumer credit currently available because clearly, without the information that comes from various credit bureaus and other sources, lenders would have to impose an additional risk premium because of the uncertainty before they make such loans or may, indeed, choose not to make those loans at all." The ready availability of accurate, up-to-date credit information from consumer reporting agencies benefits both creditors and consumers. Information from consumer reports gives creditors the ability to make credit decisions quickly and in a fair, safe and sound, and cost-effective manner. Consumers benefit from access to credit from different sources, vigorous competition among creditors, quick decisions on credit applications, and reasonable costs for credit. State-specific restrictions governing areas such as furnishing information to consumer reporting agencies, or the contents of information contained in consumer reports supplied by consumer reporting agencies, could decrease the availability of credit or increase the cost of credit. As Chairman Greenspan observed, "[l]imits on the flow of information among financial market participants, or increased costs resulting from restrictions that differ based on geography, may lead to an increase in the price or a reduction in the availability of credit[.]" Additionally, credit scoring has become an important tool in the credit granting process. Credit scoring models use credit bureau data to construct mathematical scorecards that accurately predict the risk profiles of individual consumers. The predictive power of credit scores depends directly on the content and quality of the credit bureau data that are used to construct the models. Credit scoring enables creditors to evaluate, quickly and inexpensively, the risk of lending to virtually any credit applicant, and promotes the making of expedited credit decisions in a safe and sound manner. Consumers benefit from the increased availability and lower cost of credit that results from the use of credit scoring models. Credit scoring also may help to reduce unlawful discrimination in lending to the extent that these systems are designed to evaluate all applicants objectively and thus avoid issues of disparate treatment. As Chairman Greenspan recently noted, "the emergence of credit scoring technologies, which rely on the availability of information about the financial experiences of individuals, has proven useful in expanding access to credit for us all, including for lower-income populations and others who have traditionally had difficulty obtaining credit. It has also enabled financial institutions to offer a wide variety of customized insurance, credit and other products." Non-uniform state laws currently preempted by the FCRA might seek to restrict the information that can be furnished to or reported by a consumer reporting agency and could reduce the availability or increase the cost of credit by impairing the utility of consumer reports and credit scores that creditors use for portfolio management, underwriting, and fraud control. Legislation has been proposed in several states to impose greater obligations on furnishers to ensure the accuracy of information furnished to consumer reporting agencies. The duties of furnishers of information raise complex issues that require a delicate balancing of divergent interests. The accuracy of consumer report information is a critical element of the national credit reporting system. Recent studies have shown that consumer reports sometimes contain inaccurate, incomplete, or inconsistent data, although the degree to which this is a problem is in dispute. Most of the problems with consumer reporting agency data appear to result from the failure of creditors, collection agencies or public entities to furnish complete and consistent information in a timely manner. Although these studies might suggest to some that states should be allowed to impose increased obligations on furnishers to ensure the accuracy of the information that they furnish, differing state laws regarding the duties of furnishers could have adverse consequences. First, state-by-state differences in the responsibilities of furnishers--many of which operate nationwide--could result in consumer reporting agencies obtaining less complete and consistent data and increase compliance costs for furnishers. Second, because there is no requirement to furnish information to consumer reporting agencies, the imposition of additional, state-specific duties or liabilities on furnishers for purposes of ensuring accuracy could affect the willingness of creditors to furnish information voluntarily to consumer reporting agencies. The informational content of consumer reports, including the requirement to remove obsolete information, is another area where different state laws could adversely affect the national operations of banks and bank holding companies. Under the FCRA, consumer reporting agencies generally may include any information in a consumer report, except that certain obsolete information must be omitted from consumer reports within prescribed time periods. If the preemption provision applicable to the informational content of consumer reports is allowed to sunset and states were to enact different restrictions on what information, if any, must be omitted from consumer reports--and when--the contents of consumer reports could vary on a state-by-state basis. This would make it more difficult and costly for institutions doing business in different states to evaluate the creditworthiness of prospective applicants. Different state law requirements regarding furnishers or the informational contents of consumer reports, therefore, could produce a lack of uniformity in credit bureau data and undermine the utility of such data for assessing creditworthiness. This, in turn, could compromise the integrity and predictability of the credit scoring models that banks and other creditors rely upon for risk-based underwriting and portfolio management. As a consequence, creditors might have greater difficulty assessing their risk from an underwriting, portfolio management, and fraud control perspective, which could lead to higher credit costs and reduced credit availability. III. Conclusion In conclusion, this Subcommittee is to be commended for undertaking this examination of the FCRA preemption provisions to determine whether to allow states to enact non-uniform laws or regulations in areas currently preempted by the FCRA. In conducting this examination, it is important to ensure that we maintain a viable, national credit reporting system that preserves and expands reasonable access to credit. Footnote Remarks following prepared testimony by Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 12, 2003, House Financial Services Committee; see also Remarks following prepared testimony by Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April 30, 2003, House Financial Services Committee. See "An Overview of Consumer Data and Credit Reporting," Federal Reserve Bulletin, February 2003, at 49-50. A credit score is a numerical representation of a consumer's overall credit profile. Letter from Chairman Alan Greenspan to Congressman Rub�n Hinojosa, February 28, 2003. Remarks following prepared testimony by Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April 30, 2003, House Financial Services Committee. Remarks following prepared testimony by Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April 30, 2003, House Financial Services Committee. Remarks following prepared testimony by Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April 30, 2003, House Financial Services Committee. Letter from Chairman Alan Greenspan to Congressman Rub�n Hinojosa, February 28, 2003. For a summary of these recent studies, see "An Overview of Consumer Data and Credit Reporting," Federal Reserve Bulletin, February 2003, at 50. Id. at 70-73. Footnote Remarks following prepared testimony by Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 12, 2003, House Financial Services Committee; see also Remarks following prepared testimony by Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April 30, 2003, House Financial Services Committee. See "An Overview of Consumer Data and Credit Reporting," Federal Reserve Bulletin, February 2003, at 49-50. A credit score is a numerical representation of a consumer's overall credit profile. Letter from Chairman Alan Greenspan to Congressman Rub�n Hinojosa, February 28, 2003. Remarks following prepared testimony by Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April 30, 2003, House Financial Services Committee. Remarks following prepared testimony by Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April 30, 2003, House Financial Services Committee. Remarks following prepared testimony by Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April 30, 2003, House Financial Services Committee. Letter from Chairman Alan Greenspan to Congressman Rub�n Hinojosa, February 28, 2003. For a summary of these recent studies, see "An Overview of Consumer Data and Credit Reporting," Federal Reserve Bulletin, February 2003, at 50. Id. at 70-73.
No content found
Remarks by Governor Donald L. Kohn At the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston's 48th Economic Conference, Chatham, Massachusetts June 10, 2003 Comment on "Good Policies for Bad Governments: Behavioral Political Economy" by Daniel J. Benjamin and David I. Laibson Introduction I found the paper by Benjamin and Laibson (B&L) interesting and stimulating. Naturally, sitting where I do, I have taken the opportunity presented by serving as a discussant for this paper to think about the possible implications of behavioral economics for my own job--the conduct of monetary policy. B&L venture a little way into this area--they recommend that the Federal Reserve set a long-run inflation target well above zero and they recommend greater attention to survey results in forecasting--but I wonder whether the ideas might have more far-reaching application. So I have chosen not to comment very much on the paper or to pass judgment on its policy recommendations, but instead to use it as a jumping-off point for raising questions about the wider implications of nonrational behavior for monetary policy. After I prepared the first draft of these comments, I looked at the program again and realized the considerable overlap between my questions and those posed in the introductory paragraph for this session. You can think of this comment as expanding on those questions in the hope of pointing the way toward more fruitful research. Deviations from fully rational optimizing behavior induced by psychological factors have long been important in macroeconomic analysis and hence in monetary policy. Certainly the terms "animal spirits" and "irrational exuberance" have been used extensively in macroeconomic and policy discussions in recent years to characterize these types of behaviors by private agents. It may be that the framework of behavioral analysis laid out by B&L and others gives us the tools to look at these and similar phenomena more systematically and to derive from that analysis implications for the conduct of policy that we cannot derive from more standard ways of looking at the economy and the effects of policy. B&L extend the usual scope of analysis by pointing out that policymakers are subject to the same types of biases and mistakes made by private agents. It took only a few seconds of introspection to convince me that this subject was worth pursuing, and I will also raise some questions about its possible import for how monetary policy is made. What are the implications of nonrational behavior on the part of private agents? 1. What do these behaviors imply about how aggressive monetary policy should be and about whether it should pay special attention to asset prices? If people do such things as overweight the near-term future at the expense of long-term goals, ignore reversion to the mean, and pay too much attention to recent changes relative to longer-term levels, they may be likely to overreact to current interest rates and asset prices and extend recent trends inappropriately. That response would tend to result in increasingly serious misallocations of resources as interest rates and asset prices strayed further from long-run fundamentals. If such behavior were widespread, a major deviation of interest rates from longer-run equilibrium levels, which might be called for to forcefully counter economic weakness or inflation, could then have some side effects that needed to be taken into account. Short-sighted businesses and households would make decisions about investments in houses and capital equipment based on today's rates, without giving adequate consideration to whether such investments would seem appropriate at the equilibrium constellation of rates. Compromising longer-run policy objectives clearly would be destabilizing and counterproductive; but if these side effects were significant, they might counsel smaller deviations of the funds rate from the neighborhood of its natural level and a more patient return to longer-run goals than otherwise. However, other aspects of behavioral economics could send conflicting signals. For example, the "slow learning" error seems to underline the importance of keeping inflation and inflation expectations close to whatever level the central bank sees as appropriate over the long run because any change in expectations could be difficult and costly to reverse. The picture becomes even more complicated when we consider a broader array of financial assets. We observe what appears to be a tendency for equity prices, exchange rates, and other asset prices to overshoot longer-run fundamentals from time to time. Such overshooting can be derived from models in which asset prices are fully rational, but it could be accentuated by some of the behaviors identified by B&L. If so and if also, as a consequence of those behaviors, resources are even more poorly allocated than a standard model would suggest, does this strengthen the argument that monetary policy should pay attention to asset prices even at the expense of shorter-term deviations of output and prices from long-term objectives? I must admit that even raising these questions makes me uncomfortable. Like most central bankers, my predilection is to keep monetary policy focused closely on achieving legislated mandates expeditiously and to limit consideration of resource allocation or asset prices to their likely effect on macroeconomic stability over the next few years. Asset price bubbles and resource misallocations are difficult to identify, especially at times of structural change such as the late 1990s in the United States. Moreover, governments have other policy tools with which to address some of the potential effects of these distortions, such as the supervision of banks and securities dealers. But a finding of large and systematic distortions, owing for example to problems of self-control, would be a new element to weigh in the policy mix, in particular if they were shown to add to the volatility of output and prices over longer periods. 2. What do nonrational behaviors imply about the price stability goal of monetary policy? The authors repeat the familiar argument that resistance to nominal wage reductions owing to money illusion and nominal loss aversion on the part of workers justifies the settings of monetary policy in its inflation target appreciably above zero to facilitate employers' ability to cut real wages. However, the evidence on this point isn't nearly as overwhelming as B&L suggest. With inflation much lower than the authors' suggestion of 3 percent and continuing to decline, we're in the midst of a natural experiment. So far at least, real wage increases have not been markedly higher than would have been predicted based on models fit over periods of more rapid inflation. And inflation has been coming down somewhat more rapidly than our models expect given the level of the unemployment rate. Preliminary work by Bill Wascher and Bruce Fallick on the Board staff using micro data from the Employment Cost Index does show a piling up of wage changes at zero each year that affect perhaps an extra 10 to 15 percent of wage decisions--not a small proportion. However, the spike has become no larger in recent years as inflation has fallen to quite low levels. In addition, the same work shows only small distortions to wage-change distributions over periods of four years; apparently by freezing wages for more than one year, and because productivity rises and negative shocks go away, employers can achieve reasonable outcomes for wage increases over time and still respect the resistance to nominal wage declines in any particular year. Moreover, I wonder whether bounded rationality and money illusion don't actually weigh more heavily on the side of seeking true price stability over time. Obviously, true price stability is the only state in which money illusion won't give distorting signals for resource allocation. Perhaps the difficulty of rationally factoring prospective changes of the price level into decisions about saving and investment partly fuels the public's strong aversion to inflation. Decisions about how much to save for a distant event, like retirement, and about how to allocate savings across financial and real stores of value are greatly complicated by the need to take account of inflation. In my view, the main argument for keeping steady-state inflation a little elevated is the possible constraint that the zero bound on nominal interest rates might place on the central bank's ability to decrease real interest rates in response to a downward demand shock. To be sure, as many of my colleagues have been emphasizing, we do have instruments to deal with a situation in which conventional policy ran out of room; but as they also have emphasized, a first choice would be to avoid circumstances in which the use of these instruments would be required. Still, any steady state rate of inflation has costs and benefits, and further analysis of this consideration using the tools of behavioral economics might be useful. 3. How should the nonrationality of private agents be integrated into forecasting? B&L touch on this subject by advocating the greater use of survey results. I can assure them that, at the Board, the staff already pays close attention to these surveys and finds them of some help in predicting near-term developments. We have followed them especially closely when we are trying to determine whether specific events are likely to trigger changes in spending behavior, for example after the Gulf wars and the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001. We have not, however, found that they add much of value to predictions based on standard spending determinants over periods of several quarters or more. In our forecasts and policy discussions we take account of the full range of information and possible behavioral responses to explain recent developments and to forecast the economy. These discussions often focus on anomalies in the economic situation and deviations from expected paths, frequently giving psychological explanations, such as the animal spirits and irrational exuberance examples I cited near the beginning of my discussion. I do occasionally wonder whether, in the absence of more-focused analysis and any quantitative measures of such behaviors, such an identification is simply relabeling our ignorance. And we often speculate on the psychology of market participants when we discuss the potential reactions to different paths for policy. My question is whether behavioral economics can narrow our ignorance and give us a deeper and more systematic understanding of economic dynamics. Our formal modeling has already incorporated some insights of this character. For example, in the course of putting together FRBUS, the Board staff's current large-scale quarterly econometric model, we quickly decided not to restrict ourselves to just model-consistent expectations and instead to allow a variety of mechanisms for individuals to form their expectations. We have spent a lot of time on attempting to capture sensible descriptions of learning--what do people know, when do they know it, and how does new information become embedded in expectations. But much more can probably be done to work in those micro level insights of behavioral economics that can be shown to have macroeconomic importance. It stands to reason that, if the types of irrational decisionmaking cited by B&L and others are widespread, they should affect at least the dynamics of macroeconomic adjustment. Starting points and recent history, the size and frequency of changes, hyperbolic discounting, and other such characteristics could impart important nonlinearities and asymmetries to the response of the economy to monetary policy or other shocks, which, if well understood, could narrow at the margin our degree of ignorance and uncertainty. Does bounded rationality promote the use of rules of thumb by households and business, and if so, what is the nature of these rules? Has the response to the decline in equity wealth we have seen in recent years been shaped in a nonlinear way by the decline's extraordinary size, or by its following a rapid run-up in wealth, or by the circumstance that so much of it came to rest in defined-contribution retirement accounts? We are constantly striving to have our models reflect what people actually do and how they actually form expectations. How can behavioral economics help in that endeavor? What are the implications of nonrational behavior on the part of policymakers? 1. What does the potential for such behaviors imply about institutional design? Elected representatives, recognizing their own "self-control" problem, have created central banks with a high degree of insulation from short-term political pressures and instructed them as to their long-run objectives. Such a design should help to address the potential conflict in the political arena between "patient long-run goals" and "impatient short-run impulses," in the phrases of B&L. But as the authors point out, the policymakers could be subject to the same set of biases. Moreover, when exercising their oversight, politicians are often tempted to emphasize short-run results over long-term goals. Formally focusing accountability tightly around long-run goals, like price stability, will help to counter these tendencies in politicians and policymakers, but it risks short-changing legitimate shorter-run objectives like stabilizing output. Of course, a considerable literature already addresses the issues of the way to structure central bank independence and accountability. The question is whether this new wrinkle--the possibility of inadvertent irrational behaviors by the policymakers--has anything to contribute to the thinking about these elements of institutional design. In recent years, when granting central bank independence or restructuring central bank goals, many countries have given the responsibility for monetary policy to a committee in order to bring to bear a diversity of views on decisions. The possibility that individual policymakers would be vulnerable to the same mistakes as private agents seems to strengthen the rationale for group decisionmaking. Presumably, in a diverse group, some member will be able to point out a poorly reasoned analysis to the others. Perhaps for this reason the few experimental tests of group decisionmaking for monetary policy have concluded, contrary to the common wisdom, that groups perform better than individuals. But policy committees have evolved with different cultures; for example some, such as the Federal Reserve, have tended to try to find consensus under the leadership of a chairman; others, like the Monetary Policy Committee in the United Kingdom, have emphasized individual accountability. Does behavioral economics or the psychology it is based on have anything to say about how best to structure groups to enhance the odds of avoiding mistakes of reasoning such as those highlighted by the authors? Efforts to build consensus would tend to force groups to pay greater attention to individuals with contrary reasoning that turns out to be correct, but strong leadership might imply that some views get more weight than others. Can some of the concepts regarding organizations discussed in the Gibbons paper earlier at the conference be applied to the Federal Open Market Committee? Can this literature address the optimal size of the group? As groups become larger, more viewpoints are represented; but meetings can become unwieldy and damp the give and take needed to realize the full benefits of diversity. 2. What are the implications of nonrational policymaker analysis for the conduct of policy itself? If group decisionmaking does not entirely rule out the possibility of irrationally based analysis, is policymaker bounded rationality--the inevitably limited understanding of the economy--another reason to be restrained in the conduct of policy, another reason for gradualism? Decisionmakers, recognizing that they can't foresee and weigh all the possible elements in the outlook and responses to policy, may see their own limitations as another form of Brainard uncertainty and restrict the aggressiveness of their actions. Slow policy responses could also result from excessive weight on changes relative to levels--for example, mistaking easing for easy policy. In either case, the risk is that timid policy would allow imbalances to build and destabilize prices and economic activity. Does behavioral economics have anything to say about whether the nonrationality of policymakers, if not adequately recognized, has the potential to impede the efficient conduct of policy? Does it argue for a commitment to more rule-like behavior, or are the effects of policymaker errors likely to fall mostly on the forecasts that are likely to play an important role in any such rule? Conclusion Monetary policymakers necessarily operate in the real world, and we are constantly grappling with issues of how people really act, make decisions, and form expectations. Much of the attention of the FOMC is taken up with trying to understand the behavior of households and businesses, especially when their actions do not seem to conform to traditional economic models. The problems are difficult, but this conference has highlighted a flowering of interest in bringing new perspectives and a richer understanding to the study of why people do what they do. My sense is that as yet the application of this study to the issues of most concern to monetary policy has been limited, but that it has the potential for improving, at least around the margins, our ability to conduct monetary policy in the public interest. I have tried to throw down the gauntlet, so-to-speak, to research in these fields by outlining areas I thought might hold some promise. As a policymaker, and I hope this is not my irrational side coming out, I look forward to realizing more of the gains from these very interesting approaches to analyzing human behavior. Footnotes * I benefited from conversations with David Wilcox, Ben Bernanke, David Reifschneider, and Bill Wascher. The views, however, are my own and do not necessarily represent the views of other members of the Board or its staff. ** Available on the web site of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston at
Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan Natural gas supply and demand issues Before the Committee on Energy and Commerce, U.S. House of Representatives June 10, 2003 In recent months, in response to very tight supplies, prices of natural gas have increased sharply. Working gas in storage is currently at very low levels relative to its seasonal norm because of a colder than average winter and a seeming inability of increased gas well drilling to significantly augment net marketed production. Canada, our major source of imported natural gas, has had little room to expand shipments to the United States, and our limited capacity to import liquefied natural gas (LNG) effectively restricts our access to the world's abundant supplies of gas. Our inability to increase imports to close a modest gap between North American demand and production (a gap we can almost always close in oil) is largely responsible for the marked rise in natural gas prices over the past year. Such price pressures are not evident elsewhere. Competitive crude oil prices, after wide gyrations related to the war in Iraq, are now only slightly elevated from a year ago, and where spot markets for natural gas exist, such as in Great Britain, prices exhibit little change from a year ago. In the United States, rising demand for natural gas, especially as a clean-burning source of electric power, is pressing against a supply essentially restricted to North American production. Given the current infrastructure, the U.S. market for natural gas is mainly regional, is characterized by relatively longer term contracts, and is still regulated, but less so than in the past. As a result, residential and commercial prices of natural gas respond sluggishly to movements in the spot price. Thus, to the extent that natural gas consumption must adjust to limited supplies, most of the reduction must come from the industrial sector and, to a lesser extent, utilities. Yesterday the price of gas for delivery in July closed at $6.31 per million Btu. That contract sold for as low as $2.55 in July 2000 and for $3.65 a year ago. Futures markets project further price increases through the summer cooling season to the peak of the heating season next January. Indeed, market expectations reflected in option prices imply a 25 percent probability that the peak price will exceed $7.50 per million Btu. Today's tight natural gas markets have been a long time in coming, and futures prices suggest that we are not apt to return to earlier periods of relative abundance and low prices anytime soon. It was little more than a half-century ago that drillers seeking valuable crude oil bemoaned the discovery of natural gas. Given the lack of adequate transportation, wells had to be capped or the gas flared. As the economy expanded after World War II, the development of a vast interstate transmission system facilitated widespread consumption of natural gas in our homes and business establishments. On a heat-equivalent basis, natural gas consumption by 1970 had risen to three-fourths of that of oil. But natural gas consumption lagged in the following decade because of competitive incursions from coal and nuclear power. Since 1985, natural gas has gradually increased its share of total energy use and is projected by the Energy Information Administration to gain share over the next quarter century, owing to its status as a clean-burning fuel. * * * * * Recent years' dramatic changes in technology are making existing energy reserves stretch further while keeping long-term energy costs lower than they otherwise would have been. Seismic techniques and satellite imaging, which are facilitating the discovery of promising new natural gas reservoirs, have nearly doubled the success rate of new-field wildcat wells in the United States during the past decade. New techniques allow far deeper drilling of promising fields, especially offshore. The newer recovery innovations reportedly have raised the average proportion of gas reserves eventually brought to the surface. Technologies are facilitating Rocky Mountain production of tight sands gas and coalbed methane. Marketed production in Wyoming, for example, has risen from 3.4 percent of total U.S. output in 1996 to 7.1 percent last year. One might expect that the dramatic shift away from hit-or-miss methods toward more advanced technologies would have lowered the cost of developing new fields and, hence, the long-term marginal costs of new gas. Indeed, those costs have declined, but by less than might have been the case because much of the innovation in oil and gas development outside of OPEC has been directed at overcoming an increasingly inhospitable and costly exploratory physical environment. Moreover, improving technologies have also increased the depletion rate of newly discovered gas reservoirs, placing a strain on supply that has required increasingly larger gross additions from drilling to maintain any given level of dry gas production. Depletion rates are estimated to have reached 27 percent last year, compared with 21 percent as recently as five years ago. The rise has been even more pronounced for conventionally produced gas because tight sands gas, which comprises an increasing share of new gas finds, exhibits a slower depletion rate than conventional wells. Improved technologies, however, have been unable to prevent the underlying long-term price of natural gas in the United States from rising. This is most readily observed in markets for natural gas where contract delivery is sufficiently distant to allow new supply to be developed and brought to market. That price has risen gradually from $2 per million Btu in 1997 for delivery in 2000, and presumably well beyond, to more than $4.50 for delivery in 2009, the crude oil heating equivalent of rising from less than $12 per barrel to $26 per barrel. Over the same period, the distant futures price of light sweet crude oil has edged up only $4 per barrel and is selling at a historically rare discount to comparably dated natural gas. Because gas is particularly challenging to transport in its cryogenic form as a liquid, imports of LNG have been negligible. Environmental and safety concerns and cost have limited the number of LNG terminals and imports of LNG. In 2001, LNG imports accounted for only 1 percent of U.S. gas supply. Canada, which has recently supplied a sixth of our consumption, has little capacity to significantly expand its exports, in part because of the role that Canadian gas plays in supporting growing oil production from tar sands. Given notable cost reductions for both liquefaction and transportation of LNG, significant global trade is developing. And high gas prices projected in the American distant futures market have made us a potential very large importer. Worldwide imports of natural gas in 2000 were only 26 percent of world consumption, compared to 50 percent for oil. Even with markedly less geopolitical instability confronting world gas than world oil in recent years, spot gas prices have been far more volatile than those for oil, doubtless reflecting, in part, less-developed global trade. The updrift and volatility of the spot price for gas have put significant segments of the North American gas-using industry in a weakened competitive position. Unless this competitive weakness is addressed, new investment in these technologies will flag. Increased marginal supplies from abroad, while likely to notably damp the levels and volatility of American natural gas prices, would expose us to possibly insecure sources of foreign supply, as it has for oil. But natural gas reserves are somewhat more widely dispersed than those of oil, for which three-fifths of proved world reserves reside in the Middle East. Nearly two-fifths of world natural gas reserves are in Russia and its former satellites, and one-third are in the Middle East. Creating a price-pressure safety valve through larger import capacity of LNG need not unduly expose us to potentially unstable sources of imports. There are still numerous unexploited sources of gas production in the United States. We have been struggling to reach an agreeable tradeoff between environmental and energy concerns for decades. I do not doubt we will continue to fine-tune our areas of consensus. But it is essential that our policies be consistent. For example, we cannot, on the one hand, encourage the use of environmentally desirable natural gas in this country while being conflicted on larger imports of LNG. Such contradictions are resolved only by debilitating spikes in price. * * * * * In summary, the long-term equilibrium price for natural gas in the United States has risen persistently during the past six years from approximately $2 per million Btu to more than $4.50. The perceived tightening of long-term demand-supply balances is beginning to price some industrial demand out of the market. It is not clear whether these losses are temporary, pending a fall in price, or permanent. Such pressures do not arise in the U.S. market for crude oil. American refiners have unlimited access to world supplies, as was demonstrated most recently when Venezuelan oil production shut down. Refiners were able to replace lost oil with supplies from Europe, Asia, and the Middle East. If North American natural gas markets are to function with the flexibility exhibited by oil, unlimited access to the vast world reserves of gas is required. Markets need to be able to effectively adjust to unexpected shortfalls in domestic supply. Access to world natural gas supplies will require a major expansion of LNG terminal import capacity. Without the flexibility such facilities will impart, imbalances in supply and demand must inevitably engender price volatility. As the technology of LNG liquefaction and shipping has improved, and as safety considerations have lessened, a major expansion of U.S. import capability appears to be under way. These movements bode well for widespread natural gas availability in North America in the years ahead. In recent months, in response to very tight supplies, prices of natural gas have increased sharply. Working gas in storage is currently at very low levels relative to its seasonal norm because of a colder than average winter and a seeming inability of increased gas well drilling to significantly augment net marketed production. Canada, our major source of imported natural gas, has had little room to expand shipments to the United States, and our limited capacity to import liquefied natural gas (LNG) effectively restricts our access to the world's abundant supplies of gas. Our inability to increase imports to close a modest gap between North American demand and production (a gap we can almost always close in oil) is largely responsible for the marked rise in natural gas prices over the past year. Such price pressures are not evident elsewhere. Competitive crude oil prices, after wide gyrations related to the war in Iraq, are now only slightly elevated from a year ago, and where spot markets for natural gas exist, such as in Great Britain, prices exhibit little change from a year ago. In the United States, rising demand for natural gas, especially as a clean-burning source of electric power, is pressing against a supply essentially restricted to North American production. Given the current infrastructure, the U.S. market for natural gas is mainly regional, is characterized by relatively longer term contracts, and is still regulated, but less so than in the past. As a result, residential and commercial prices of natural gas respond sluggishly to movements in the spot price. Thus, to the extent that natural gas consumption must adjust to limited supplies, most of the reduction must come from the industrial sector and, to a lesser extent, utilities. Yesterday the price of gas for delivery in July closed at $6.31 per million Btu. That contract sold for as low as $2.55 in July 2000 and for $3.65 a year ago. Futures markets project further price increases through the summer cooling season to the peak of the heating season next January. Indeed, market expectations reflected in option prices imply a 25 percent probability that the peak price will exceed $7.50 per million Btu. Today's tight natural gas markets have been a long time in coming, and futures prices suggest that we are not apt to return to earlier periods of relative abundance and low prices anytime soon. It was little more than a half-century ago that drillers seeking valuable crude oil bemoaned the discovery of natural gas. Given the lack of adequate transportation, wells had to be capped or the gas flared. As the economy expanded after World War II, the development of a vast interstate transmission system facilitated widespread consumption of natural gas in our homes and business establishments. On a heat-equivalent basis, natural gas consumption by 1970 had risen to three-fourths of that of oil. But natural gas consumption lagged in the following decade because of competitive incursions from coal and nuclear power. Since 1985, natural gas has gradually increased its share of total energy use and is projected by the Energy Information Administration to gain share over the next quarter century, owing to its status as a clean-burning fuel. * * * * * Recent years' dramatic changes in technology are making existing energy reserves stretch further while keeping long-term energy costs lower than they otherwise would have been. Seismic techniques and satellite imaging, which are facilitating the discovery of promising new natural gas reservoirs, have nearly doubled the success rate of new-field wildcat wells in the United States during the past decade. New techniques allow far deeper drilling of promising fields, especially offshore. The newer recovery innovations reportedly have raised the average proportion of gas reserves eventually brought to the surface. Technologies are facilitating Rocky Mountain production of tight sands gas and coalbed methane. Marketed production in Wyoming, for example, has risen from 3.4 percent of total U.S. output in 1996 to 7.1 percent last year. One might expect that the dramatic shift away from hit-or-miss methods toward more advanced technologies would have lowered the cost of developing new fields and, hence, the long-term marginal costs of new gas. Indeed, those costs have declined, but by less than might have been the case because much of the innovation in oil and gas development outside of OPEC has been directed at overcoming an increasingly inhospitable and costly exploratory physical environment. Moreover, improving technologies have also increased the depletion rate of newly discovered gas reservoirs, placing a strain on supply that has required increasingly larger gross additions from drilling to maintain any given level of dry gas production. Depletion rates are estimated to have reached 27 percent last year, compared with 21 percent as recently as five years ago. The rise has been even more pronounced for conventionally produced gas because tight sands gas, which comprises an increasing share of new gas finds, exhibits a slower depletion rate than conventional wells. Improved technologies, however, have been unable to prevent the underlying long-term price of natural gas in the United States from rising. This is most readily observed in markets for natural gas where contract delivery is sufficiently distant to allow new supply to be developed and brought to market. That price has risen gradually from $2 per million Btu in 1997 for delivery in 2000, and presumably well beyond, to more than $4.50 for delivery in 2009, the crude oil heating equivalent of rising from less than $12 per barrel to $26 per barrel. Over the same period, the distant futures price of light sweet crude oil has edged up only $4 per barrel and is selling at a historically rare discount to comparably dated natural gas. Because gas is particularly challenging to transport in its cryogenic form as a liquid, imports of LNG have been negligible. Environmental and safety concerns and cost have limited the number of LNG terminals and imports of LNG. In 2001, LNG imports accounted for only 1 percent of U.S. gas supply. Canada, which has recently supplied a sixth of our consumption, has little capacity to significantly expand its exports, in part because of the role that Canadian gas plays in supporting growing oil production from tar sands. Given notable cost reductions for both liquefaction and transportation of LNG, significant global trade is developing. And high gas prices projected in the American distant futures market have made us a potential very large importer. Worldwide imports of natural gas in 2000 were only 26 percent of world consumption, compared to 50 percent for oil. Even with markedly less geopolitical instability confronting world gas than world oil in recent years, spot gas prices have been far more volatile than those for oil, doubtless reflecting, in part, less-developed global trade. The updrift and volatility of the spot price for gas have put significant segments of the North American gas-using industry in a weakened competitive position. Unless this competitive weakness is addressed, new investment in these technologies will flag. Increased marginal supplies from abroad, while likely to notably damp the levels and volatility of American natural gas prices, would expose us to possibly insecure sources of foreign supply, as it has for oil. But natural gas reserves are somewhat more widely dispersed than those of oil, for which three-fifths of proved world reserves reside in the Middle East. Nearly two-fifths of world natural gas reserves are in Russia and its former satellites, and one-third are in the Middle East. Creating a price-pressure safety valve through larger import capacity of LNG need not unduly expose us to potentially unstable sources of imports. There are still numerous unexploited sources of gas production in the United States. We have been struggling to reach an agreeable tradeoff between environmental and energy concerns for decades. I do not doubt we will continue to fine-tune our areas of consensus. But it is essential that our policies be consistent. For example, we cannot, on the one hand, encourage the use of environmentally desirable natural gas in this country while being conflicted on larger imports of LNG. Such contradictions are resolved only by debilitating spikes in price. * * * * * In summary, the long-term equilibrium price for natural gas in the United States has risen persistently during the past six years from approximately $2 per million Btu to more than $4.50. The perceived tightening of long-term demand-supply balances is beginning to price some industrial demand out of the market. It is not clear whether these losses are temporary, pending a fall in price, or permanent. Such pressures do not arise in the U.S. market for crude oil. American refiners have unlimited access to world supplies, as was demonstrated most recently when Venezuelan oil production shut down. Refiners were able to replace lost oil with supplies from Europe, Asia, and the Middle East. If North American natural gas markets are to function with the flexibility exhibited by oil, unlimited access to the vast world reserves of gas is required. Markets need to be able to effectively adjust to unexpected shortfalls in domestic supply. Access to world natural gas supplies will require a major expansion of LNG terminal import capacity. Without the flexibility such facilities will impart, imbalances in supply and demand must inevitably engender price volatility. As the technology of LNG liquefaction and shipping has improved, and as safety considerations have lessened, a major expansion of U.S. import capability appears to be under way. These movements bode well for widespread natural gas availability in North America in the years ahead.
Remarks by Governor Susan Schmidt Bies At the American Bankers Association, Annual Regulatory Compliance Conference, Washington, D.C. June 11, 2003 Strengthening Compliance through Effective Corporate Governance Good morning. I thank you for the invitation to speak to this American Bankers Association Regulatory Compliance Conference. Since coming to the Federal Reserve Board, I have spent much of my time dealing with corporate governance, internal control, and risk management issues. Today, I would like to talk with you about the important role that the compliance function plays in banking organizations, and how the current emphasis on improving corporate governance is an opportunity for you to strengthen the compliance function in your organization. Introduction Over the past two years, we all have been shocked by the headlines announcing corporate governance or accounting problems at a variety of companies, such as Enron, Worldcom, and HealthSouth. As we read these headlines, the question that comes to mind is, "What were the underlying deficiencies in the internal control processes of these companies that rendered their governance practices ineffective?" As the details about the scandals have been made public, it has become clear that they exemplify breakdowns in fundamental systems of internal control. Why, then, have we seen so many headlines highlighting corporate governance and accounting problems? Because these companies lost track of the basics of effective corporate governance--internal controls and a strong ethical compass. While most companies have effective governance processes in place, these events remind all of us of the importance of doing the basics well. Internal Control Framework After an earlier series of corporate frauds, the National Commission on Fraudulent Financial Reporting, also known as the Treadway Commission, was created in 1985 to make recommendations to reduce the incidence of these types of frauds. The Committee of Sponsoring Organizations (COSO) of the Treadway Commission issued a report titled Internal Control--Integrated Framework that has become the most-referenced standard on internal control. If one re-reads that report, the need to return to focusing on the basics becomes clear. The report defines internal control as: a process, effected by an entity's board of directors, management and other personnel, designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the achievement of... Effectiveness and efficiency of operations Reliability of financial reporting Compliance with applicable laws and regulations. The COSO framework was the model considered when the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act (FDICIA) was enacted in 1991. Section 112 of FDICIA requires management to report annually on the quality of internal controls and outside auditors to attest to that control evaluation. Control Assessments COSO requires all managers to, at least once a year, step back from their other duties and evaluate risks and controls within their span of authority. Each manager should consider current and planned operational changes, identify risks, determine appropriate mitigating controls, establish an effective monitoring process, and evaluate the effectiveness of those controls. Managers then should report their assessment up the chain of command to the chief executive officer, with each new level of management in turn considering the risks and controls under its responsibility. The results of this process are ultimately reported to the audit committee of the board of directors. In the case of banks, management publicly reports on its assessment of the effectiveness of controls over financial reporting and the external auditor is required to attest to this self-assessment. Thus, the process helps managers communicate among themselves and with the board about the dynamic issues affecting risk exposures, risk appetites, and risk controls throughout the company. Risk assessments such as the one outlined in COSO presumably could also be useful in assessing various lines of business when formulating business strategies. But not all corporations and boards consider risk during their annual strategic planning or other evaluation processes. The 2002 survey of corporate directors conducted jointly by the Institute of Internal Auditors and the National Association of Corporate Directors showed that directors are not focusing on risk management. I was surprised to learn that 45 percent of directors surveyed said their organization did not have a formal enterprise risk-management process--or any other formal method of identifying risk. An additional 19 percent said they were not sure whether their company had a formal process for identifying risks. These percentages indicate that some companies have directors who don't understand their responsibilities as the representatives of shareholders. The shareholders of those companies should be asking the directors how they govern an organization without a good understanding of the risks the company is facing and without knowledge of a systematic approach to identifying, assessing, monitoring, and mitigating excessive risk-taking. I trust that none of the directors who participated in the survey were on the board of a financial services company. Although directors are not expected to understand every nuance of every line of business or to oversee every transaction, they do have responsibility for setting the tone regarding their corporations' risk-taking and establishing an effective monitoring program. They also have responsibility for overseeing the internal control processes, so that they can reasonably expect that their directives will be followed. They are responsible for hiring individuals who have integrity and can exercise sound judgment and are competent. In light of recent events, I might add that directors have a further responsibility for periodically determining whether their initial assessment of management's integrity was correct. The COSO framework and FDICIA annual report can be an effective tool for the auditor to communicate risks and control processes to the audit committee. Members of that committee should use the reports to be sure business strategy, changing business processes, management reorganizations, and positioning for future growth are conducted within the context of a sound system of internal controls and governance. The report should identify priorities for strengthening the effectiveness of internal controls. Indeed, beyond legal requirements, boards of directors of all firms should periodically assess where management, which has stewardship over shareholder resources, stands on ethical business practices. They should ask, for example: "Are we getting by on technicalities, adhering to the letter but not the spirit of the law? Are we compensating ourselves and others on the basis of contribution, or are we taking advantage of our positions? Would our reputation be tainted if word of our actions became public?" Compliance officers should help ensure that processes are in place for employees to raise ethical and compliance concerns in an environment that protects them from retribution from affected managers. Internal Controls over Compliance Risk management clearly cannot be effective within a company if we forget about the basics of internal controls. It is worth stating that many of the lessons learned from those headline cases cited violations of the fundamental tenets of internal control, particularly those pertaining to operational risks. Based on the headlines, it seems that boards of directors, management, and auditors need a remedial course in Internal Controls 101. As corporations grow larger and more diverse, internal controls become more, not less, important to the ability of management and the board to monitor activity across the company. The basics of internal controls for directors and managers are simple. Directors do not serve full time, so it is important that they establish an annual agenda to focus their attention on the high-risk and emerging-risk areas while ensuring that there are effective preventive or detective controls over the low-risk areas. Regulatory compliance is one of these risk areas. While boards are organized in various ways, they do have the responsibility to understand the organization of the compliance function and the extent of its effectiveness and to identify the emerging compliance risks. The challenge for compliance officers is to ensure that their staff has the expertise and ongoing training to meet the specific and changing risks of the organization. Before a company moves into new and higher risk areas, the boards of directors, and management need assurances that they have adherence to the basics of sound governance. Many of the organizations that have seen their reputations tarnished in the past two years have also neglected to consider emerging conflicts of interest when the organization adds new products and lines of business. It is important that if a customer service or control function must be done in an independent, fiduciary, or unbiased manner relative to other activities, appropriate firewalls are in place before the product or activity begins. Internal controls and compliance are the responsibility of line management. Line managers must determine the acceptable level of risk in their line of business and must assure themselves that the combination of earnings, capital, and internal controls is sufficient to compensate for the risk exposures. Supporting functions such as accounting, internal audit, risk management, credit review, compliance, and legal should independently monitor the control processes to ensure that they are effective and that risks are measured appropriately. The results of these independent reviews should be routinely reported to executive management and boards of directors. Directors should be sufficiently engaged in the process to determine whether these reviews are in fact independent of the operating areas and whether the officers conducting the reviews can speak freely. Directors must demand that management fix problems promptly and provide appropriate evidence to internal audit confirming this. While we have been focused on midsized and larger organizations, internal controls are also important to smaller organizations. Many failures of community banks are due to breakdowns in internal controls, thus increasing operational risk. In smaller organizations, the segregation of duties and ability to hire expertise for specialized areas, like regulatory compliance, is more difficult. But smaller organizations still must go through the process of assessing risks and controls and ensuring that they are appropriate for the culture and business mix of the organization. A faster-growing financial services company in riskier lines of business will need a stronger, more formalized system of internal controls than a well-established company engaged broadly in traditional financial services. Compliance Risk Management To be effective, compliance risk management must be coordinated at various levels within the organization. In any control or oversight function, there are common elements of a successful compliance process that each organization should exhibit. While the diversity, size, and business mix of the organization will affect the specific aspects of an effective process, every financial institution should consider these elements. Director and senior management responsibilities . The board of directors and senior management cannot delegate the responsibility for having an effective system of compliance. Certain portions of the implementation of the compliance process may be conducted by more junior management, but this does not relieve the board and senior management of responsibility for the design and effectiveness of the system. The board of directors and senior management must set a tone that encourages regulatory compliance. The board should receive periodic reports on the effectiveness of the compliance program and emerging issues. The board should ensure that strategic and product development efforts include an independent view of potential conflicts and new risk exposures. The board should ensure that identified compliance weaknesses are dealt with in a timely fashion, and that the line employees, as well as compliance and internal audit staffs, are trained to keep up with changes in regulations and best practices in internal controls. Most importantly, the board should ensure that the senior compliance officer has independent access to the appropriate board committee, and the senior compliance officer has the stature with senior management to see that appropriate controls are implemented. While the governance of a bank's risk-management program comes from the top down, a successful program will involve staff at all levels, and in more than one department. In other words, while senior management bears the ultimate responsibility for successfully managing the compliance risks, management alone cannot contain these risks. This means that the teller who has contact with the customer, the auditor who periodically reviews documents for compliance, the marketing staff who prepare ads and develop new products and the attorney who reviews new forms for compliance all play an integral part in running an effective compliance management program. Structure . The compliance function will vary by the size and complexity of the organization. But the compliance officers should be able to have access to all operational areas. One of the benefits of having an independent compliance function is that it can help identify compliance weaknesses that cross management lines of responsibilities and may not be effectively managed. In larger organizations this may require both business-line and enterprise-wide compliance committees to prioritize resources. Further, you, as compliance officers, are the independent eyes and ears of the audit and other board committees. As you work throughout the bank, you know which managers and which projects are likely to entail greater weaknesses in compliance. By helping senior management address these risks before exceptions occur, you can help protect the reputation of managers and the bank and increase your credibility. Appropriate reporting to the senior management compliance committee and the audit committee of the board, and timely resolution of findings, will build your credibility, provided that you follow through on their behalf to ensure that managers are taking compliance and internal control issues seriously. Scope . Compliance should have an annual work plan that lays out priorities, monitoring processes, and testing. New or changed regulations have to be evaluated and relevant internal policies appropriately modified. This can entail training for both the line and compliance staff. The frequency and extent of compliance reviews and testing should be consistent with the nature and complexity of the institution's compliance risks. Areas with higher penalties for non-compliance, that have prior findings of deficiencies or where new products or processes are being introduced should receive more attention. Unacceptable exceptions should be reported promptly to appropriate management and, if appropriate, the board of directors. Compliance officers should monitor corrective action plans, and retest to ensure deficiencies are corrected in a timely manner. As with any risk management function, the management compliance committee and appropriate committee of the board should at least annually review and approve the compliance risk assessment, the scope of the annual plan, and adherence to the compliance plan. While the plan serves as the prioritization of resources, it should be flexible enough to allow appropriate reallocation of resources as unexpected product introductions or compliance testing results require. At the end of each year, the validity of the initial assumptions should be critically assessed and appropriate reallocations of resources scheduled for the new plan year. Compliance audits . The internal audit function should perform independent reviews of the effectiveness of the compliance function. This would include assurance of the quality of information in compliance reports, adequacy of training programs, prompt correction of deficiencies, and implementation of compliance risk management by product managers. The internal auditor can also assess whether sufficient resources are available to meet the changing needs of the organization. Internal audit should be independent of the compliance function. Auditors lose their independence when they perform management consulting roles for which they later will have to render an opinion. Internal audit has both the ability and the responsibility to look across all of the management silos within the corporation and make sure that the system of internal controls has no gaps. Further, the control framework must be continually reviewed to keep up with corporate strategic initiatives, reorganizations, and process changes. When an auditor becomes part of management, the independent view is lost. Sarbanes-Oxley Act Now let's turn to Sarbanes-Oxley. At its core, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act is a call to get back to the basics that we have been discussing. Simply stated, the current status quo for corporate governance is unacceptable and must change. This message is applicable to both public and private companies alike and affects everyone within a company. The message for boards of directors is: Uphold your responsibility for ensuring the effectiveness of the company's overall governance process. The message for audit committees is: Uphold your responsibility for ensuring that the company's internal and external audit processes are rigorous and effective. The message for chief executive and chief financial officers and senior management is: Uphold your responsibility to maintain effective financial reporting and disclosure controls and adhere to high ethical standards. This requires meaningful certifications, codes of ethics, and conduct for insiders that, if violated, will result in fines and criminal penalties, including imprisonment. The message for external auditors is: Focus your efforts solely on auditing financial statements and leave the add-on services to other consultants. The message for internal auditors is: You are uniquely positioned within the company to ensure that its corporate governance, financial reporting and disclosure controls, and risk-management practices are functioning effectively. Although internal auditors are not specifically mentioned in the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, they have within their purview of internal control the responsibility to examine and evaluate all of an entity's systems, processes, operations, functions, and activities. What Are the Challenges for Compliance Officers in the Sarbanes-Oxley Era? First, compliance officers must help corporate risk officers and managers reinvigorate the risk assessment, internal controls, and ethical compass of the organization. Recently, the Fed has been looking at the FDICIA 112 management reports on internal controls for several banks that have had significant breaks in internal controls. From these banks, we have identified several whose FDICIA 112 processes were not effective. A closer look at these situations indicates that managements had essentially put this process on autopilot. Further, the external auditors had not done effective reviews of the basis of management reports. Before you say, "That could not happen at my company," let me remind you how we started our discussion today. In each of the cases involving banks, management seemed to be content with the loss of vigor in the process and the external auditor was apparently satisfied to simply collect a fee. This is totally unacceptable. Further, as the organization evolves by offering new products, changing processes, outsourcing services, complying with new regulations, or growing through mergers, the controls need to be modified to reflect the changes in risks. In some cases, the controls failed with respect to newer risk exposures that were not identified, or growth put strains on existing control processes that were not suitable for a larger organization. Don't assume that what was acceptable in the past is good enough for the future. Remember that there is a tendency for an organization to go on autopilot if the compliance officer is not vigilant. You should view this as an opportunity to convince the board and management to adopt a rigorous self-assessment process for compliance controls. Further, use this as an opportunity to improve your own quality assurance process. Are you surprised by exceptions? Do you find your staff coming to different findings for compliance reviews that have similar fact patterns? Are you harder on some managers in your findings, and "trust" others to improve without citing the weaknesses? When you do not have a consistent quality for the work of the compliance function you send mixed messages to employees and officers. Further, you weaken your credibility. And more importantly in the current environment, you are not part of the process to strengthen corporate governance. Now, certainly, we must know which way the ethical compass of the organization is pointing. Are the product designs, marketing practices, and disclosures communicating a solid image of trust and integrity that your organization is targeting? Conclusion My objective today was to exhort you to take a stand and make a difference for the better in the corporate governance of your company. You should help lead the dialogue on corporate governance. Although I recognize that some of you are compliance officers of companies that are not subject to Sarbanes-Oxley, I believe the act is a wake-up call more generally for everyone who is part of designing and testing a system of internal controls. The events of the past two years demonstrate how quickly a corporation's reputation can be tainted by accusations of inappropriate activities or lack of attention to regulations. Success in banking still is heavily dependent on winning and keeping the trust of customers, employees, and communities. When corporate reputations are tainted, it can take a considerable time to rebuild customer and community relationships.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between The Marathon Bank, Winchester, Virginia and the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond. The Federal Reserve Board also announced the issuance of a Cease and Desist Order against Lori H. Staples, a former vice president and an institution-affiliated party of The Marathon Bank, Winchester, Virginia. Copies of the Agreement and the Order are attached.
Remarks by Governor Edward M. Gramlich Community economic development At the Northwest Side Community Development Corporation's 20th Anniversary Luncheon, Milwaukee, Wisconsin June 13, 2003 It is a pleasure to be here today. I enjoyed meeting many of you during this morning's activities and appreciate the opportunity to see firsthand your work to improve the economic viability of this community. Since the mission of the Northwest Side Community Development Corporation (CDC) is to promote small business and community economic development, I would like to discuss some of these issues. Capitalism is defined by its focus on private ownership. Ownership provides the avenue for building wealth, and it is also the channel through which price incentives work. While we typically associate capitalism with Wall Street or corporate leaders, capitalist principles work just as well in promoting entrepreneurship and economic development, the topic of our discussion today. Broadly speaking, to be entrepreneurial is to create new value through innovation and the creative use of resources. The U.S. Economic Development Administration characterizes the entrepreneurial theory of development as one in which development proceeds as changes in firms and industries produce more resilient, diverse local economies. The essential ingredient in this process is innovation, which is associated with improvisation or creative risk-taking. Entrepreneurs make development happen. Other things equals, we try to promote and reward entrepreneurial endeavors. Many entrepreneurs are found in small businesses--defined as those with fewer than 500 employees. Statistics from the U.S. Small Business Administration (SBA) indicate that these small firms create about three-quarters to two-thirds of net new jobs and employ about 50 percent of the workforce. Very small firms--those with fewer than 20 employees, represented 89 percent of all firms in the country in 2000. In Wisconsin, these firms represented 85 percent of all employer firms and accounted for 15 percent of the state's annual payroll. Data reported by the Global Entrepreneurship Monitor illustrate the degree to which these small businesses are involved in entrepreneurship. This organization finds that in 2001 more than 11 percent of the total adult population in the United States was involved in a start-up process or in a business less than 42 months old. Although this measure of total entrepreneurial activity has declined lately, the United States consistently ranks among the most entrepreneurial nations in the world. Other statistics describe the potential benefits of entrepreneurial endeavors on individuals' financial status. Data reported by the Bureau of Economic Analysis indicate that nonfarm proprietor income increased nearly 5 percent from 2001 to 2002, while income reported from wage and salary disbursements from all industries increased slightly more than 1 percent. In terms of the value of business ownership, the Federal Reserve's Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) demonstrates a positive effect of business ownership on families' financial status. These data indicate that the median value of families' holdings in private business equity increased 53 percent between 1998 and 2001, about twice the rate of increase in the median value of families' holdings in publicly traded corporate equities. In addition, the 2001 SCF shows a direct correlation between entrepreneurial endeavors and family net worth. For families with any entrepreneurial activity, that is, those reporting private business ownership or a self-employed status, the median value of net worth is more than five times that of families without entrepreneurial activity. Further, even for families reporting a household income of less than 80 percent of the median, the net worth of entrepreneurial families is still about five times that of families without entrepreneurial activity. These statistics indicate the important effect that entrepreneurial endeavors can have on the ability of families at all income levels to accumulate wealth. Going beyond these overall statistics, as the role of large industrial and manufacturing firms in the overall economy declines, small business entrepreneurs become critical in providing a new engine for economic growth. With the dawning of the "new economy," entrepreneurial activity, particularly in technology-related enterprises, gives the promise of economic rejuvenation by providing new sources of employment opportunities and tax revenues. Further, entrepreneurial activity continues to be an important means of promoting local and regional economic development. A report by the National Governors Association (NGA) explored the importance of creating linkages between public- and private-sector systems to foster the growth and development of entrepreneurial activity. The report observes that states that have been successful in attracting entrepreneurs have developed comprehensive support systems that integrate the resources of academic, corporate, and governmental institutions to create a favorable business climate. Many states, including Wisconsin, offer a wide variety of financing packages, technical assistance programs, and organizational support mechanisms, such as incubators and network groups, to aid fledgling enterprises. These programs typically augment and leverage federally sponsored efforts, such as those offered by the U.S. Small Business Administration and the U.S. Department of Commerce, to support investment, development, research, and funding for small businesses. The U.S. Department of Agriculture is exploring the value of promoting community-led entrepreneurial development that capitalizes on the unique natural, human, and cultural resources of rural communities. In addition to these government-sponsored efforts, nonprofit organizations, such as the Social Compact and Initiative for a Competitive Inner City have focused on devising new methodologies for measuring demand in underserved inner-city neighborhoods and for attracting private investment and capital to their communities. The Federal Reserve undertakes a variety of activities to promote these flows of information and capital. To gauge credit conditions and availability of financing to commercial enterprises from banks, the Federal Reserve conducts a quarterly survey of senior loan officers. In addition, a survey of small business finances is conducted every five years to gather information on firm and owner characteristics, as well as to track trends in small businesses' use of various financial service products, services, and providers. Beyond these research activities, the Federal Reserve's Community Affairs Offices seek to promote small business development in low- and moderate-income areas. These initiatives focus on collaborative efforts to support enterprise growth and development. Examples include the following: The Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago initiated the Small Enterprise Capital Access Partnership (SECAP) to engage Chicago-area small businesses in an evaluation of the funding process of new solutions for improving capital access to traditionally underserved communities. The partnership offered recommendations for bridging gaps in small business financing and for underwriting, technical assistance, equity investment, and marketing. The Federal Reserve Bank of Boston co-sponsors microenterprise development training for lenders and technical assistance providers. The Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland assisted in the establishment of a statewide network to facilitate technical assistance and financing resources among microenterprises throughout Ohio. A collaborative effort between the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond and the Board of Governors in Washington, D.C., convened representatives from local government agencies, financial institutions, and universities to discuss community development strategies, resulting in the creation of a full-service resource center serving small businesses in an area targeted for commercial revitalization. Although small business proprietors and entrepreneurs are often grouped together, the NGA does differentiate between the two groups. The NGA contends that entrepreneurship is the critical element in bringing new wealth to a community. The presence of a viable entrepreneurial business sector provides a strong economic base and serves as a reliable source for employment opportunities, household income generation, and tax revenues. Activities and innovations by these firms also increase marketplace efficiencies. In addition to these benefits, increases in local private investment enrich a community by enhancing the resources available to educational, cultural, and civic institutions. An important characteristic of the entrepreneurial approach to development is the ability to recognize and respond to new opportunities, regardless of the scarcity of resources. By understanding and accepting calculated risks, entrepreneurs promote further innovation in an industry, a product, a service, or a delivery mechanism to the benefit of the consumer. Community developers understand these relationships and often display commendable ingenuity in creating opportunities in traditionally underserved neighborhoods. These community development organizations seek to reengineer their neighborhood economies by bringing together resources for small business development, home ownership, and services through innovative strategies and collaborations. Northwest Side CDC is a clear example of such an entrepreneurial spirit. As today's event celebrates, the Northwest Side CDC has worked in this neighborhood for the past two decades to promote community-based economic development for the betterment of the residents and the community. Its efforts have increased both the economic viability and social framework of this community. Northwest Side CDC's approaches to economic opportunity have been innovative and resourceful and range from the establishment of the Northwest Industrial Council to the creation of a business incubator that has launched nearly 90 businesses and created approximately 300 jobs. Other creative initiatives promote local enterprises through a supplier linkages program and increase the competitive advantage of neighborhood firms through technology-based services connecting them with e-business opportunities. Another notable achievement of Northwest Side CDC is its partnership with the Eaton Navy Controls Division in training local residents in the manufacturing of new technology for ship propulsion. The resulting job training initiative provided Eaton with qualified employees, and over time it gained a reputation for reliable advanced technology products. Between 1994 and 2000, Eaton grew 174 percent and increased its employment 50 percent. This partnership, as well as the other initiatives of Northwest Side CDC, shows how entrepreneurial investment can increase both economic capital and human capital, and thereby contribute to the financial sustainability of the community and individual residents. Corporate entrepreneurial managers try to create environments that encourage employees to seek innovative and creative approaches and establish management structures that are responsive and resilient. Similarly, community economic development leaders explore entrepreneurial approaches, particularly in the face of diminishing funding sources, to increase the sustainability of their organizations without compromising social impact and mission. A study published jointly by Harvard University's Joint Center for Housing Studies and the Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation considered various aspects of entrepreneurial community development. This analysis applies private-sector principles for business management to not-for-profit organizations to improve long-term financial sustainability. The study suggests that, like corporations, community development organizations should improve their organizational discipline, implement accounting and performance tracking systems, adopt an overall strategic plan as well as individual business plans for each activity, and identify and invest in core competencies. Other fruitful strategies mentioned by the study include collaborating with public and private organizations, achieving economies of scale, diversifying funding streams, and consolidating with other CDCs to reduce redundancies. In addition to these strategies, the study also suggests methods for improving sustainability by identifying income-earning activities and creating strategic alliances. Income-generating activities require a balance between the mission of the organization and the pursuit of income streams. For example, while a CDC may offer a unique service that has market value, assessing a fee for that service may conflict with the organization's mission, or it may be otherwise inappropriate to charge for certain services. The creation of strategic alliances requires entities to identify areas in which enlightened self-interest serves the interests of all parties. The collaboration between Northwest Side CDC and Eaton demonstrates an entrepreneurial approach to community economic development, characterized by the creation of an innovative strategy to respond to the market need for skilled workers while, at the same time, fulfilling a social need for increased employment opportunities. Successful strategic alliances among other CDCs have taken the form of homebuyer counseling and loan-packaging services provided to financial institutions, which have used these services to increase their market share of mortgage loans in targeted lower-income communities. As I indicated earlier, community developers are innately entrepreneurial and assume calculated risks for the betterment of neighborhoods. As the community development field confronts continued funding challenges and mounting demands for services and expertise, there will be an increasing need for further innovation and creativity, in both organizational structure and service delivery in order to fulfill the mission of expanding economic opportunity for low-income populations and communities. For the past twenty years, Northwest Side CDC has embraced entrepreneurial principles and provided leadership and vision for residents and other community development organizations. It has been innovative in its strategies for creating economic opportunities and for increasing its organizational capacity. I congratulate you on your past successes and look forward to your future accomplishments. Footnotes 1. Andrew L. Zacharakis, Heidi M. Neck, William D. Bygrave, and Larry W. Cox, Global Entrepreneurship Monitor, National Entrepreneurship Assessment--United States of America: 2001 Executive Report (Kauffman Center for Entrepreneurial Leadership at the Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation, 2002). 2. Thom Rubel and Scott Palladino, Nurturing Entrepreneurial Growth in State Economies (National Governors Association, Center for Best Practices, 2000) ( ). 3. Ellen Stiefvater, Entrepreneurial Community Development: Exploring Earned-Income Activities and Strategic Alliances for Community-Development Nonprofits (Joint Center for Housing Studies of Harvard University and Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation, November 2001) ( ).
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Southern Commercial Bank, St. Louis, Missouri and the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
Remarks by Governor Susan Schmidt Bies Before the Oregon Bankers Association, Independent Community Banks of Oregon, and Idaho Bankers Association; Sunriver, Oregon June 16, 2003 Managing Business Risks Thank you for inviting me to participate in the joint annual convention of the Oregon Bankers Association, the Independent Community Banks of Oregon and the Idaho Bankers Association. One of my responsibilities as a governor on the Federal Reserve Board is to chair the Board's Committee on Supervisory and Regulatory Affairs. In that role I apply my knowledge of banking to the continuing task of adapting the Federal Reserve's supervision process to meet the needs of the evolving financial services industry. Today I want to explore some issues of joint interest to us, as bankers and supervisors, and to think about how we can better manage the risks inherent in banks. First I'll focus on some of issues arising from events at public companies and banks in the past eighteen months that have shown weaknesses in risk management practices. And then I'll talk about how operational risk management is evolving into a discipline that can strengthen the corporate governance process at banks. Bank earnings and performance Banks in the United States have experienced two consecutive years of record earnings, despite the recession and slow recovery, losses due to exposures to bankruptcies arising from corporate fraud, and record low interest rates. In 2002, the return on assets rose 16 basis points, to 1.33 percent, the highest level in three decades. The improvements in earnings and ROA are even more remarkable in that they occurred while banks were strengthening their capital ratios. Thus, banks' performance was driven by increased net interest margins, lower relative costs and comparatively constant loan loss provisions. The ability of bankers to achieve record earnings during a recession and the early part of the recovery reflects the improvement in risk management that occurred in the 1990s. This is especially true in relation to credit and asset/liability risks. Operational risks are a different matter: Banks have had to deal with losses arising from operational issues, as a few well-publicized events have shown. Operational risk "Operational risk" is a relatively new term that has no unique definition. In the mid-1990s the concept began to receive attention at banks and nonfinancial firms as enterprise-risk management began to evolve. For purposes of my talk today, I am going to refer to operational risk as any risk that arises from inadequate or failed internal processes, people, or systems or from external events. Examples of operational risk include employee fraud, customer lawsuits, failed information system conversions, and mis-sent wires. Operational risk has always been part of banking. But the greater variety of products and services that banks provide, the evolution of business processes, and changes in the ethical environment in which we live have all contributed to more observable exposures to this type of risk. An example of this is the growing use of automated loan underwriting systems. When individual loan officers are responsible for making lending decisions within established credit guidelines, unexpected losses tend to be concentrated. That is, if a particular loan officer is a weak underwriter, only the portion of the loan portfolio generated by that individual shows higher delinquencies and charge-offs. Management could address this risk in many ways, including by providing additional training for that loan officer and by increasing loan-review activities. Today, many lending decisions are made by automated systems. If the model used for underwriting has a weakness, a systemic asset-quality problem can arise. That is, higher delinquencies are no longer isolated in a small portion of the portfolio managed by one loan officer. Instead, significant losses can occur simultaneously across the bank's loan portfolio. Avoiding the problems of "model risk" requires more-rigorous oversight of internal controls. The model should be back-tested to verify that the factors it uses deliver the level of losses that was assumed when the loans were made and priced. Avoiding model risk also requires greater data integrity in loan application and underwriting systems, as data errors can also contribute to unintended results. Many banks today use credit-scoring models to help in mortgage and consumer credit originations. Although most of these models have been shown to be effective in the past few years they have been in use, they have not been tested through a serious consumer-led recession. In the last recession, the weaknesses in asset quality were--and have been since--on the commercial loan side rather than the consumer side. During the period, consumer disposable income continued to grow. The test of the models will come when we hit a period of significantly higher unemployment or falling incomes. Then we'll be able to see if the credit models have reliably predicted the credit losses. Reputational risk Another area of risk that has received attention because of recent events is reputational risk. Bankers know that a critical element of success is customer and investor perceptions of the organization's integrity. When customers select an organization to manage their wealth and financial transactions, they have a few essential expectations--that their privacy will be protected, their transactions will be conducted in a timely manner, the advice they are given will be reliable, and their assets will be invested appropriately and consistently with their financial goals and appetite for risk. Events of the past eighteen months have shown that customers and investors react quickly when a reputation is tainted. Many of these events reflect operational risk breakdowns. The case of Arthur Andersen has several lessons for bankers, and I want to focus on the reputational risk aspects. A key component of many banks' strategies is the use of relationship managers. Bankers believe that a single point of contact will help a customer identify the range of the bank's services, will provide a consistent level of service quality, and will increase the cross-selling of services. As a result, customer retention will increase and profitability will improve. Arthur Andersen had a similar relationship-management strategy. The breakdown occurred because engagement partners who served as relationship managers had the final word on signing-off on accounting policy. Because the engagement partner was compensated on the basis of total revenues paid by the client, the partner had a natural conflict between trying to increase his or her compensation and holding firmly to recognized accounting standards. Further, it appears that Andersen did not have an effective quality-assurance process so that executive management would know when a particular partner was compromising accounting standards to meet his or her own compensation goals. Since the reputation of an independent auditing firm rests on its perceived integrity in ensuring that all its clients meet generally accepted accounting standards, the core value of the enterprise was compromised. As bankers offer more products via a relationship-management model, they should heed the lessons of the Arthur Andersen incident: Make sure operational controls are in place to monitor the conflicts that the account officer is facing. Controls are especially necessary in the area of credit oversight. Rarely can enough fee income be generated to offset credit losses. An effective risk-management process can help identify areas of conflict that emerge as new products and management processes are adopted. Risk assessments initiated early in the planning process can give the bank time to get mitigating controls and monitors in place and conduct an internal audit validation of the quality of those controls, before product launch. Thus, risk management functions can be effective tools for bankers to help limit surprises that affect their reputation in the marketplace. Accounting Over the past year and a half, some organizations have had to restate financial results because of inappropriate accounting. Both corporate financial officers and outside auditors failed to effectively evaluate the sophisticated nature of the underlying transactions and arrive at the appropriate accounting policy. At a few banks, the evaluations were ineffective for special-purpose entities and derivatives. You have all read accounts of these incidents, and I will not dwell on them. Rather, I want to illustrate operational risk in relation to a basic accounting concept by discussing another area of weakness that bank regulators determined needed attention--accounting for subprime credit card activity. The accounting concept is not new or esoteric. Rather, the nature of the subprime credit card business, compared with that of the prime card business, is to rely much more on fee income than on interest income for revenue. For subprime accounts, rapid growth of the account base can mask underlying revenue trends. Some financial institutions did not have management information that allowed them to track the percentage of delinquent accounts that were not paying late fees and other charges that had been billed. In such situations, the accounting is very straightforward. Even if you have billed a customer for services, if you do not think you are going to collect the fee, you should not recognize the revenue and should set up a reserve for bad debt. Some financial institutions with a large subprime client base did not have adequate accounting systems to disclose that a significant amount in fees was not being collected. By recording revenue on the basis of billed fees, these institutions were overstating income. New guidance issued jointly by the bank regulators clarifies these accounting standards. Further, at some subprime banks, management information did not reflect the level of charge-offs of fees and advances as accounts aged. By relying on charge-off reports for the portfolio as a whole, portfolio growth was masking the increasing amount of loan losses. This is a good example of how changes in the customer mix and profit drivers of an existing product can lead to unintended loss exposures if management information and accounting do not reflect the economics and risks of the product when it is altered. FDICIA: Internal controls Other areas of operational risk have come to light as a result of the events and debate surrounding the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. I want to talk about a couple of these areas--internal control assessments and the role of outside auditors. Since 1991, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act (FDICIA) has required that the chief executive officer (CEO) and the chief financial officer (CFO) of all Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) registrants report on the quality of internal controls. One of the observations that regulators made this past year was that at some banks that had breaks in internal controls, the process of reporting on internal controls had become a "paper pushing" exercise rather than a robust part of the corporate governance process. The related lesson is that compliance with a similar requirement in Sarbanes-Oxley will require monitoring by bank regulators to make certain the goal of strengthening accountability and governance is achieved. Recently, the Federal Reserve and the other bank regulators made known our expectations about the application of Sarbanes-Oxley to small, non-SEC registrant banks. Although we are not requiring that these banks report on internal controls for either FDICIA or Sarbanes-Oxley purposes, recent losses at banks and notable corporate scandals demonstrate that sound governance and internal control practices are important for all banks. Depending on the size, riskiness, and complexity of any bank's business mix, elements of the internal control framework developed by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO) can provide a process to help identify and monitor areas in which controls should be strengthened. I will describe some ways in which aspects of these processes can assist corporate governance at some community banks. FDICIA came after the savings and loan failures and a series of corporate governance scandals in the 1980s. In the late 1980s, the COSO issued guidance on best practice in the area of internal controls, and FDICIA adopted this framework. The management report on internal controls that banks issue should be prepared in a manner similar to the COSO framework. FDICIA requires that once a year, managers step back and look at the risks inherent in the businesses and processes they manage, and then determine what level of risk exposure is appropriate given the profit and strategic goals of the organization. Once the risk limit is set, managers should evaluate the mitigating controls and monitoring processes to see if they are effective in achieving the designated level of risk. Managers should also look at the organization's business plan to see how risk exposures are expected to change and to determine whether new controls, or changes in existing controls, are needed to manage that level of risk. Finally, managers should prepare action plans for building or modifying existing controls to effectively manage risk. As each manager completes their report on internal controls, the report should go up the chain of command to their boss, who then repeats the process for all of their managed areas. When the report gets to the top of the organization, the CEO and CFO issue the final management report on internal controls to bank regulators. Further, the external auditor is to review the report and attest to its validity. At the Fed, we have been looking at the reports produced by banks at which internal control breakdowns led to significant losses. We have found instances in which failures of internal controls that were known to management were not mentioned in the management report. These failures include basic types of internal control breakdowns, such as failure to reconcile accounts in a timely fashion or failure to segregate duties in critical transaction-processing or accounting functions. In some of these cases, the external auditor did not identify the known failure in the attestations. We are working with banks to make sure this basic control process has substance in the future. Management reports on internal controls can also help bank boards of directors and audit committees gain a better understanding of the nature of the risks and the quality of the controls in place. Audit committees should not just hear that the outside auditors have "signed off" on the FDICIA report. Rather, the report itself can be the basis for an effective discussion of internal controls among managers, internal auditors, external auditors, and the audit committee. Audit committee members can use these reports to discuss how risks are changing and what the priorities for strengthening controls should be. Audit committees can also use the reports to bring to their attention recurring concerns--control weaknesses that managers continue to fail to address in a timely manner. Having seen weaknesses in the quality of external auditors' review of financial reporting and internal controls, the bank regulators have issued an exposure draft to define a policy under which an auditor can be debarred from serving as an auditor of a bank. Bank regulators have had this authority since FDICIA but have not chosen to use it in the past. Regulators have relied on the quality assurance process of public accounting firms and the peer review process of the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants' (AICPA) to monitor the quality of auditors. But as you all are aware, the events of the past year have clearly shown that these self-regulatory controls have not always been effective. The Sarbanes-Oxley Act established the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board, which will be the regulator charged with monitoring the quality of audit work. Since bank regulators rely heavily on the work of external auditors, we are proposing that bank regulators also lay out the expectations for the quality of audit work and the conditions under which an individual or firm would be debarred from audit work at a bank. We expect to work closely with the Oversight Board, as it gets fully up and running, to improve the quality assurance for audit services. As bankers, you should make certain that you are receiving value for audit services. As you hire your independent accountant, or if you outsource internal auditing, look for an auditor who regularly works for another financial institution or is part of a larger organization that is aware of and concerned about emerging risks and best practice controls. Such a firm will provide resources to ensure that corporate governance and controls are appropriate for your organization and that internal controls evolve to keep pace with changing business practices. Conclusion Banks are becoming more differentiated as they choose to serve different customer mixes, focus on specialized activities, or rely on new delivery channels. Thus, it is important that you make risk management part of your strategic planning process. Corporate governance and audit failures over recent months demonstrate how quickly trust can be lost. Reputation and integrity are vital to building and maintaining good relations with bank customers, employees, investors and communities. Good governance and continued attention to internal controls are responsibilities that boards of directors and management cannot afford to neglect. With the improvements in credit and asset/liability management, failures in operational controls and corporate governance will continue to be a larger source of losses for banks in the future. Thus, all bankers need to formally add the evaluation and mitigation of operational risk to their corporate governance processes.
Joint Press Release Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Office of the Comptroller of the Currency For Immediate Release June 17, 2003 Regulators Award Contract in First Step to Modernize the Collection of Bank Data The Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC) today announced the first step in an interagency effort to modernize and streamline how federal bank regulators collect, process and distribute quarterly bank financial reports. Today's step involves awarding a contract, through the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), to Unisys Corporation, McLean, Virginia. Unisys, with its development team of Microsoft, PricewaterhouseCoopers, IDOM, EDGAR Online, UBMatrix, and V-Tech Solutions, will create a flexible solution, based on proven technologies, that incorporates Internet delivery using promising new innovations like the XBRL business reporting language. The new business process, which will be phased in through 2004, will consolidate the collection, editing, and access of quarterly bank financial reports into a central data repository, which will be accessible by banking regulators, financial institutions, and the public. The new model is also expected to reduce burden on the industry, while providing data to the public in a more timely and flexible manner. Initial system development and pilot projects will take place over the next 18 months. During that time the FDIC, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency will work with the industry to define data standards, streamline the collection and validation of the data, and prepare for the rollout of the new central data repository. The first reports are expected to be filed under the new system effective with the September 2004 Call Report. The 10-year, fixed price contract of $39 million includes short-term systems development costs and long-term operating costs. Federal Reserve David Skidmore 202-452-2955 FDIC David Barr 202-898-6992 OCC Kevin Mukri 202-874-5770
Remarks by Vice Chairman Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. At the Basel Sessions 2003, Institute of International Finance, New York, New York June 17, 2003 Basel II: Some Issues for Implementation I appreciate the opportunity provided by the Institute of International Finance to participate in your all-day session on Basel II. It has taken a long time to reach this stage in the negotiations for a new capital accord: five years, 3-1/2 quantitative impact surveys, three consultative papers, and numerous outreach meetings with industry representatives. The process is not yet complete. In a continuation of one of the most transparent efforts to vet a regulatory proposal, we are asking for comment, and again we will carefully consider suggestions to improve the proposal on the basis of evidence and analysis submitted. Perhaps some of those suggestions will come from the sessions today. I think you will see from a comparison of the third consultative paper (CP3) with its predecessor that we are listening to what the public and the industry have been saying. Our response to comments has often added complexity to provide options in the context of a worldwide banking system in which countries and individual banks have different procedures and approaches. We have made every effort to avoid cookie-cutter rules for complicated banking structures. Those efforts continue. For example, in the United States, our Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (ANPR) will seek further comment on additional options for securitization and risk mitigation as well as the treatment of various retail exposures, any one of which may require further negotiation at Basel. Complexity is also added because we are attempting to include principles of modern finance and risk-management, all of which involve complex statistical, and thus mathematical, techniques. Of course, it is exactly that direction that banking and its best-practice management have been taking over the last decade. In short, complexity in many cases provides options and in most cases is simply a part of modern finance. The details are not yet cast in concrete. A point I want you to keep in mind is: We will seriously consider suggestions for furthering the objectives of more-risk-sensitive capital requirements and better risk measurement and management in the least costly and most efficient way. At this point, however, comments must be analytical and empirical if they are to be helpful and likely to modify the proposal. The Framework As we involve ourselves in the fine detail of Basel II, it is useful to keep in mind what we are trying to do. We are developing a replacement for the current capital accord, Basel I, an agreement that simply is no longer consistent with the way the world's largest banks conduct their business. From the perspective of banks, supervisors, and, let us not forget, counterparties and stakeholders, capital is a cushion to ensure safety and soundness and to provide a benchmark against which the financial condition of banks can be measured. The large banks of the world have so changed the nature of how they do business that for them Basel I neither provides an appropriate cushion nor an accurate risk benchmark. It must be replaced, particularly in a world whose financial markets are so interrelated that substantial difficulties at any one of the largest banks, let alone a failure, could place all the large banks of the world at risk. Indeed, with due regard for an international level playing field, which I will discuss later, we should consider that the need of all of our countries for economic stability should be paramount in our supervisory and regulatory judgments. It is worth emphasizing that substantial disruptions in our financial systems linked to a large bank failure could raise the risk of a regulatory, if not legislative, response that would likely add restrictions greatly limiting the flexibility and efficiency of our banking system. In addition, perhaps one of the largest risks to the safety of the world banking system is the competitor--either local or cross-border--that erroneously evaluates risk, acts on that evaluation, and induces a competitive response that increases risk exposures broadly. For both reasons, action is imperative. It must be taken both by banks and by their supervisors to improve risk measurement and management; to link to the extent we can the amount of regulatory minimum capital to the amount of risk taken; to attempt to further focus the supervisor-bank dialogue on the measurement and management of risk and the risk-capital nexus; and to make all of this transparent to the counterparties and uninsured depositors that ultimately fund--and hence share--the risk positions. In a rather large nutshell, that is what Basel II seeks to do, while at the same time seeking a level regulatory playing field for banks that compete across borders. Cyclicality Many critics--in and outside of the industry--have raised concerns that the framers of Basel II have unintentionally overlooked a byproduct of the package that will tend to destabilize the world's economies. With all the world's banks on the same regulatory structure, these critics argue, the typical business cycle will be accentuated by Basel II as perfectly reasonable estimates of probabilities of default and of loss given default decline in economic expansions and rise as the economy weakens. The resultant changes in the cost and availability of credit will be pro-cyclical, that is, will exacerbate cyclical patterns in the real economy. But we should recognize some important responses that have emerged from regulators and markets: flatter risk functions have been adopted in the Basel II proposal; banks maintain buffer capital stocks; Basel II requires that, under Pillar 2, supervisors and banks discuss the size of the necessary buffer capital that each bank should carry for cyclical purposes; and the proposed rules require stress-testing of risk parameters. Perhaps a more important point is that, in evaluating the pro-cyclicality argument, we should not forget the cyclicality in bank credit flows that we see in history. If we are to truly evaluate the critics' concerns with post-Basel II pro-cyclicality in bank credit flows, we should be sure that it is compared with the pre-Basel II pattern. Until quite recently, systematically and formally managing many of the key risks taken by banks, in particular their credit risk, was quite difficult. The techniques for quantifying and measuring risk, and the technology and instruments to manage and distribute it, simply did not exist. Individual credit-risk decisions tended to be made by lending and credit officers who used their judgment to decide who was given credit and who was not. A characteristic of lending officers is that they are paid to make loans, and in competitive lending markets they want to make sure they maintain, if not increase, market share. This is not to say that lending officers are uninterested in risk management but rather that their focus is on finding a way to make the loan. In a world of judgment, the risk manager had considerable difficulty in persuading lending officers, indeed management, about excessive risk when quantitative procedures and systems did not exist. Differences in judgment are difficult to resolve. That is probably the reason that bank credit availability has historically demonstrated a clear cyclical pattern that is consistent with the credit-making decision process I have just described and that, in turn, has exacerbated real economic cycles. During economic recoveries, bank credit officers would become more optimistic and willing to lend, an attitude that only strengthened during booms; in such times the voices of risk managers, even supervisors, calling for caution were likely to carry less weight. During recessions, with losses clear and write-offs rising, caution would come to the forefront, and more-restrictive attitudes toward lending would be reinforced by the arguments of risk managers and supervisors who could point to the losses. One can, I think, begin to notice a change in recent years in this typical pro-cyclical behavior in bank credit availability in the United States. The change first became apparent in the minimal credit losses at the large U.S. banks during the Asian debt crisis and Russian debt default in the late 1990s. It was also noticeable when these same entities began to tighten lending standards during the later years of the last expansion, in contrast to typical patterns, in which tightening occurred near or after the peak. The moderation of pro-cyclical behavior is also apparent in the continued strength in the portfolios of these organizations and in the modest spreads on their subordinated debt during the recession. To be sure, part of the explanation is new techniques and instruments for shifting and sharing risks. But at bottom, I would argue, we are beginning to see the payoff from more-formal and rigorous quantitative risk-management techniques for credit decisionmaking, techniques that have also been central to the development of new instruments for hedging, mitigating, and managing credit risk. Basel II builds on and formalizes these developments in bank credit risk management. Such a regime of greater formal attention to risk exposures, as under Basel II, offers the hope of a more stable pattern of credit availability. Quantitative risk management should reduce the buildup of excessive unintended credit risks that have been assumed in expansions and thereby minimize the losses and associated tighter lending standards during recessions. Such lending behavior, in turn, might well reduce the cyclical pattern in minimum capital requirements that would occur without the better risk-management techniques required under the proposed Basel II. The response to more-formal risk management thus creates the reasonable prospect of a reduction in concerns about the pro-cyclicality of capital ratios under Basel II. In the past, problems have arisen when banks have been too complacent in their judgments of risks during good times, too slow to react when the situation turns, and too risk-adverse once their losses have turned out larger than anticipated. A process that encourages banks to think more carefully and more pro-actively about all of these possibilities offers the hope of a significant improvement in the way that they manage themselves over the course of the business cycle. Risk will continue to vary over time. Ignoring that fact is in no one's interest. In fact, capital ratios under Basel I by default fail to convey that pattern to managers, stakeholders, and supervisors because the risk categories are insufficient to recognize changing risk. The proposed Basel II, in contrast, would convey to managers, to supervisors, and importantly, to the public how risk changes as capital requirements respond to changes in the real underlying risk. A sufficiently risk-sensitive capital regime would impart timely information regarding risk. That, in turn, would allow adjustments in lending policies sufficiently early to limit excessive swings in lending behavior. Risk sensitivity in capital requirements would damp swings in credit availability and thereby reduce both credit sprees and credit crunches. Supervisors prefer--or at least ought to prefer--the regulatory capital ratios that convey more information. Supervisors, banks, and the public should want to understand when bank portfolios are facing higher risks or when an updated estimate of risk relative to capital reveals a warning sign that requires attention. No such early warning system is provided by a system of capital requirements that does not signal that a bank has a problem until the problem is severe enough to have already eroded the underlying capital. That is, a capital system with little risk sensitivity creates the potential for problems to escape undetected for longer periods. Such delays increase the likelihood that the underlying problems will not be addressed soon enough and will grow larger. Dispersion in Capital Requirements Under Basel II Basel II is designed to deliver capital requirements that are more risk sensitive. As such, one can expect that some banks--those with less risk exposure--will see their required capital decline; those with larger risk exposures should see their required capital rise. On average, we expect capital requirements for the total of credit risk and operational risk to remain about unchanged for the banking system. As I have just discussed, the resultant dispersion of capital requirements seems desirable to supervisors for its portfolio inducements, for its aid in supervisory evaluations, and for its contribution to safe and sound banking. The dispersion of capital requirements has also created an unexpected criticism from some observers: it will distort the competitive landscape, as if somehow lower capital requirements were a random gift and higher capital requirements a random penalty, rather than correctly reflecting underlying risk. To be sure, some, but not all, of the concern in this country has reflected objections from banks that will not be required to apply Basel II--and thus will not see their capital requirements change at all. Some of these entities fear they will face a rival that will get a capital break because the rival is following Basel II and has lower risk exposures recognized by the new accord. The extent to which regulatory capital requirements drive pricing or profitability is an empirical question. My own view is that in a world in which banks hold capital buffers and can securitize and sell assets, and with bank management increasingly allocating resources and making decisions on the basis of internal economic capital measures, the answer must be: not very much, if at all. Rather, I believe that we are increasingly observing that pricing decisions reflect economic capital allocations that are risk based. We have tried hard to set risk-based regulatory capital requirements in Basel II below economic capital measures so that regulatory requirements will not affect the allocation of capital within the bank. If we make a mistake and set the regulatory capital requirements too high relative to market-based economic capital, we can read the effect of our error right away in the securitization of the exposure; securitization is a release valve that relieves the pressure of our mistakes. To be sure, as better risk measurement and management results in more sensitive risk-based pricing, we may well see that exposures with higher capital charges are priced higher than those with lower capital charges. But such observations should not lead us to confuse cause and effect. The regulatory capital charges and price of credit will both be reflecting the same thing--risk; the higher price won't be a reflection of the higher capital charge. U.S. Scope of Application No discussion on Basel II with a room full of global bankers would be complete without a discussion of the intended scope of application of Basel II in this country. In particular, I would suspect that you want to hear about the implications for the integration of your U.S. and worldwide operations. A week ago, I gave a rather full presentation on that issue to the Institute of International Bankers, and I call your attention to that statement, which is available at the Board's web site . But this afternoon let me present the highlights of what I said. First, what do we plan to do? In this country, we intend to offer only the advanced approaches under Basel II: the Advanced version of the Internal Ratings Based approach (A-IRB) for credit risk and the Advanced Measurement Approach (AMA) for operational risk. There will be no Foundation IRB and no Standardized approach for credit risk in the United States for any U.S. chartered bank--domestic or foreign; nor will there be a Basic Indicator or Standardized method for calculating operational risk for any U.S. chartered bank. In this country, only the largest, most internationally active banks will be required to adopt Basel II: A-IRB and AMA. The proposed criteria indicate that about ten such banks will be in this "core" group. In addition, any U.S. bank--including any subsidiary of a foreign bank--that meets the infrastructure requirements of the A-IRB approach may choose Basel II; we expect that, initially, about another ten banks will do so. The twenty or so U.S. banks that we expect to operate in the near future under Basel II--the ten mandatory core banks and the ten banks choosing Basel II--account today for 99 percent of U.S. bank foreign assets and two-thirds of total domestic consolidated assets of all U.S. banking organizations. Those banking organizations in this country not in the core group and not choosing to adopt Basel II will remain on the current capital regime (Basel I). They will not be subject to explicit operational risk capital requirements. These banks may also opt in to Basel II (A-IRB and AMA) whenever they wish, provided they meet the infrastructure requirements. Why did we not make the other Basel II options available in the United States? We have made it clear from the outset that the new accord would apply in this country only to those institutions that genuinely competed across national boundaries to ensure, in so far as possible, a level competitive playing field internationally. Only a small number of U.S. institutions meet the test of truly operating across borders. They happen to be very large and, hence, the authorities here concluded that they should be subject to the most sophisticated Basel II versions so that they receive the very real benefits of improved risk measurement and management and a more risk-sensitive regulatory capital requirement and so that they operate under the increased market discipline that comes from improved disclosure and greater transparency. Indeed, very large banks that do not meet the internationally active criterion will also be required to become core banks for these reasons. The banks that will remain under the current capital regime in this country have certain attributes that led the authorities to conclude that, for those banks, realizing the benefits of Basel II would impose costs that exceeded those benefits. Most of these banking organizations have relatively straightforward balance sheets that would benefit less from the Basel II risk-measurement and management requirements. In addition, in this country, our banks are subject to the requirements of prompt corrective action and minimum leverage and to statutory provisions that induce them to hold buffer capital far above the minimum requirements. More than 93 percent of the expected Basel I banks hold capital that is in excess of 10 percent of their risk-weighted assets. Moreover, in this country, requirements of the sort found in Pillar 2 have been in existence for many years and are well ingrained into our supervisory process. The U.S. banking system also has a greater tradition of disclosure, as those of you with U.S. subsidiaries well know. Thus, the cost-benefit analysis suggested that it would not be responsible to require most of our banks--entities that do not operate across national borders--to adopt Basel II, especially because thousands of them would probably choose the standardized version that adds only modest credit-risk sensitivity to risk-based capital requirements. Smaller banks in many other countries, we believe, would benefit from adherence to Pillars 2 and 3, and we hope they adopt Basel II, but our banks already operate under regimes fairly close to what the simpler versions of Basel II would provide. In light of their capital and supervision, we anticipate that U.S. banks with modest overseas activities operating under Basel I rules would be able to continue their overseas operations without having to adopt Basel II. Their subsidiaries, of course, would be subject to the rules and requirements of the host country. And, U.S. authorities will make available to host-country supervisors whatever information is required. U.S. branches of foreign banks would be basically unaffected by Basel II rules because they are not subject to direct capital requirements. And U.S. supervisors expect to find any variant of Basel II applied in foreign countries to be acceptable for our evaluations of well-capitalized standards at the consolidated parent level. However, U.S. subsidiaries would be subject to our rules for domestic banks and thus would have to choose either the A-IRB and AMA approaches or remain under the current Basel I rules. We do understand that this could present some complications for foreign banks using approaches for their consolidated organizations that are not offered in the United States, such as Foundation IRB for credit risk. When the parent organization's approach does not align with what the U.S. subsidiary must choose (either advanced approaches or current rules), some adjustments will indeed be necessary. U.S. supervisors and their counterparts from Basel member countries are already working, through the Basel Accord Implementation Group (AIG), to resolve cross-border implementation issues and minimize burden created from differences in home and host-country rules. We understand, however, our responsibilities to work with foreign banks to address the remaining conflicts. When foreign banks with U.S. subsidiaries adopt IRB variants at home and Basel I rules in the United States, U.S. supervisors would be prepared to assist them, and their supervisors, in helping the subsidiary bank here provide the requisite inputs for calculation of capital at the global, consolidated level. When the foreign bank adopts at home the IRB variant not available in this country, the Foundation IRB, the issues are more complicated; if the bank wants its U.S. subsidiary to also be on IRB, doing so would require that subsidiary to adopt the Advanced IRB version here. To meet the requirements for risk measurement and management required by the authorities for U.S. markets, that subsidiary would have to invest the resources to estimate loss given default (LGD) and exposure at default (EAD) parameters for their corporate exposures. Such an effort is not without cost, but we are willing to work with such banks to ease their transition. We are, for example, prepared to explore the possibility of allowing U.S. subsidiaries of foreign banks to use conservative estimates of LGD and EAD for a finite transitional period when data are not yet available for parts of some portfolios. This possible option would, if adopted, apply equally to fully domestic U.S. banks adopting A-IRB. We might also be willing to work out transition methodologies to permit foreign banks to allocate their overall operational risk capital charge for their consolidated entity between their parent and U.S. A-IRB bank subsidiary--for a limited time. Such transition approaches are indicative of our willingness to approach the implementation of our scope of application policy in a pragmatic way. The U.S. authorities strongly encourage U.S. banks and foreign banks concerned about cross-border implementation to establish a dialogue with supervisors in their respective home jurisdictions and, for foreign banks in the United States, also with U.S. supervisors; we want these banks to comment on any documents addressing cross-border issues, so that AIG members can tackle these issues together. The authorities here want to hear your observations on how to avoid creating undue burdens on foreign banks while at the same time retaining our ability to shape the risk-measurement and management methods employed by banks in our own markets. Summary Basel I must be replaced for the large, internationally active banks of the world because it no longer produces an adequate indicator of the strength of such banks, and, moreover, that indicator does not vary as risk changes. Basel II is designed to improve risk management and measurement, to link required capital to risk, to focus supervision more closely on these variables, to make such relationships more transparent, and to facilitate a level playing field for banks that compete across national borders. Critics concerned about the pro-cyclicality of Basel I should compare the likely post-Basel II pattern with the pattern of earlier years; in doing so, they should consider the extent to which better risk management, a more risk-sensitive capital requirement, and the rise in market discipline that comes from greater transparency will modify bank lending patterns, particularly the unintended acceptance of risk during expansion periods. The U.S. authorities are proposing that in this country the A-IRB and AMA approaches of Basel II be required of the largest, most internationally active banks that meet certain size and foreign-activity criteria and be permitted for any other bank that meets the infrastructure prerequisites of the A-IRB and AMA approaches. All other banking organizations would remain under Basel I. The proposal would not permit any banking organization in this country to operate under the Standardized or Foundation IRB approaches of Basel II. We will be working with the AIG at Basel to minimize any issues that may arise because of different capital regimes for the consolidated operations of foreign banks and the choices available to their subsidiaries in the United States. U.S. supervisors will cooperate with foreign supervisors to provide any required inputs from U.S. subsidiaries of foreign banks that the home-country supervisors need for their consolidated supervision. The U.S. banking agencies are also willing to consider possible transition methodologies to assist foreign banks that want to use IRB here to adopt the A-IRB and AMA approaches. We urge the U.S. bank subsidiaries that are commenting on the U.S. ANPR to advise both U.S. and home-country supervisors of the problems that our proposed scope of application may cause them. In particular, we solicit suggestions that address these potential problems but still recognize the desire of the U.S. authorities to apply only the advanced versions of Basel II in this country. Footnotes 1.
No content found
No content found
Paper by Governor Donald L. Kohn and Brian P. Sack, Senior Economist Presented at the Macroeconomics, Monetary Policy, and Financial Stability Conference in honor of Charles Freedman, Bank of Canada, Ottawa, Canada June 20, 2003 Central Bank Talk: Does it Matter and Why? Abstract. Statements released by the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) and congressional testimony by Chairman Greenspan are found to significantly affect market interest rates, indicating that central bank "talk" conveys important information to market participants. These effects arise not only because the statements provide information about the near-term policy inclinations of the FOMC but also because the statements convey information about the outlook for the economy. By contrast, statements raising questions about asset valuations typically have not generated a significant response of those asset prices. Note. Governor Kohn and Brian P. Sack, senior economist, Board of Governors, wrote this paper for a volume of writings honoring Charles Freedman, Deputy Governor, Bank of Canada.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the issuance of a consent Order of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty against the Centennial Bank of the West, Fort Collins, Colorado, a state member bank. Centennial Bank of the West, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order in connection with its alleged violations of the Board's Regulations implementing the National Flood Insurance Act. The Order requires Centennial Bank of the West to pay a civil money penalty of $3,000, which will be remitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency for deposit into the National Flood Mitigation Fund. A copy of the Order is attached.
No content found
No content found
Remarks by Governor Mark W. Olson At the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act of 1996 Outreach Meeting, St. Louis, Missouri June 26, 2003 Bank Management Challenges in a Low-interest-rate Environment
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced its approval of the application by The Royal Bank of Scotland Group plc, The Royal Bank of Scotland plc, RBSG International Holdings Ltd., all in Edinburgh, Scotland, and Citizens Financial Group, Inc., Providence, Rhode Island, pursuant to section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act to acquire all the voting shares of Port Financial Corp., Brighton, Massachusetts, and thereby indirectly acquire Cambridgeport Bank; and up to 9.9 percent of Cambridge Bancorp, which controls Cambridge Trust Company, all in Cambridge, Massachusetts. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.