For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the issuance of a consent Order of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty against the Gulf Bank, Miami, Florida, a state member bank. Gulf Bank, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order in connection with its alleged violations of the Board's Regulations implementing the National Flood Insurance Act. The Order requires Gulf Bank to pay a civil money penalty of $4,550, which will be remitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency for deposit into the National Flood Mitigation Fund. A copy of the Order is attached.
No content found
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan At the Securities Industry Association annual meeting, Boca Raton, Florida November 6, 2003 I am pleased to join you today to discuss the outlook for the United States economy. About a year ago, the uncertainties surrounding a possible war in Iraq began to have a perceptible macroeconomic effect. Those uncertainties, coupled with the lingering concerns that had been created by corporate governance scandals, were among the key factors causing the performance of the U.S. economy late last year and early this year to be lackluster. Risk spreads on corporate bonds peaked in the fall of 2002 at the highest levels observed in at least a decade. Business fixed investment then stalled in the first quarter of this year, and many firms, particularly outside the motor vehicle sector, were content to meet some of the increase in demand by drawing down inventories. Fortunately, a vibrant housing market lifted construction activity and, by facilitating home equity extraction, provided extra support to consumer spending. When hostilities commenced in March, uncertainties related both to the potential for damage to Iraq's oil fields and to the possibility of broader turmoil in the Middle East rapidly dissipated. Risk spreads fell sharply as did the price of oil. Stock prices rose. Economic activity perked up in late spring and then accelerated further this summer as tax cuts provided a substantial boost to the disposable incomes of households. For the third quarter as a whole, real GDP, our broadest measure of output, is reported to have increased 7-1/4 percent at an annual rate, the fastest quarterly rate of growth in nearly twenty years and obviously a pace not sustainable over the longer run. Even though consumer spending evidently slowed somewhat this fall, new orders received by manufacturers of nondefense capital goods, excluding aircraft, have been rising as have unfilled orders--developments that suggest some further increase in equipment spending is likely in train. There have been some signs in recent weeks that the labor market may be stabilizing. However, viewed from the perspective of the past couple of years, the jobs picture has been weak. Indeed, since November 2001--the estimated trough of this cycle--total payroll employment is currently reported to have declined by 1 million, and aggregate hours worked in the nonfarm business sector have come down 1-1/2 percent. The combination of growing output and falling hours worked was made possible by a startlingly large rise in productivity. Indeed, since the fourth quarter of 2001, output per hour in the nonfarm business sector has increased 5 percent at an annual rate. And during the second and third quarters of this year, output per hour increased at the astonishing average annual pace of about 7-1/2 percent. This outcome has been associated with a dramatic increase in profits despite little evidence of corporate pricing power. The explanations of the past two years' surge in productivity are wide-ranging. One hypothesis is that some of the increase represents a temporary rise in the level of productivity reflecting a view that an unusual amount of caution is leading businesses to press workers and facilities to a greater degree than can be sustained over the longer haul. By this hypothesis, as that caution dissipates, employment growth will pick up and the level of output per hour will drop back. Another hypothesis is that the level of productivity has undergone a one-time permanent upward shift. This hypothesis builds on the idea that the heavy emphasis on exploiting new and expanding markets from 1995 to 2000 likely diverted some corporate management from the hard work of controlling costs. The payoffs from cost control doubtless seemed small relative to those thought to attend big-picture expansion. But with tepid sales growth, uncertainty about the strength of future demand, and a fierce discipline exerted by financial markets, companies have been forced to search aggressively for ways to use resources more efficiently, to cut costs, and restore operating profit margins. The extent to which businesses have succeeded in boosting output with fewer labor hours and minimal capital investment over the past two years points up the possibility that a considerable stock of inefficiencies accumulated in the boom years and that this stock is still being worked off. Finally, yet another hypothesis stresses a more-lasting increase in the growth of output per hour. This notion focuses on the considerable lag between the introduction of new technologies and their full integration into production processes and business practices. To reap the full benefits of technological innovation takes learning time, especially if there are large synergies through network effects. Of course, given the exceptionally high rate of growth in output per hour over the past two years, some combination of short-term and longer-term productivity-enhancing forces seems likely to have been at work. In any event, one consequence of these improvements in efficiency has been a temporary ability of many businesses to meet increases in demand while paring existing workforces and continuing to exercise restraint on capital spending. * * * If businesses are to spend and hire more vigorously, they will need to be convinced that economic growth can be sustained beyond the short run. One prominent concern is that, if the labor market remains weak, household confidence will suffer, with detrimental consequences for spending. Although layoffs seem to be diminishing, surveys indicate that households continue to be worried about the condition of labor markets. While real after-tax personal income increased at more than a 7 percent annual rate in the third quarter, most of that gain reflected the influence of this year's cut in taxes. Unless hiring picks up and layoffs ease, assuaging the latent job security fears of many of those currently employed, the share of income spent could decline, a development that would hamper the vigor of the expansion. The odds, however, do increasingly favor a revival in job creation. The surge in final demand in recent months has been met in part by drawing down inventories. In many industries, available data suggest that inventories have become low relative to sales, and purchasing managers' perceptions of their customers' inventories corroborate that view. Any swing from inventory liquidation to accumulation would add significantly to the level of GDP. Efforts to rebuild inventories and a dwindling pool of possible efficiencies seem a combination that could generate a notable pickup in hiring should growth in final sales remain firm. * * * A critical factor distinguishing the current economic environment from much of the previous experience of the past half century is the inflation backdrop. In previous recessions since the 1960s, the underlying rate of inflation at economic troughs remained clearly above any level that could be associated with effective price stability. As a consequence, with some risk to economic activity, monetary policy typically had to move aggressively in the uncertain early stages of past economic recoveries to ensure that inflation would be contained. By contrast, in the current episode, core consumer price inflation as measured in the national income and product accounts has been running only a little more than 1 percent over the last year, and firms exhibit scant evidence that they are gaining appreciable pricing power despite the pickup in the pace of economic growth. Indeed, the Federal Open Market Committee has judged that the probability, though minor, of an unwelcome fall in inflation exceeds that of a rise in inflation from its already low level. In these circumstances, monetary policy is able to be more patient. That said, no central bank can ever afford to be less than vigilant about the prospects for inflation. * * * The foregoing relatively optimistic short-term outlook for the U.S. economy is playing out against a backdrop of growing longer-term concern in financial markets about our federal budget. As you know, the Congressional Budget Office is projecting that, if current policies remain in place, the unified budget will post deficits throughout the remainder of this decade--a sharp turnaround from the large and growing surpluses projected just a few years ago. Given the events of the past three years--the economic downturn, the retrenchment in equity markets, the increased need for spending on homeland security, and the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq--some deterioration in the federal budget balance was probably unavoidable, particularly in the short term. One source of deterioration--the buildup of a larger military force structure--will not persist indefinitely. Merely maintaining a given force structure rather than increasing it will remove an important factor driving the deficit higher. Of course, the deterioration in the fiscal balance has already increased the level of debt relative to GDP, and thus has elevated the starting point from which policymakers will soon have to address the budget implications of the impending retirement of the baby-boom generation. Recent budget deliberations are not encouraging. The current debate appears to be about how much to cut taxes or how much to increase spending. No significant constituency seems to support taking the actions that will be necessary to move toward, and one hopes achieve, budget balance. In retrospect, the emergence of budget surpluses in the late 1990s eroded the discipline that emerged as a consequence of the earlier fear of ever rising and, hence, potentially destructive deficits. Indeed, many of the rules that helped to discipline budgetary decisionmaking in the 1990s--in particular, the statutory limits on discretionary spending and the so-called PAYGO rules--were allowed to expire. Many analysts properly continue to be concerned that, without these enforcement mechanisms and the fundamental political will they signal, the built-in bias in favor of red ink will once again become entrenched. Policymakers have become all too aware that government spending programs and tax preferences can be easy to initiate but extraordinarily difficult to shut down once constituencies develop that have a stake in maintaining the status quo. The now-expired major provisions of the Budget Enforcement Act of 1990, and the act's later modifications and extensions, provided a set of rules that helped translate a general commitment to fiscal discipline into the actions necessary to achieve it. Remember that in just five years the first cohort of the baby-boom generation will reach 62, the earliest age at which social security retirement benefits may be claimed and the age at which about half of the prospective beneficiaries choose to retire. In about 2008, the proportion of the working-age population that will retire is projected to begin escalating. Almost surely, the social security and Medicare benefits that are promised under current law to future retirees cannot be financed with existing tax rates. Budget simulations by a broad range of analysts (including those at the Office of Management and Budget and the Congressional Budget Office) suggest that the rapid increase in the unified budget deficits that would occur under current law as the baby-boom generation retires could set in motion an unsustainable dynamic in which large deficits result in growing interest payments that augment deficits in future years. Such a development could have notable, destabilizing effects on the economy. Increased productivity growth, while helpful, does not alter that conclusion, because when productivity growth increases, so do social security obligations and, indirectly, Medicare benefits as well. Productivity would have to grow at a rate far in excess of the historical average to fully resolve the long-term financing problems of social security and Medicare. Tax rate increases of sufficient dimension to deal with our looming fiscal problems arguably pose significant risks to economic growth and the revenue base. The exact magnitude of such risks are very difficult to estimate, but they are of enough concern, in my judgment, to warrant aiming to close the fiscal gap primarily, if not wholly, from outlay restraint. At the same time, the dimension of the challenge, especially in later years, cannot be underestimated. The one certainty is that the resolution of this situation will require difficult choices, and the future performance of the economy will depend on those choices. History has shown that, when faced with large challenges, elected officials have risen to the occasion. In particular, looking back over the past twenty years or so, it has been evident that the prospect of large deficits generally has led to actions to narrow them. I trust that the recent deterioration in the budget outlook and the fast-approaching retirement of the baby-boom generation will be met with similar determination and effectiveness. Footnotes The views I will be expressing are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the approval of the application by HBOS Treasury Services plc, London, United Kingdom, to establish a branch in New York, New York. Attached is the Order relating to this action.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act by AllNations Bancorporation, Inc., Shawnee, Oklahoma, to acquire The First National Bank of Calumet, Calumet, Oklahoma. Attached is the Board’s Order relating to this action.
Remarks by Vice Chairman Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. At the conference on The Changing Regulatory Capital Regime in Europe: A Challenging New Business Concept, Brussels, Belgium (via videoconference) The Proposed U.S. Approach to Regulatory Capital: An Update Good afternoon. I would like to thank you for the opportunity to join you at this impressive conference. You asked me to provide some thoughts about Basel II, particularly its application in the United States. Before doing that, I would like to inform you of our progress in developing the new accord. As most of you know, we are in a very important stage of the process. Over the past six weeks there have been some crucial developments as a result of the discussions among member regulators, a demonstration once again of the Basel Committee's determination to listen to comments and make those modifications necessary to deliver the best accord possible. The proposal for a capital standard based on unexpected losses submitted by the committee for public comment is a good example of this earnestness in seeking an improved final product. Other issues are still being discussed, including securitization, retail credit, and credit risk mitigation. One should not forget that, on a parallel track, member countries still have to complete their own domestic efforts to translate the accord into national regulation. As you probably know, the comment period for the initial U.S. proposal for Basel II--known as the advance notice of proposed rulemaking (ANPR)--just ended earlier this month. U.S. supervisors are reviewing the comments carefully. If supportable arguments are given for further accord alterations, we will develop proposed changes to present to our colleagues on the committee. In the United States, after this next round of discussions there will still be additional procedural steps before a final rule is in place, with opportunity for comment at each stage. To be clear, the need for more procedural steps in the United States should not be taken as an indication of our lack of commitment to the Basel process. Rather, it is a sign of our attempt to develop these proposals on as transparent a basis as possible and to hear a wide range of comments. The Congress of the United States has also held hearings on the development of the new accord. The interest and oversight by our Congress in these discussions is appropriate and welcome, particularly for an undertaking as extensive as Basel II. The U.S. regulators appreciate the fact that we are able to operate as independent agencies but also realize that we have an obligation to keep the elected representatives informed of our progress in this major effort. Of course, it is expected that other countries and the European Union will be following their own procedures as well. Overall, I have been impressed by the efficacy of the comment process and believe it offers an open forum for all parties to voice their opinions. Debate and discussion on such an important undertaking are essential, and--if solid and convincing arguments are put forth--provide a real opportunity for enhancements to the final product. The current proposal is better because the comments have elicited good ideas that have been taken seriously. Future comments based on sound thought and evidence will create further modifications. But I must say that simple assertions will not carry very much weight. At the same time, we do need to ensure that momentum is maintained. In October, the committee members committed to work promptly to resolve outstanding issues by mid-2004. In January, the Basel Committee will meet to address further analysis of outstanding issues and review the timetable for completing and implementing the committee's work on the accord. Using the agreement reached in the committee as a template, U.S. supervisors then plan to conduct another Quantitative Impact Study (QIS) to gauge more clearly the impact of the Basel proposals. We believe it is critical that we carefully test the new proposal to determine its effects on individual institutions and to ascertain the need to fine-tune the proposal further, a process that could include recalibrating some of the risk-weight functions. It is our sense that other countries will be doing the same. Because timing is a function of the degree of changes required by the QIS, the U.S. agencies will then conduct a full notice of proposed rulemaking once again to seek and then evaluate public comments before adopting a final rule. U.S. proposals for Basel II Against that background, let me turn to a number of topics that some have raised about Basel II. The U.S. banking agencies have, as you know, proposed to implement Basel II somewhat differently than other nations have. These differences are perfectly consistent with the spirit and letter of the proposal, and reflect the particular characteristics of the U.S. banking system and the rules and regulations under which it operates. While our approach is best for the United States, it is not necessarily best for other nations. The U.S. banking agencies propose that only the most advanced approaches under Basel II be offered for banking organizations in the United States: the advanced internal ratings-based approach for credit risk, known as A-IRB, and the advanced measurement approach for operational risk, known as AMA. As indicated in the ANPR, the standardized approach and the foundation IRB approach to Basel II would not be permitted for credit risk. Nor would the basic indicator approach or standardized approach be available for operational risk. The banking agencies took considerable time to develop the advanced proposals, which we believed would clearly be the best option for the U.S. banking system. The complex operations of the largest banks have outgrown the existing capital regime, and for them Basel I has become less and less effective. Indeed, in the view of U.S. supervisors, an overhaul of the regulatory capital system for our largest banks would be worthwhile only if the most advanced approaches were used. Because of the heterogeneous nature of the U.S. banking system, some balance in the application of Basel II would be necessary. On the one hand, the size, scale and complexity of the internationally active U.S. banks requires, in the opinion of the U.S. supervisors, that these entities operate with the best feasible risk measurement and management procedures, and these procedures are most consistent with the advanced versions of Basel II. On the other hand, the U.S. agencies do not want to impose the higher costs of the advanced version of Basel II on institutions for which it is clearly not suited. In the end, the U.S. banking agencies tried to allow as much choice as possible, while ensuring that banks are still meeting domestic regulatory obligations, avoiding private-sector costs that do not produce some clear and convincing level of benefits, abiding by the evolving Basel II agreement, and, most important, maintaining a safe and sound U.S. banking system. The U.S. banks that would be required to adopt Basel II, as well as those that we expect to choose or opt in to the new regulatory capital rules, are those that, because of size and complexity, should operate with the most sophisticated risk-management practices. The ANPR lays out objective criteria, including asset size and foreign exposure, to identify the large, internationally active banks that would be considered mandatory banks. Naturally, there are also thousands of banks in the United States that do not qualify as large and internationally active and for which the advanced approach of Basel II may not necessarily be appropriate. The overwhelming majority of these banks are significantly less complex and have a scale of operations and market that generally does not extend beyond the United States. As I will discuss, these entities need not be covered by the revised accord to meet international obligations or our own regulatory responsibilities. Thus, the U.S. banking agencies have proposed that those banks not operating under Basel II advanced approaches would remain under the current U.S. regulatory capital rules. An important factor in our decision to retain the current capital regime for those entities that are neither large nor significant global competitors is the scale and nature of the existing capital regime in the United States. The U.S. supervisory regime already contains the substantial elements of Pillar Two under Basel II, including evaluations of internal capital adequacy processes. U.S. supervisors have for many years conducted extensive and thorough on-site supervisory reviews, a process which we believe has contributed to a sound banking and financial system. In addition, the culture of disclosure within the United States already comes close to, and in some areas exceeds, the Pillar Three requirements of the accord revisions. For those U.S. institutions with public debt or equity, requirements by the Securities and Exchange Commission, as well as demands by the market, translate into fairly extensive public disclosure. Moreover, these small and medium-sized banks for the most part already hold capital well in excess of the supervisory minima under both the current and proposed capital regimes. Indeed, the overwhelming majority of U.S. banks maintain capital above the well-capitalized criteria of 10 percent of risk-weighted assets under the U.S. prompt corrective action rules, and generally the smaller the bank, the larger the proportionate capital cushion. Nearly 95 percent of all small and medium-sized banks have regulatory capital ratios of at least 10 percent, and thus it is likely that their current ratios would essentially meet or surpass proposed requirements under Basel II. Therefore, we believe that the current approach to determining regulatory minimum capital in the United States is at least as prudent as Basel II. While U.S. supervisors see no need to require Basel II for banks not considered large or internationally active, the proposal would allow any bank to adopt the accord revisions if it so desired. Of course, any bank wishing to adopt Basel II would have to meet the same high standards applied to mandatory institutions, particularly the internal measurement and management of risk for its exposures. For some large nonmandatory regional institutions, moving to Basel II may be a good choice, and we anticipate that at least ten, and perhaps more, may do so. In effect, the approach proposed in the United States requires that those institutions that would not be required by scale or global activities to adopt the A-IRB version of Basel II would have to conduct their own cost-benefit analysis to determine if they should opt in or wait, perhaps for the costs of implementation to come down through vendor and other developments, or, alternatively, if they should remain under the current capital regime. Initially, some of our colleagues on the Basel Supervisors' Committee criticized the U.S. agencies' approach to scope of application, claiming that the application was too limited or inconsistent with the proposed accord. But this criticism has faded with better understanding of the structure of the U.S. banking system: More than two-thirds of the assets of U.S. banking organizations are likely to be covered by Basel II, as well as more than 99 percent of the foreign claims held by U.S. banking organizations. Potential Competitive Effects The U.S. agencies have increasingly focused on the potential competitive effects of Basel II on U.S. banks. As the ANPR outlines, policymakers will be attentive to the competitive concerns of both the institutions expected to adopt Basel II in the United States, and those that might not. We are of course interested in the evidence developed from the ANPR. In addition, Fed staff members are now conducting empirical research to try to determine if the bifurcated approach has any implications for possible acquisition strategies to be used by advanced Basel II banks in acquiring non-Basel II banks. Moreover, we are also trying to determine empirically the evidence for the competitive implications of the U.S. implementation proposals on credit for small and medium-sized business, residential mortgage, and credit card markets. If that empirical evidence indicates a high probability of general competitive imbalances, we will then review our options for addressing the problem. But we first need to see the evidence that a problem exists and then determine how large it may be. That these issues surfaced, I might add, illustrates the benefits of a transparent comment period. Standards for Basel II One would hope that, by now, no one misunderstands the extensive requirements for any institution adopting Basel II, particularly for the advanced approaches that will be the only option in the United States. Because capital requirements under the advanced approaches will be based on bank inputs, the bar will clearly have to be raised, particularly for risk management and control systems. For most banks--in fact, I would say for all banks moving to the advanced versions of Basel II--meeting these standards and requirements will be very challenging and will require substantial resources. Managers at some institutions may believe that their institution is already very close to meeting all the prerequisites for Basel II. Although our rules and standards are not yet final, on the basis of pilot reviews and discussions with line supervisors here in the United States, I would advise any institution thinking it has little work remaining to make a careful and frank reassessment of where it stands. In the United States we are developing a set of supervisory guidance to accompany our rulemaking. This supervisory guidance, which will be developed for all A-IRB credit portfolios of Basel II as well as for the AMA, is intended to provide additional clarity and interpretation of the rule, and to more clearly define supervisory expectations. And the guidance, by describing in more detail what it will take to satisfy U.S. supervisors, should assist nonmandatory banks in deciding whether to opt in. Initial drafts of supervisory guidance for corporate A-IRB and for AMA were published for comment in concert with the ANPR. U.S. regulators are already reviewing feedback on this draft supervisory guidance and, as with the ANPR, remain open to suggestions for altering that guidance if we are presented with valid arguments for doing so. Draft guidance for other A-IRB portfolios, such as retail, is being developed and will be published for comment as well. This is also a good opportunity for me to add a few initial thoughts about the possible nature of qualifying examinations for Basel II in the United States. As I noted, we still need to reach an agreement in Basel and complete the process for formulating a final rule in the United States before we can start assessing institutions vis-ï¿½-vis new standards related to Basel II. However, the U.S. agencies are starting to identify, on a joint basis, what a qualification process for Basel II would encompass, both for mandatory and opt-in banking organizations. This will not be an easy task, in part because our particular regulatory structure has different supervisors overseeing different banks and legal entity types. And it will be complicated by the need to coordinate qualification internationally with host jurisdictions to minimize the burden on banking organizations supervised by agencies from multiple countries. Cooperation among the U.S. agencies on this and other matters relating to Basel II implementation has been excellent. There is, of course, no expectation that under Basel II the U.S. regulatory structure will change in terms of the legal mandates assigned to each agency. As the ANPR states, an institution's primary federal supervisor would have responsibility for determining an institution's readiness for an advanced approach and ultimately would be responsible, after consultation with other relevant supervisors, for determining whether the institution satisfies the supervisory expectations for the advanced approaches. And this procedure will obviously apply at both the bank and bank holding company level in the United States. Given the significance of Basel II, enhanced communication and cooperation among U.S. supervisory agencies--and between U.S. supervisors and affected host country supervisors--will be necessary. We are already in agreement that the U.S. qualification process will be intensive, rigorous, and lengthy, because of the nature of what we are about to embark upon. But in the end we believe that a rigorous qualification process will create a more risk-sensitive regulatory capital regime and improve risk management. Cross-border issues The accord revisions wisely contain a certain amount of flexibility to account for differences in the banking systems of member countries. These so-called national discretion elements, combined with different approaches that member countries might choose for their banking system, mean that maintaining a level playing field across countries is a challenge. Achieving an acceptable level of consistency in implementation is something that the Basel Committee takes seriously and is the reason it formed the Accord Implementation Group (AIG) two years ago. The AIG comprises line supervisors from member countries and is charged with identifying potential implementation issues and creating as much consistency as possible across countries. These issues, which are referred to as "cross border" or "home/host" issues, cover both credit and operational risk. Cross-border issues are particularly complicated because the new accord will apply to both consolidated banking organizations in home countries as well as subsidiary bank and bank holding companies in host countries. This August the AIG issued a set of high-level principles for cross-border implementation of the accord. These principles lay the groundwork for further cooperation and coordination for implementation among member countries. They clearly identify the need to respect both home and host country rules and regulations, the need for enhanced and pragmatic cooperation between both types of supervisors, and the desire for supervisors to minimize the burden on banking groups as much as possible. The U.S. agencies believe that their choice for scope of application is consistent with these principles. For example, the proposal to allow only the advanced approaches in the United States also extends to any U.S. banking subsidiaries of foreign banking organizations and reflects our legitimate role as host country supervisors and the principles of national treatment. At the same time, we understand that other countries may offer approaches that are different from those offered in the United States. So a consolidated banking organization not based in the United States may choose to operate under an approach not offered in our country--such as foundation IRB for credit risk or basic indicator for operational risk--even though the advanced approaches would be the only ones available to its U.S. bank and bank holding company subsidiaries. And if those U.S. subsidiaries are not considered mandatory Basel II institutions, they also have the option of remaining on the current U.S. regulatory capital regime. By the same logic, foreign banking subsidiaries of U.S.-based organizations would have to abide by the local rules and regulations of host country supervisors, even if their consolidated entity is operating under different rules. These differences between approaches offered in host versus home countries present challenges for global banking organizations, both foreign-based and U.S.-based. As a result, U.S. supervisors need to work very closely with supervisors from other member countries to assist banking organizations in meeting the various requirements. The AIG has already begun to foster this type of collaboration. For this issue the bottom line is that legal mandates across countries are not going to change, and supervisors realize that they have an added responsibility to keep complexity to a minimum. One of the most challenging home/host issues that has arisen of late is the allocation of operational risk capital within a consolidated banking organization. This issue, similar to other cross-border issues, goes right to the heart of home/host supervision. The conflict arises because host supervisors may require subsidiary banks at the local level to hold a certain amount of capital which, when aggregated across both geography and entity type, may be greater than what the consolidated organization deems necessary, because of diversification effects. This is clearly a difficult issue. As Chairman Caruana commented last month, it may well take some time for our efforts to converge to an acceptable solution in this matter, and that solution may not be completely satisfactory for all parties. Right now the AIG is working with the Committee's Risk Management Group (RMG) to develop a set of possible solutions to the problem. My expectation is that reaching a solution will require a slow and steady effort, but in the end, we will reach an acceptable compromise. In that sense, this issue reflects much of what the Basel II process is all about--identifying challenging issues, listening carefully to comments, conducting analysis to find a range of possible options, and then reaching an acceptable compromise solution that is consistent with safety and soundness. Finally, I would like to turn to the AIG's work on consistency of standards. Because member countries have different supervisory regimes, there is the possibility for Basel II rules to be applied in a variety of ways. While some variety in standards across countries may be unavoidable, we believe that maintaining as much consistency as possible is a worthwhile objective. It benefits no one if there is an appearance that countries vary considerably in their application of standards. The entire accord is undermined if a set of banks from one country appears to be subject to softer standards. We are already happy with the progress we have seen within the AIG on this issue and believe that pursuing the goal of consistent standards will truly bring about a better and safer global banking system. Concluding Thoughts I thank you for the opportunity to share some of my thoughts on Basel II. As I stated, I consider the recent decisions reached by the Basel Committee to be a very good example of how supportable and valid arguments for alterations in the accord proposals are taken seriously. In the United States, additional opportunities still remain for comments to be heard and for possible modifications as the United States continues its rulemaking processes. That said, we do not expect to slacken the high standards expected of banks operating under the advanced approaches for Basel II. The U.S. agencies have tailored the application of Basel II to the particular characteristics of the U.S. banking system, while maintaining both the letter and spirit of the accord. We expect other countries to act similarly with regard to their own banking systems. We understand that a number of cross-border issues relating to Basel II implementation pose challenges, and that it may take some time to resolve them. This will of course mean that supervisors across countries must work even more closely together. But I hope it is evident that the fervent efforts among member countries to heed comments and to find solutions underscore our commitment to craft the best accord revisions possible, while maintaining a safe and sound global banking system.
No content found
Remarks by Governor Edward M. Gramlich At a meeting on rental housing hosted by the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation, Washington, D.C. November 14, 2003 For many years the MacArthur Foundation has been a mainstay in the effort to expand the supply of affordable rental housing in the United States. This luncheon brings together more than thirty organizations involved in a new $50 million Foundation initiative aimed at preserving and improving affordable rental housing. You are pursuing a very worthwhile objective, and I am delighted to participate in your meeting. When Americans think of housing, they usually think of homeownership. Spending on largely owner-occupied, single-family units has increased smartly in recent years, and has been one of the factors preventing the economic slowdown from being worse than it has been. This spending has been supported in no small way by a revolution in mortgage credit markets, extending subprime credit much further down the income scale. The extension has not been free of problems--the Federal Reserve now spends much time and effort studying and determining what to do about predatory lending--but by and large the extension has enabled millions of new homeowners to have a chance at the American dream of owning a home and building wealth. As if to emphasize the point, the Commerce Department recently reported that the American homeownership rate has reached an all-time high of 68.4 percent, a rise of 5 percentage points in the past decade. For what it is worth, this rise places the United States just behind Spain, Finland, Ireland, and Australia in international homeownership rates, roughly on a par with the United Kingdom, and well above the rate in most other industrial countries. The fact that seven out of ten American households now live in their own homes is reassuring; but seven out of ten is not ten out of ten. Millions of Americans still rely on rental housing. Although at any one point in time only three of ten Americans are living in rental housing, over the life cycle that number is more like ten out of ten--virtually all household families live in rental housing for at least some period in their life. They may start with rental housing after getting out of school and end there after selling the family residence. Even at the top of the income scale rental housing is important. The Federal Reserve's Survey of Consumer Finances indicates that nearly one-tenth of the top quintile of earners are renters. Rental housing is indispensable for households in transition between locations, for workers on temporary assignment, for immigrants, and especially for low-income people. Unfortunately, some of these low-income people may never get to the point where they can afford a home, and must rely on rental housing throughout their lifetime. For these reasons, for high- and low-income households alike, it is impossible to imagine a well-functioning housing sector without an ample supply of rental housing. The aggregate statistics on rental housing do not indicate anything particularly alarming, but below the surface there are clear trouble spots. Overall rental vacancy rates have risen in recent years and are now near record highs for apartments with two or more occupants and clearly at record highs for single-family rental units. With the rise in vacancy rates one would expect a moderation in price pressures, but in fact rental rates have increased in real terms as well. Much speculation exists about why this is the case, but one factor clearly seems to involve an internal shift--new multifamily units are substantially more expensive than the units being lost. This trend, caused by escalating development costs, conversion of previously subsidized properties, and local resistance to multifamily construction, is resulting in a change in composition of available rental housing which works to the detriment of lower-income renters. Most of the social problems involving rental housing pertain to what I will call the lower-income sector, specifically rental units available to low- and moderate-income households. According to official statistics, this "affordability" sector comprises roughly half of the nation's thirty-four million rental units. For this sector of the market, the supply conversion issue is aggravated by several trends on the demand side. After a brief respite, income disparities are growing again, resulting in smaller income gains in the lower-income parts of the distribution than among those with high incomes. There has also been some rise in unemployment, and a steady rise in the number of immigrants. Although we are still a few years away from the retirement of the baby boomers, numbers of aged renters will soon begin to rise and stay high for several decades. All factors together will put price pressure on the dwindling supply of affordable rental units. Statistics on the lower-income part of the rental market, many of which you are familiar with, confirm these fears. The Joint Center for Housing Studies reports that nearly seventeen million renter households in the United States have housing-related problems. Roughly seven million have severe cost burdens, spending more than 50 percent of their income on housing; another seven million have moderate burdens, spending 30 percent to 50 percent of their income on housing. About 2.5 million renter households have multiple problems--severe or moderate cost burdens, overcrowding, or living in seriously inadequate units. Many of the families with severe cost burdens are working close to full time, indicating that having a job is not enough to ward off affordability concerns. Not surprisingly, the incidence of housing difficulties is disproportionately high among very low-income households, African-American and Hispanic families, and female-headed families with children. Geographically, families with housing needs are not confined to cities but are spread across suburban and rural areas as well. The physical quality of the available affordable rental housing stock represents another problem. Whereas in the 1980s about half the available stock was more than twenty-five years old, now that ratio is more like two-thirds. The Joint Center estimates that more than a million renter households live in housing that is considered seriously inadequate, and more than 2.5 million live in rental housing considered moderately inadequate. The overall social implications of this shortage could be quite serious. Households spending more than half their income on housing, by definition, have very little income left to spend on anything else--food, child-care, education, health care, and so forth. Households that cannot afford decent housing are likely to be forced to live many miles from their jobs, or from any jobs, and to have to spend a great deal of time and money commuting to work. Households living in cramped or inadequate quarters are vulnerable to higher crime rates and other social problems, such as below-average public schools. There are any number of ways in which housing shortages can lead to serious social problems for the affected households, now and for their long-term prospects, and to a shortfall in overall economic performance for the economy. This all leads to some difficult policy questions. Numbers of households that depend on lower-income rental housing are rising, low incomes are roughly stagnant, the new supply of affordable units for lower-income families is stagnant, many units are being converted from lower-income to high-income housing, the existing stock is aging, and millions of households are either paying a high share of their income for housing, living in substandard housing, or both. What to do? A first question involves incomes. I am at the Federal Reserve, and it would be nice if the Fed could wave a magic wand and raise incomes. To be sure, the Fed controls an important policy instrument, monetary policy, but the Fed doesn't have a magic wand. The best that the Fed can do is to stabilize prices and stabilize income growth around its long-term trend, thereby preventing large increases in unemployment. Both types of stability might, to some degree, improve long-term growth prospects for the American economy. But even under these circumstances, Fed policy must be motivated by overall macroeconomic conditions. There is no way the Fed can go beyond its overriding stabilization concerns to try to improve the income conditions of particular groups. By cutting taxes on lower-income households and raising them on higher-income households, tax policy could put more spending power in the hands of low-income households. But given the flavor of recent tax policy debates, it is hard to forecast such a change. In recent years, the idea of using tax policy to redistribute income in favor of low-income groups seems to be about as popular as the idea of raising taxes. As for spending, the Section 8 voucher program provides rent vouchers to residents with income that is less than half of the area median to help pay the rent in privately-held apartments. By the mid-1990s more than a million households had received this form of assistance. The program seems to have worked well, though many of the rent voucher payments are small, and even a million households is a small number relative to the size of the number of rental housing gaps described earlier. Although added Section 8 assistance would be welcomed, it would take an enormous amount to cure these rental housing problems on the demand side of the market. On the supply side, the obvious possibility would be to increase the new construction of rental units available to lower-income households. This construction was in fact subsidized by the various tax shelters available in the early 1980s, mostly eliminated in the Tax Reform Act of 1986. The Low Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC) was introduced then to cushion the effect of base-broadening tax reform on the supply of low-income housing, and this LIHTC now stands as the single most important federal supply program. The LIHTC offers private investors, who provide the equity needed to build or rehabilitate qualified housing, a ten-year sellable tax subsidy. In exchange for the tax subsidy, owners are required to maintain, for fifteen years, units affordable to households that make less than 60 percent of the area median. The program has been modified over the years, among other things to extend the fifteen year affordability period. Since 1987 more than a million apartment units have been constructed under the program, adding about 25 percent to new multifamily construction annually, and costing slightly more than $3 billion a year. Even if the program continues in much the present form, in any particular year there will be a significant number of units for which the affordability restriction will expire, leading to the phenomenon of running harder to stay in the same place. Beyond the LIHTC, one could, of course, imagine further tax subsidies for new construction and/or rehabilitation. But there is a significant problem with all of these incentives--where does the money come from? The budget situation at all levels--federal, state, and local--is a mess and is likely to remain so until spending is cut or taxes are raised. Indeed, budgets are now so far out of balance that even stiff fiscal austerity packages are unlikely to stem the tide of red ink. This tight budgetary situation also has indirect effects. Much past housing support has come through nonprofit institutions, but many of these are struggling as well, restricted by declining state and local support on one side and lower endowment payouts on the other. This is the challenging atmosphere facing the MacArthur Foundation and other groups supporting affordable rental housing. The demand-supply imbalance is tight now and likely to get tighter. Chances of raising the incomes of lower-income renters are limited, beyond the macroeconomic and budget policy measures that have already been taken. It is difficult to expand the supply of affordable rental housing, beyond the measures that have already been taken. The fiscal picture is dismal. When all else fails, one can always try ingenuity, and there does seem to be plenty of that in the affordable housing area. I chair the board of the Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation (NRC), a quasi-governmental housing program just now celebrating its twenty-fifth anniversary. The program gets a federal subsidy of about $100 million a year, passing much of it along to its 226 local affiliates. Ultimately this $100 million generates about $1.7 billion of annual housing assistance, a leverage ratio of 17. Although the NRC focuses on homeownership, it by no means ignores rental housing. The NRC provides annual assistance to families in more than 40,000 rental structures around the country, more than doubling the number just a year ago. The MacArthur Foundation knows all about this program because it provides $2 million to the NRC's new loan fund, helping finance the preservation of rental properties, along with providing added direct support to many of the NRC's multifamily lenders. I have visited several of the rental units sponsored by the NRC, and they do indeed seem to contain lively, vibrant communities living in very liveable structures. On the other hand, as with the above programs, it would take an enormous expansion to make a substantial dent in the existing demand-supply imbalance. In this regard, there is an interesting recent book by Alexander von Hoffman, House by House: Block by Block . Old timers like me remember back in the 1960s when Alexander's father, Nicholas, was writing radical columns for the Washington Post. His repeated theme was basically that most of society's institutions were either corrupt or ineffective. A generation later his son, Alexander, is arguing that housing conditions are actually improving in New York, Boston, Chicago, Atlanta, and Los Angeles, partly for home ownership but also in the rental sector. Frankly, the book confirms my own impression from the NRC field trips that there are many effective programs out there, employing many different approaches to improving housing. These impressions, either mine or von Hoffman's, are anecdotal. We see the successful programs but probably do not see the unsuccessful programs or the dreary neighborhoods that never get better; but at least there are many successful programs. With that background, I might raise a few questions from the literature on affordable rental housing, comparing it to my impressions from field trips and elsewhere. Macro versus micro. One examining the macro literature on overall imbalances finds these imbalances in the millions. According to the Joint Center, more than 2 million new affordable rental units are needed to balance demand to supply--a significant gap. On the other hand, field trips leave the impression described above that things may be going pretty well. What is the cause of the disjoint? Maybe our macro figures are inconclusive, maybe our anecdotal impressions are biased, or unrepresentative, maybe field trips just do not cover all the areas that need help. Whatever the case, at some point we will need better quantitative indicators of rental housing problems. Subsidy issues. Today low-income rental housing is subsidized on the demand side by Section 8 vouchers and on the supply side by the LIHTC and older project-related subsidies. It would be nice to imagine a world without any required subsidies, but that dream probably is impractical. The more scarcity pushes up rental rates, the less affordable rental housing gets, and the more at least some lower-income households are likely to need a subsidy. But a host of subsidy-related questions remain. The primary one, of course, is the extent to which the social externalities of inadequate housing justify housing subsidies. I presume that most people in the room think they do, but we can always use better analytical evidence. Beyond that, in neoclassical economics the subsidy required to stimulate a certain amount of housing is the same if given on the demand or supply side of the market. But that may not be the case in the real world. If not, is it more efficient to subsidize on the demand or supply side of the market? How large should subsidies be? Should subsidies focus on particular households or units, or be generally available across the market? There are a number of such evaluative questions, and it would certainly be refreshing to see these subsidy policies handled in an analytical manner. Construction versus preservation. Most of those in the field, including the MacArthur Foundation, have looked at supply incentives on the one hand and massive needs on the other, and conclude that a strong preservation focus is critical. There is an obvious rationale for such a focus. First, preservation uses the existing housing stock and is likely to be much cheaper than new construction. Moreover, it is painful to imagine the remaining green spaces around major cities being converted to endless housing projects. Surely we can make better use of the existing structures, many of them constructed when structures were constructed in a sturdy manner. The transportation infrastructure is already there, the social infrastructure may be there as well, and we should use it. At the same time, it is hard to imagine an ample supply of low-income rental housing without at least some net new additions to the rental housing stock. If there are new additions, they must be sited properly. To the extent possible, it would be nice to see these units located near either jobs or transportation facilities, so occupants can get to places of employment, and developed in a way that does not perpetuate income and social disparities. Mixed-income versus low-income. In the 1950s there were construction subsidies for massive public housing projects for low-income families. These may have been maximally efficient from the standpoint of creating the most housing per dollar, but that was it. The experience with public housing of this sort was depressing indeed, and by now many of these structures have been blown up, with very few tears shed. We now have a chance to start over, with mixed-income public housing. There is a tradeoff here, in the sense that there will not be as many affordable units per dollar, or per square foot of urban space, in mixed-income developments. But the mixed-income housing will address other social objectives. We care not only about putting people in liveable houses, but also in giving them a liveable atmosphere and in building healthy neighborhoods. Mixed-income housing projects at least have the potential to permit the low-income housing renters to mix with other groups, to learn from them, integrate with them, and have their children share schools. Of course no one can predict the degree to which these laudable goals will be promoted by mixed-income housing, but we do know that these goals were not fulfilled earlier with rental housing populated solely by low-income households. * * * * * There is no shortage of questions to be asked about rental housing, and I could go on. More than likely, further discussion would expose further trouble spots, further rationales for support, and maybe even further evidence of progress. Whatever the case, significant challenges are ahead in the struggle for an adequate supply of rental housing overall and an increased supply of affordable rental housing. The MacArthur and other initiatives will need all of the experience and knowledge you have learned over the years, and more. I wish you well.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced its approval of the applications by The PNC Financial Services Group, Inc. and PNC Bancorp, Inc., both in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, to acquire United National Bancorp, and thereby indirectly acquire its wholly owned subsidiary bank, UnitedTrust Bank, both in Bridgewater, New Jersey. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced its approval of the application under the Bank Holding Company Act by Shinhan Financial Group Co., Ltd., Seoul, Korea, to become a bank holding company and to control CHB America Bank, New York, New York. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan At the 21st Annual Monetary Conference, Cosponsored by the Cato Institute and The Economist , Washington, D.C. November 20, 2003
Testimony of Richard Spillenkothen Director, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation Corporate governance, risk management, and internal controls Before the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations, Committee on Governmental Affairs, U.S. Senate November 20, 2003 Introduction Thank you for the opportunity to testify today on the Federal Reserve's continuing efforts to advance corporate governance, risk management and internal controls at banking organizations. I would like to note that my testimony today reflects the views of Federal Reserve supervisory staff, and not necessarily those of the Board of Governors. Numerous governance, accounting, and legal compliance failings within publicly held companies, including those delineated in this Subcommittee's investigation of the Enron debacle, have been identified over the course of the past two years. The Subcommittee's current investigation into the role of professional firms in the development, marketing, and implementation of abusive tax structures highlights once again the critical need for effective corporate governance, risk management and internal controls to guide organizations' business practices and activities, thereby promoting compliance with all laws and regulations and safeguarding firms' franchises. Federal Reserve staff has not reviewed the specific abusive tax structures that I understand to be the focus of today's hearing, and, as you know, bank supervisors are not tax experts, nor are they responsible for the oversight of tax compliance by banking organizations or their customers. However, I appreciate the opportunity to talk to you today about our supervisory requirements and expectations for banks involved in complex structured transactions, some of which are tax driven, and about some of the continuing enhancements to our supervisory processes to better address banking organizations' risk management and internal control infrastructures. Perhaps to an even greater extent than those in other industries, financial services organizations face substantial challenges in ensuring that risk management practices and internal controls are designed to fully address the wide range of traditional and more recently-identified nontraditional risks emanating from the products and services offered by a rapidly evolving financial industry. While these financial products provide many legitimate benefits to bank customers and to the economy as a whole, they can also be misused, and in the process, create risks for banking organizations. With recent events such as corporate accounting scandals and large bankruptcies, banks have learned that involvement in some transactions can result in significant legal costs and reputational damage, in addition to major losses on extensions of credit. All of these risks need to be recognized by senior management of banking organizations and effectively managed and controlled. In this regard, it is the longstanding expectation of the Federal Reserve that banking organizations have comprehensive corporate governance programs to ensure that the entire range of an organization's activities and practices are in full compliance with all applicable laws and regulations. Banking organizations appear to be actively responding to the lessons of recent events. Supervisory assessments of management processes around structured transactions indicate that various additional control mechanisms, such as internal business review committees and more intense due diligence by key risk control functions within banks, are being instituted to assure appropriate senior-level management attention to proposed transactions, particularly to the legal and reputational risks involved. Role of Supervisors At the outset, it is important to provide some background on the Federal Reserve's role as supervisor of banking organizations and our relationship with other supervisory authorities in carrying out our responsibilities. The primary focus of the Federal Reserve's supervision is ensuring an institution's safety and soundness, as well as compliance with banking and consumer laws and regulations, in a way that protects the deposit insurance fund and the consumer, while promoting stability of the financial system. To accomplish these goals, the Federal Reserve uses a risk-based approach to supervision in which examiners focus primarily on areas posing the greatest risk to the banking organization, and on the overall adequacy of an organization's risk management and internal controls as measured against not only regulatory standards and expectations, but also against the evolving practices of well managed firms. To promote the proper functioning of these systems, examiners review selected transactions across business lines to identify whether written policies and procedures are being followed. In the case of more complex transactions and business practices that can pose higher levels of operational, legal and reputational risk, examiners seek to determine whether the banking organization has a process in place for obtaining its own legal, tax and accounting approvals from key control functions within the organization and, when appropriate, from third party professionals. Examiners are not legal or tax experts, and as has become increasingly apparent, abusive tax structures are often designed to resemble legitimate tax transactions and, by their very nature, can be highly complex, varied, and extremely difficult to detect. With the exception of the banking and consumer protection laws for which the Federal Reserve has enforcement responsibility, examiners are not trained to identify violations of non-banking laws or compliance with the tax code. Nor are they qualified to perform an independent legal or tax analysis of transactions or business practices. It is the responsibility of each banking organization to develop an appropriate control structure to ensure that all transactions entered into are legal and in the long-term best interest of the banking organization, and that they do not compromise the organization's financial condition. While banking organizations have the responsibility to perform their own due diligence of transactions and business activities, it is important to note that banking organizations, of necessity, rely to a considerable extent on other parts of the financial and legal infrastructure. Accounting and legal firms are key components of that infrastructure. To the extent these important components of the financial system are not performing their appropriate duties, the operations of banking organizations will inevitably be affected. When weaknesses in corporate governance or risk-control infrastructures are identified by the Federal Reserve, other bank supervisors, functional regulators, or law enforcement authorities, the Federal Reserve stands ready to use its full complement of supervisory and enforcement tools. The supervisory objective is to ensure that banking organizations implement appropriate corrective actions to address any financial weaknesses, promote compliance with laws and sound banking practices, and protect the federal deposit insurance fund. Supervisory Requirements and Expectations for Banking Organizations Some basic principles and expectations for banking organizations guide our work in assessing business activities and risks. First, and most obviously, banking organizations must obey the law. In particular, they must have policies and procedures in place that are followed by their employees to ensure that they are in compliance with all laws and regulations. The laws most commonly applicable include banking, consumer, securities and tax laws, whether federal, state or foreign. Second, banking organizations should perform thorough due diligence on the transactions or business activities that they are involved in and check with key legal, accounting and tax authorities within their own organizations, as well as independent third-party professional experts when appropriate. However, banking organizations ordinarily should not be held legally responsible for the judgments, actions or malfeasance of their customers, or third-party professional advisers. Nor, as a general rule, should they be required to second guess their customers' accountants, tax or legal experts, or to police their customers' and third-party professionals' business activities. Such an expectation would require, inappropriately, banking organizations to assume management responsibilities outside of their control, create potential legal liability that would compromise their ability to perform their role as financial intermediaries or threaten their safety and soundness, and place significant costs on banking organizations to audit the activities of their customers and professional advisers. On the other hand, banking organizations should not, of course, participate in activities that they know or suspect to be illegal, and they must maintain controls and procedures to ensure that they are not knowingly facilitating illegal activities by their customers or business associates. Moreover, banking organizations should not engage in borderline transactions that are likely to result in significant reputational or operational risks to the organization. Third, in those cases where a banking organization does become aware of fraudulent or criminal activities by their employees, customers, or business associates, they are required by federal law and the Federal Reserve's and other bank regulators' regulations to file Suspicious Activity Reports (SARs). If for any reason a banking organization does not fulfill this obligation, the SAR would be filed by the bank's supervisor. SARs are available electronically to all the federal, state, and local law enforcement agencies with interests in investigating and prosecuting crimes involving banking organizations. This includes the Criminal Investigations division of the Internal Revenue Service. Fourth, the role of banking organizations is to assume and manage all the attendant risks related to their activities as financial intermediaries. Before banking organizations offer new products and engage in new activities, they should evaluate all the dimensions of risks, including credit, market, legal, operational and reputational risks. In light of recent events, banking organizations are re-evaluating the risks related to both their traditional and their new products, recognizing that as financial markets and practices change, legal and reputational risks may manifest themselves in new ways or in magnitudes not previously recognized. Moreover, as practices and products change, banking organizations must build appropriate mitigating controls to manage the evolving risk exposures and ensure that a process is in place to assess the effectiveness of those controls over time. Finally, banking organizations must recognize that although they are not directly accountable for the actions of their customers or the third-party legal and accounting professionals with whom they have business dealings, to the extent their names or products are implicitly associated with misconduct by those parties, additional legal and reputational risks may arise. Such risks may ultimately lead to significant costs and if these risks are not recognized and addressed, they could affect an organization's financial health. Banking organizations should be particularly vigilant that any business relationships with third-party legal and accounting professionals do not cloud the independence of those professionals, rendering their opinions and recommendations unreliable. Moreover, a banking organization must also seek to ensure that any non-audit or other business relationships with the external audit firm engaged to opine on the organization's public financial statements do not contravene the auditor independence standards. Supervisory Activities For its part, the Federal Reserve focuses its supervisory activities on reviewing the methods used by banking organizations to identify, evaluate, and control all dimensions of risk associated with the organization's business activities, including operational, legal and reputational risks. Safety and soundness is dependent on strong overarching corporate governance programs that clearly establish an organization's risk appetite and tolerance levels. Such programs must be fully supported by written policies and procedures and well-developed control infrastructures that dynamically evolve to maintain effectiveness as new products and risk combinations or conflicts of interest emerge and new business initiatives are undertaken. Active independent risk management, internal audit, and compliance functions are crucial elements of each banking organization's control process. Recent events have influenced the thinking of supervisors as well as banking organizations on effectively targeting resources toward more vulnerable points within an organization's risk-management structure. In particular, events have reemphasized that in developing the scope of a supervisory review, factors used to prioritize reviews should go beyond standard balance sheet measures of risk to include an individual customer's or business line's overall contributions to revenues or profits. Highly profitable or rapidly growing business lines, relationships, or new products and services, in addition to large credit or market exposures, are also activities for which the adequacy of internal checks and balances needs to be appropriately tested and, where warranted, reinforced. Clearly events of the past two years have focused banking organizations' and bank supervisors' attention on the legal and reputational risks associated with complex structured transactions. For its part, the Federal Reserve has initiated a number of actions to strengthen our supervisory processes and to promote the remediation of identified problems. As a result of our examination of banking organizations' relationships with Enron, the Federal Reserve, along with other bank and securities regulators, conducted special reviews of banking and securities investment firms to develop a more complete understanding of how each institution oversees its structured financing activities and controls the associated risks. In conducting these reviews and in our supervisory follow-up, the Federal Reserve has been clear regarding our expectations that banking organizations should have effective internal controls that comprehensively assess the risks associated with legal compliance, including compliance with tax laws. Formal, Enron-related supervisory enforcement actions taken publicly by the Federal Reserve last summer, in coordination with other regulatory and law enforcement authorities, underscore supervisory expectations regarding the need for banking organizations to address weaknesses in internal controls and risk management relating to complex structured transactions. In addition to ongoing supervisory efforts, we are also working with other bank and securities regulators to develop supervisory guidance on appropriate controls and risk management systems relating to complex structured transactions, including those specifically designed for tax purposes. The Federal Reserve has used the lessons learned over the last couple of years to make some refinements to our risk assessments and supervisory programs for large complex banking organizations. Specifically, we have increased our emphasis on, and review of, organizations' management of legal and reputational risks. Among other things, increased focus has been put on the adequacy of new product approval processes, the management of large or highly profitable customer relationships, and controls over the use of special purpose entities. Examiners are also increasing efforts to review basic internal control infrastructures at banking organizations, including examination of board and management oversight and reporting, corporate-wide compliance activities, and internal audit functions. Conclusion In closing, it is clear that effective corporate governance programs and internal control processes will continue to be crucial to the success of banking organizations and corporations more broadly. These programs and processes must be rigorous and they must adjust to ensure the detection and control of all risks stemming from new products and services and from their interactions with existing businesses. Equally important to the effective identification and management of new and emerging risks, however, is a robust internal control infrastructure that enables organizations to maintain compliance with all laws and regulations, including tax laws. Supervisors will continue to focus on risk management and control processes in order to foster safety and soundness, financial stability, and compliance with applicable laws and regulations. Supervisory activities will continue to reinforce recent actions taken by banking organizations to address weaknesses and, whenever necessary, require further corrective action. Supervisory efforts are directed at encouraging banking organizations to enhance their new product review and approval procedures, and to strengthen their overall approach to identifying, managing and controlling legal, reputational and other operational risks. Of course, no system of official oversight is failsafe, and supervisors cannot detect and prevent all control or management failures. However, strong and effective supervision, including the use of supervisory enforcement tools, bank managements' recognition of the need to maintain sound corporate governance, risk management and internal control infrastructures, and the workings of market discipline, should result in continued improvements in the management of legal and reputational risks.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the issuance of a Final Decision and Order of Prohibition against Garfield C. Brown, Jr., a former employee of Mellon Bank, N.A., Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. The Order, the result of an action brought by the Office of Comptroller of the Currency, prohibits Mr. Brown from participating in the conduct of the affairs of any financial institution or holding company. Attached are the Board's Final Decision and Order relating to this action.
Remarks by Vice Chairman Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. At the Executives' Club of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois November 21, 2003 Economic Outlook It is a pleasure to be with you today to speak about the U.S. economy. As always, the views I will be expressing are my own and do not necessarily represent those of the other members of the Board of Governors or the Federal Open Market Committee. My last formal speech on the economy was in November 2002. And in preparing my remarks for today, I was struck both by how much has happened over the past year and by how much economic conditions have changed. Think back to the economic situation of a year ago. After growing moderately over the first three quarters of 2002, the economy was about to stall out. The lingering effects of the corporate governance scandals, rising oil prices, and growing uncertainties about the economic consequences of a possible war in Iraq were holding back the nascent recovery from the 2001 recession. The pessimism that had gripped the business community since the summer of 2000 intensified, and firms renewed their focus on restructuring rather than expanding their operations. The result was another round of job cuts and continued sluggishness in capital spending. Intense geopolitical risks and uncertainties continued to weigh on the economy until major combat operations in Iraq ended this past spring. Shortly thereafter, the Congress enacted additional reductions in personal income taxes and extended the enhanced corporate expensing provisions for new investment. Moreover, the Federal Reserve eased monetary policy an additional 25 basis points in June. By early this summer, a significant amount of monetary and fiscal stimulus was in place, and although there was no evidence in hand at the time, most forecasters anticipated a step-up in the pace of economic activity. In the event, the economy rebounded faster than even the most optimistic of prognosticators had predicted. Real gross domestic product rose at an annual rate of 3-1/4 percent in the second quarter of this year and surged at a rate of more than 7 percent in the third quarter. The labor market, which heretofore had continued to deteriorate, appears to have stabilized during the summer, and almost 300,000 new jobs were created over the July-to-October period. Although the economy now appears to have turned the corner, much additional progress needs to be made before our country's labor and capital resources are fully utilized. Indeed, until the most recent employment report, many commentators had described this period as the "jobless recovery." Since the cyclical trough in November 2001, nonfarm payrolls have actually fallen 1/2 percent. This decline compares with a 1-1/4 percent rise over a period of comparable length in the preceding jobless recovery from the recession of 1990-91 and an average 7 percent increase in the other seven post-war recovery periods. A similar picture emerges for industrial production, which is up only 2 percent from its cyclical trough, compared with 6-1/2 percent in 1990-91 and almost 20 percent on average after the other seven post-war recessions. Are Jobless Recoveries Now the Norm? These developments are striking departures from past cyclical behavior, and they raise the question of whether some facet of the U.S. economy has changed. Given the very slow employment growth in the two years after the past two recessions, should we consider "jobless recoveries" to be the new norm? Proponents of this view cite the widespread cost cutting and restructuring that has occurred in the past two recoveries, the continuing outsourcing of jobs overseas, and an ongoing focus of business decision makers on improving efficiency rather than expanding capacity. I suspect that the differential behavior of the past two recoveries reflects more the nature of the shocks that hit the economy during these periods than a fundamental shift in the structure of the economy. Let me elaborate on this hypothesis. Glance at the textbook descriptions of business-cycle fluctuations between 1946 and 1990, and you will find repeated references to swings in aggregate demand induced by so-called "stop-go" economic policies--policies that alternated between being excessively stimulative and excessively restrictive. These descriptions often portray the Federal Reserve as one of the villains in this process, first by spiking the proverbial punch bowl to get the party rolling and then preemptively removing it once everyone was having a bit of fun. During this period, monetary policy attempted to manage cyclical shocks to aggregate demand and aggregate supply to first control inflation and then to confront any excess slack in resource utilization that might follow from these initial actions. However, the recessions of 1990-1991 and 2001 were different than this prototypical postwar downturn. Both involved unusual economic circumstances that placed additional strains on the economy. In 1990, a credit crunch was layered on top of the usual cyclical dynamics. The collapse of savings and loan institutions and the need to repair the capital structure of the banking industry led to a period in which the flow of credit to businesses was impaired. Although the Federal Reserve cut interest rates to confront these "headwinds," a prolonged adjustment period was still needed to correct the financial imbalances that had emerged in the late 1980s. Facing limited access to the credit markets, businesses--especially small businesses--were unable to expand, and hiring lagged far behind that of the typical postwar recovery. In my view, this credit-supply shock and the associated efforts of businesses to repair their balance sheets proved to be the characteristic of the 1990-1991 recession-and-recovery period that distinguished it from earlier cycles and led to its jobless features. The 2001 recession was an unusual investment-led downturn that followed the boom of the late 1990s and early 2000. The exuberance that accompanied the growth of information technology and the Internet led some to overestimate the potential of this revolutionary hardware and software to generate productivity gains and extra-normal rates of return. An important step-up in the rate of productivity growth occurred during this period, but not all players in the game were capable of achieving the extra-normal rates of return that flowed to some of the more innovative companies. Young start-up companies that had never made a profit (and never would) attracted copious amounts of financing from venture capitalists and the initial public offering market. Analysts began to question whether established "bricks and mortar" businesses could ever compete with this new Internet business model, and many of these more-traditional firms felt compelled to accelerate their own on-line strategies. In the end, the bubble burst, but not before huge sums of money had been spent on new (and subsequently unneeded) capacity. The ultimate fallout was severe, especially in segments of manufacturing that had geared up to satisfy the anticipated demand for high-technology products. The bursting of the bubble wiped out significant amounts of financial wealth, prompting adjustments throughout the economy. Firms slashed payrolls, and capital spending projects were abandoned. As with the process of adjustment to the 1990 credit crunch, a long period of time has been required to get employment and capacity back to more viable levels. And some industries--such as telecommunications--still appear to be struggling. As a footnote, I should mention that the successful efforts of many companies to ready their computer systems for the year 2000 date change probably added to the length of this adjustment period in some high-technology industries. The new equipment and rewritten software that were put in place by the end of 1999 seem to have greatly exceeded expectations both in terms of longevity and associated productivity gains. We continue to hear from businesses that they have been able to extend the useful service life of this equipment and to reap additional productivity gains by fine-tuning their automation systems. Although this extended replacement and upgrade cycle has helped to support the profitability of technology-consuming businesses, it obviously has been bad for the bottom line of the producers of these high-tech goods and services. Although the boom-bust in capital spending was a unique feature of the most recent business cycle, the U.S. economy was also hit by the terrorist attacks of 2001, the corporate governance scandals of 2002, and the 2003 war in Iraq. In hindsight, it is clear that such an uncertain and risky environment was not conducive either to the creation of new jobs or to the expansion of capacity. Indeed, I am amazed that the U.S. economy could cope with such a severe sequence of negative economic shocks without even greater economic pain. That, to me, is testimony to the underlying strength and flexibility of our economic system. Current Conditions Given the disappointments of the past two years, what do I see today in the economic data that makes me think that the economy has more likely than not turned the corner? The rate of growth of real GDP in the third quarter was impressive, and even more so, when you look at the contributions of final demand. The household sector has been the driving force in this expansion. For example, in the third quarter, real personal consumption expenditures increased at an annual rate of 6-1/2 percent, while real residential investment surged 20 percent. Last quarter's strength in consumer spending was fueled by the midyear tax cuts, the waning influence of negative wealth effects from the past slide in equity prices, and some improvement in consumer sentiment from the war-related lows registered in March. In addition, very generous incentives on autos and light trucks boosted light vehicle sales to annual rate of 17-1/2 million units in the third quarter. After such substantial increases last quarter, it has not been surprising that consumer spending has softened as we moved into the fourth quarter. Still, the fundamental determinants of consumer spending remain favorable, and consumer sentiment is increasingly upbeat. Housing markets remain very strong even though mortgage rates have moved up somewhat from the very low levels seen at the beginning of the summer. Single-family housing starts jumped to an annual rate of 1.62 million units in October, a record high for this series. Moreover, sales of both new and existing homes have also held near historical highs. As I noted before, the business sector has been the locus of weakness in this expansion. However, the extreme caution that had been gripping firms now appears to be dissipating. Real outlays for equipment and software rose at an annual rate of 15-1/2 percent in the third quarter, after an increase of 8-1/4 percent in the second quarter. Moreover, businesses also are hiring again. Private nonfarm payrolls increased at an average pace of about 120,000 per month in September and October, and further declines in initial claims for unemployment insurance suggest that this improvement in the labor market has continued into November. Finally, manufacturing production is perking up. Although light vehicle assemblies have slipped from the very high levels of the summer, production of other goods rose 0.2 percent in September and an additional 0.4 percent in October, reflecting fairly widespread gains across industries. The sustainability of the recovery will depend importantly on future trends in employment, household spending, and business investment. Twice before in this recovery we have seen short periods of strong growth, followed by a return to sluggish, subpar growth. Given the strength of the incoming data that I have just outlined, the risk that the economy will again stall out must be given a smaller probability than that assigned just a few months ago, but the risk cannot be discounted completely. For example, the strength in consumer spending in the third quarter might prove to be temporary--a one-time surge related to the fiscal stimulus. Indeed, analysts who subscribe to this view would take some solace in the latest data on non-auto retail sales. Under these circumstances, businesses likely would remain very cautious about the demand conditions they expect to prevail in the year ahead. This would make them reluctant to expand and hire new workers--factors that would hold down economic expansion in 2004. While the consensus forecast for next year calls for a growth rate of 4 percent (on a fourth-quarter-to-fourth-quarter basis), which seems reasonable, a weaker outcome than that is not hard to imagine. Productivity, Potential Growth, and Inflation One of the most prominent characteristics of this economic expansion has been the rapid gains in labor productivity. Output per hour rose at an annual rate of 4-1/2 percent in the first half of this year and at an extraordinary 8 plus-percent rate in the third quarter. In part, these gains are cyclical and reflect firms' unwillingness, until recently, to expand their payrolls. In addition, the productivity gains have translated into an improvement in businesses' income statements: Real wages have not kept up with the growth in productivity, and with businesses generally reluctant to spend, corporate profitability has improved markedly this year. This development has allowed firms to reduce the debts inherited from the 1990s. Some slowing in productivity growth from the third-quarter pace is almost inevitable. However, looking beyond the quarter-to-quarter movements, I remain optimistic that we have seen a permanent step-up in the underlying rate of labor productivity growth. As I noted before, businesses have achieved considerable efficiency gains through the information technology that they have installed since 1995. Moreover, as my Y2K example illustrated, I believe companies are continuing to adapt their operations to take advantage of the capabilities of these technologies and are seeing a payoff for these actions in their bottom lines. The apparent step-up in the underlying rate of productivity growth in recent years implies that the nation's rate of potential output growth--the rate of growth in real GDP that is consistent over time with a stable rate of inflation--has also risen. That's good news because it means that the economy can grow at a faster pace than in the past without generating upward pressure on prices. Moreover, the level of potential output is still well above that of actual GDP, and this output gap is likely to persist for some time even if real GDP grows in excess of its potential pace. Finally, let me say a few words about inflation. Although the overall consumer price index has been buffeted by swings in food and energy prices, the core measure that excludes these components has slowed noticeably over the past year. The core CPI is up only 1-1/4 percent from its level of a year ago. This performance means that the U.S. economy has reached effective price stability. That is an achievement that owes to many factors: economic slack, faster productivity growth, stable inflation expectations, and the general public's belief that the Federal Reserve is committed to keeping inflation under control. Moreover, recent research has shown that, as inflation has been brought down over the past two decades, the sensitivity of prices to the level of resource utilization has also fallen. This finding implies that, unlike in past periods, the specter of rising inflation is less likely to haunt the economy as activity improves and the output gap shrinks. Indeed, inflation still seems more likely to move lower than to increase. Under these circumstances, the central bank has the luxury to monitor events before it has to confront the need to return the stance of policy to a neutral position. Conclusion In conclusion, the macroeconomic fundamentals seem to be in place for an increase in the pace of economic growth. Although I do not expect a repetition of the extraordinary economic performance of the third quarter, I do expect growth to be sustained. However, this expectation will have to be reexamined periodically during the upcoming period--in light of evolving economic circumstances. Even if the growth is sufficient to make meaningful progress in reducing the slack in our nation's labor and capital resources, that pool of underutilized resources is large and it will take some time to be worked off completely. Fortunately, as the economy has experienced cyclical turns and surprising shocks, it has proved to be quite resilient, and we have benefited from a step-up in productivity that has left the economy well positioned to provide for the long-term welfare of our fellow citizens.
Remarks by Governor Mark W. Olson At the annual meeting of the National Conference of Insurance Legislators, Santa Fe, New Mexico November 22, 2003 Functional Regulation and Financial Modernization Introduction My thanks to the National Conference of Insurance Legislators (NCOIL) for inviting me to speak to you today, and special thanks to my former senator, Cal Larson, for being my host. You've asked me to provide some thoughts on financial modernization and functional regulation, and to discuss more specifically how these issues may, from the perspective of the Federal Reserve Board, relate to insurance. I'd like to discuss first the importance of cooperation between the Federal Reserve System and state insurance supervisors. Then I'll describe some of the lessons we at the Fed have learned as participants in the dual banking system. I hope that hearing about our experiences will be useful as you consider initiatives to enhance the state insurance supervisory system. My comments today are my own and do not necessarily represent the views of my fellow Board or Federal Open Market Committee members. Cooperation between the Federal Reserve and the state insurance supervisors The McCarran-Ferguson Act has long kept supervision of insurance within the exclusive domain of the states. For most of the past century, we--that is, the Federal Reserve and state insurance professionals--have traveled in completely different circles for practical reasons as well. The Federal Reserve has had very little to do with insurance issues because the banks and bank holding companies for which we are responsible have had little involvement in insurance. In fact, the federal legislation that charges the Federal Reserve with supervising bank holding companies--the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956--was enacted in large part to prevent the affiliation of one of the largest banks in this country with a large insurance underwriter. Congress went on to strengthen the separation of banking and insurance in 1982 with an amendment to that act generally prohibiting bank holding companies from engaging in insurance agency activities. At that point the insurance underwriting and sales activities of banking organizations were constrained to four limited categories: Banking organizations were permitted to underwrite and sell credit-related insurance; some state-chartered banks could engage in insurance sales under state law that either granted explicit permission or contained implicit authority for these activities; national banks could engage in insurance sales from small towns; and a limited number of bank holding companies were grandfathered and thus were allowed to continue insurance activities that they had started prior to enactment of the 1982 amendment. The historic statutory separation of banking and insurance was altered in 1999 when the Congress enacted the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLB Act) and allowed well-managed and well-capitalized banks to affiliate with insurance underwriters and insurance agencies. That brings the Federal Reserve and state insurance professionals into the same circle. To date, about 630 bank holding companies have chosen to become financial holding companies, the vehicle under the GLB Act through which bank, insurance, and securities affiliations may take place. Of those, about 165 (more than 25 percent) use the new GLB Act authority to engage in insurance agency activities while only 26 (fewer than 5 percent) are engaged in underwriting insurance that is unrelated to credit. All of these companies must comply with state laws governing the sales and underwriting of insurance. The significant interest by banking organizations in selling insurance makes sense. The banking system is still dominated, in number, by small banking organizations. More than 90 percent of the banks in this country have total assets of less than $500 million each. Banks of all sizes have quite large branch networks--as of the end of last year there were almost 67,500 branches of the more than 7,800 commercial banks in this country. Entering the insurance market as an agent, not as an underwriter, fits naturally with the nature of banking as an industry dominated by smaller providers. More broadly, banking organizations have developed good networks and systems for delivering financial products to consumers--a business model that does not always require manufacture of the product. Insurance is increasingly viewed not just as a product that stands on its own, but as an important item on a menu of financial vehicles that help consumers create a portfolio of financial assets, manage their financial risks, and plan for their financial security. Many consumers prefer to make their financial decisions and purchase financial planning products at a single location that offers a full package of financial services. Thus, banking organizations are a natural alternative delivery system for insurance underwriters looking to expand their customer base. The affiliation of banks and insurance underwriters has been more modest. One large banking organization has affiliated with a large insurance underwriter, and one large insurance underwriter has acquired a small bank. In addition, several foreign banks with insurance operations abroad have begun to offer both insurance and banking products in the United States. Before the GLB Act, these foreign banking organizations were required to choose between operating as a bank in the United States or engaging in insurance activities in the United States; they generally could not do both. Whether the affiliation of insurance underwriters and banking organizations will become more common is unclear. Insurance underwriting involves a much larger commitment of resources than insurance sales and, apart from underwriting credit insurance, seems so far to have little synergy with banking. Banks and insurance companies so far seem not to have determined whether it makes business sense to mesh the manufacturing and distribution of insurance with the manufacturing and distribution of more traditional banking products. The experimentation has begun in ways you would expect. For example, insurance companies have long thought that the trust and fiduciary powers of banks would offer them an opportunity to manage insurance payouts and other assets of large estates. And a few banking organizations are experimenting with manufacturing the insurance products they deliver. These trial runs need time to work themselves out. What is important is that federal law no longer prevents the marketplace from evolving and the industry from experimenting. The result can only be beneficial to consumers. With these developments have come new supervisory challenges. As I mentioned earlier, we at the Federal Reserve have little expertise in supervising insurance companies. While some types of risks are common to both banking organizations and insurance companies, the products, business practices, and historical framework of the insurance industry are unique and outside our experience. Similarly, the risks and operations of banks and bank holding companies, which are in our area of expertise, are quite different from those typically seen in the domain of insurance supervisors. The obvious supervisory approach suggested by these different risks and regulatory schemes is cooperative functional regulation that matches supervisory expertise with the risks encountered by the regulated entity. This cooperation and a functional regulatory scheme are required by the GLB Act. But they also make good supervisory and business sense. It is crucial that supervisors talk to each other in order to understand the risks posed by functionally regulated entities, one to the other. It is also important that supervisors not overburden organizations with duplicative and conflicting regulation that destroys the very cost savings and consumer benefits of affiliation. Consequently, we do not examine insurance underwriters or the insurance agency business of bank holding companies. Instead, we defer to the appropriate state insurance authorities. We also rely on reports and other information that insurance companies provide to state insurance authorities to understand the activities and financial strength of the insurance company, rather than imposing our own reporting requirements on insurance companies. Importantly, we have established very successful partnerships with the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) and with many state insurance supervisors to enhance our mutual understanding of our supervisory frameworks and to facilitate the sharing of supervisory information and consumer complaints. To date, we have information-sharing agreements with nearly all of the states and the District of Columbia. While not all of these agreements have been spurred by an important affiliation that requires information sharing, the process of establishing these agreements has introduced us to the appropriate authorities in these states and begun a relationship that will improve our supervisory cooperation and effectiveness if difficulties develop down the road. It is important to have open lines of communication among supervisors and a framework and relationship with the states that prepare us to respond to developments as needed. We are also working with the NAIC and the state insurance supervisors to compare supervisory approaches for identifying and resolving troubled organizations. Banks and insurance companies must comply with very different minimum capital requirements--requirements that are tailored to their businesses. It is important that in circumstances in which affiliated banks and insurance companies are experiencing financial stress, the bank and insurance supervisors be able to work cooperatively to resolve that stress without taking steps that help one regulated institution at the expense of the other. We think that efforts to understand each other's supervisory tools and processes for identifying and resolving troubled institutions will allow functional regulators to work more effectively and cooperatively to find an early and effective solution to troubled institutions. To improve our own understanding of the issues developing in the insurance industry, we have also established resource centers at the Board and at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston to monitor developments in the insurance industry. We particularly value the fruitful relationships that we have had with organizations such as the NAIC, which has welcomed our input and worked to help educate us on important insurance issues, and with various state insurance supervisors, who have fostered cross-training opportunities for us. State regulation of multi-state entities When Senator Neil Breslin, chairman of NCOIL's State-Federal Relations Committee, testified earlier this month before the House Financial Services Committee, he identified several initiatives that the states are taking to address issues involving modernization of state insurance regulation. NCOIL is to be commended for initiating these efforts. While there are many structural differences between the banking and insurance industries, I would like to share with you the experience of the banking supervisors in maintaining a viable state banking supervision option in an increasingly interstate banking environment. Until the early 1980s, banks were prohibited by a combination of federal and state law from establishing branches, or even bank affiliates, across state lines. In the mid-1980s, several states began to experiment with interstate compacts that allowed banks to affiliate with banks in other states. By 1994, there was consensus that interstate banking was important enough to both banks and consumers that Congress repealed the federal prohibition on interstate affiliations and established a framework for interstate branching. At the same time, Congress greatly limited the ability of states to restrict interstate entry by out-of-state banks. As a result, the banking industry has flourished and customers have benefited. Banks can now provide products and services seamlessly to customers nationally, including customers that have wide geographic operations and customers that move geographically. And customers have gained the convenience afforded by banks that have a wide footprint of branches. At the same time, interstate expansion has posed challenges for us as supervisors. Although the Federal Reserve is not limited geographically, we partner in our supervisory efforts with state authorities that are constrained by state lines. Interstate expansion in a supervisory framework tied to state boundaries means that state-chartered banks that operate on an interstate basis face the possibility of regulation by their chartering state as well as by each state in which the bank establishes a branch office, plus an overarching federal supervisor. In addition to the potential for conflict and burdensome duplication that having multiple supervisors presents, state banks operating on a multistate basis must compete with nationally chartered banks that are supervised on a national basis by a single regulator. To meet this challenge, we have worked with the state supervisors to develop a more uniform and seamless approach to supervision. Under the auspices of the Conference of State Bank Supervisors, the various state banking supervisors have developed a protocol for cooperation in examining and collecting information from multistate banks. This protocol deals with examinations of two types. Responsibility for safety and soundness examinations rests with the chartering or "home" state for the bank. However, the protocol recognizes that the states into which a bank has branched--the so-called host states--also have a legitimate interest in monitoring the safety and soundness of banks that operate within their borders. Thus, it allows host states to conduct safety and soundness examinations of out-of-state banks that branch into the state. It contemplates however that the host state will conduct safety and soundness examinations only in emergency situations or as part of the examination conducted by the home-state supervisor. The protocol relies on robust information sharing and coordination between state supervisors and the federal banking agencies to take the place of these examinations. Responsibility for compliance with applicable consumer protection laws is divided among state supervisors, with each state supervisor responsible for monitoring compliance with local law by local offices. Examination for compliance with federal consumer laws in some instances is left to the federal banking agencies and in others is shared with state bank supervisors. In addition to building on the strength of our system of state bank supervisors, we realized that supervising large interstate operations requires different and significantly more sophisticated techniques than we employ for our smaller local banks. For example, our bank examination practices for many years focused on the review of a sizable number of individual loan files at each bank. This is an amazingly intrusive and time-consuming process. And it became increasingly obvious that as institutions grew in size, the technique was not practical on a large scale. Over time, we have had to develop more-sophisticated sampling techniques as well as methods for identifying and focusing our examinations on areas of greatest risk to the banking organization. We continue to review the policies and efforts that each bank employs to identify the risks it faces, to set and implement standards to address those risks, and to monitor the effectiveness of its risk-management practices. This approach involves the examination of policies and procedures and the review of statistics on loan default experiences for entire portfolios rather than large numbers of individual transactions. We are in the process of developing a more-sophisticated approach to capital as well. The current "Basel" capital standard was developed in 1988 through negotiations conducted by bank supervisory authorities under the auspices of the Bank for International Settlement in Basel, Switzerland. Current efforts to replace this capital accord with a new version (called Basel II) take a decidedly more risk-focused approach to measuring risk. The proposed approach would build on techniques used by the largest banks worldwide and should produce results that are much more consistent than the existing standard with market perceptions of risk. It would separate risks into their component parts and should give supervisors important new tools for evaluating not only the level of risk, but also the performance and responsiveness of bank management. Although the proposed standard will be a challenge to implement and enforce, it will also provide important and necessary incentives to managers of our largest institutions to adopt more-sophisticated practices for measuring and managing risk. We have also developed more risk-focused techniques for reviewing compliance with applicable consumer and other laws. At the same time, we--like the state insurance commissioners--have established consumer complaint divisions in each of the federal banking agencies to monitor and investigate individual consumer complaints. To be sure, our system of risk-focused supervision of banking organizations relies heavily on cooperation among multiple state and Federal supervisors, and it is not perfect. But it is working, and we think working effectively. State-chartered banks remain competitive and strong, and the asset share of state-chartered banks has remained relatively constant. While the banking industry's continued consolidation is widely recognized and the total number of U.S. commercial banks continues to decline, less evident is the consistent chartering of new banks--roughly one new charter for every three consolidations. Seventy-five percent of these newly chartered banks are state banks. The state charter is apparently no less attractive than before banks gained new powers to expand nationwide. Certainly, we could not have postponed interstate banking until we had devised the perfect system for supervising it. The marketplace was moving, and we had to adjust our role to take account of that. The system we have developed in the banking arena is an evolutionary one, and one we will continue to work to improve. I know that you have been working hard at similar efforts in the insurance industry. I understand that here in Sante Fe, you have a number of important efforts underway, including proposals involving model laws that would govern Market Conduct Surveillance and Property and Casualty Insurance regulation. The institutions we supervise face the same challenges: competition on a growing number of fronts from unregulated entities, and consumers who are more sophisticated about choosing financial products. Regulated institutions must be allowed to respond to changes in the marketplace or they will not survive. Less-regulated institutions will prevail and in the process diminish the very protections that the regulations sought to preserve. At the same time, of course, we cannot forget that we are required by law to supervise the entities under our jurisdictions, to protect the public, and to preserve the strength of the financial system. To conclude, I will offer one final thought on the important subject of financial regulation and legislation. While we as regulators and legislators have the responsibility for setting and maintaining standards of safety and soundness for the benefit of consumers, we cannot ignore the power of market forces to cause the continual development of consumer financial products. Improvements in technology and consumer techno-literacy have prompted dramatic changes in all financial industries. Yet with all the changes we have seen, we are likely still in the early stages of realizing the full benefit of technological innovation. Our efforts as regulators and legislators will continue to be relevant only when they are consistent with these changing market forces.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced its approval of the application by S&T Bancorp, Inc., Indiana, Pennsylvania, to acquire up to 9.9 percent of the voting shares of IBT Bancorp, Inc., and thereby indirectly acquire an interest in Irwin Bank & Trust Company, both in Irwin, Pennsylvania. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday published proposed rules to establish more uniform standards for providing disclosures under five consumer protection regulations: B (Equal Credit Opportunity); E (Electronic Fund Transfers); M (Consumer Leasing); Z (Truth in Lending); and DD (Truth in Savings). Establishing a more uniform standard, and defining more specifically the standard for providing disclosures, is intended to help ensure that consumers receive noticeable and understandable information that is required by law in connection with obtaining consumer financial products and services. In addition, consistency among the regulations should facilitate compliance by institutions. Under most of the consumer financial services and fair lending laws administered by the Board, consumers must be provided with disclosures that are "clear and conspicuous." This standard is currently defined using similar but not identical language in the various regulations. The proposed rules provide a more specific definition for "clear and conspicuous" and include examples of how to meet the standard. The Board is also proposing additional amendments to Regulation Z and the staff commentary that interprets and implements the regulation. An interpretive rule of construction would be added to clarify that the word "amount" represents a numerical amount throughout Regulation Z. Proposed updates to the staff commentary provide guidance on consumers' exercise of rescission rights for certain home-secured loans. The proposal also includes several technical revisions to the staff commentary. The Board's Federal Register notices are attached. Comment on the proposed rules is requested by January 30, 2004.