Remarks by Governor Ben S. Bernanke Before the Money Marketeers of New York University, New York, New York February 3, 2003 "Constrained Discretion" and Monetary Policy What is the appropriate framework for making monetary policy? This crucial question has sparked lively debate for decades. For much of the period since World War II, at least until recently, the debate has been carried on mainly between those favoring the use of rules for making monetary policy and those arguing for reliance on discretion . Under a strict rules-based approach to monetary policy, advocated most prominently by Milton Friedman and his followers, the policy instruments of the central bank would be set according to some simple and publicly announced formula, with little or no scope for modification or discretionary action on the part of policymakers. For example, under Friedman's most famous proposal, the so-called k-percent rule (Friedman, 1960), the central bank would be charged with ensuring that some specified measure of the national money supply increase by a fixed percentage each year, irrespective of broader economic conditions. Friedman believed that such a rule would have the important advantage of preventing major monetary policy errors, as when the Federal Reserve permitted the U.S. money supply to collapse in the 1930s--a blunder that contributed substantially to the severity of the Great Depression. In addition, Friedman argued, a rule of this type would have the advantages of simplicity, predictability, and credibility, and it would help insulate monetary policy from outside political pressures and what Friedman saw as an inherent tendency toward excessive policy activism. Neither the k-percent rule nor any comparably strict policy rule has ever been implemented, but "rule-like" monetary policy arrangements have existed in the real world. An important example is the international gold standard, the dominant monetary system of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Under the gold standard, at least in principle, the central bank's responsibility regarding monetary policy extended only so far as ensuring that the value of the currency in terms of gold was stabilized at the legally specified value. In short, under a strict gold standard the monetary policy rule would be, "Maintain the price of gold at so many dollars per ounce." Although the gold standard system malfunctioned and ultimately collapsed during the chaotic economic and financial conditions that followed World War I, many economic historians have credited it with promoting price stability and robust international trade and capital flows during 1870-1913, the so-called classical gold standard era. Another example of a rule-like monetary policy institution is a currency board, such as the ones currently employed by Hong Kong and several eastern European nations. On the other side of the debate, advocates of discretion have firmly rejected the use of strict rules for policy, arguing that central bankers must be left free to set monetary policy as they see fit, based on their best judgment and the use of all relevant information. Supporters of discretion contend that policy rules of the type advocated by Friedman are simply too mechanical and inflexible for use in real world policymaking; in particular, simple rules cannot fully accommodate special circumstances or unanticipated events. During the past few decades, for example, financial innovation and new transactions technologies have led to large and difficult-to-predict changes in the empirical relationship between money growth and the rates of growth of output and prices. If central banks had slavishly followed Friedman's k-percent rule for money growth during this period, critics point out, substantial economic instability would have been the likely result; indeed, most central banks have de-emphasized money growth as a policy target or indicator in recent years. More generally, opponents of rules have argued that, as a practical matter, policymakers can never credibly commit to abandoning discretion in favor of supposedly "unbreakable" rules. The problem, this argument runs, is that the public will understand that the central bank always has the option of abandoning its rule, should the rule happen to dictate a policy action perceived at the time as counterproductive. Hence, an announcement by the central bank that it is adopting a strict policy rule would carry little credibility. Although a strict rules-based framework for monetary policy has evident drawbacks, notably its inflexibility in the face of unanticipated developments, supporters of rules in their turn have pointed out--with considerable justification--that the record of monetary policy under unfettered discretion is nothing to crow about. In the United States, the heyday of discretionary monetary policy can be dated as beginning in the early 1960s, a period of what now appears to have been substantial over-optimism about the ability of policymakers to "fine-tune" the economy. Contrary to the expectation of that era's economists and policymakers, however, the subsequent two decades were characterized not by an efficiently managed, smoothly running economic machine but by high and variable inflation and an unstable real economy, culminating in the deep 1981-82 recession. Although a number of factors contributed to the poor economic performance of this period, I think most economists would agree that the deficiencies of a purely discretionary approach to monetary policy--including over-optimism about the ability of policy to fine-tune the economy, low credibility, vulnerability to political pressures, short policy horizons, and insufficient appreciation of the costs of high inflation--played a central role. Is there then no middle ground for policymakers between the inflexibility of ironclad rules and the instability of unfettered discretion? My thesis today is that there is such a middle ground--an approach that I will refer to as constrained discretion --and that it is fast becoming the standard approach to monetary policy around the world, including in the United States. As I will explain, constrained discretion is an approach that allows monetary policymakers considerable leeway in responding to economic shocks, financial disturbances, and other unforeseen developments. Importantly, however, this discretion of policymakers is constrained by a strong commitment to keeping inflation low and stable. In practice, I will argue, this approach has allowed central banks to achieve better outcomes in terms of both inflation and unemployment, confounding the traditional view that policymakers must necessarily trade off between the important social goals of price stability and high employment. In the rest of my talk, I will first define constrained discretion more precisely and argue that, to an increasing extent, this approach characterizes contemporary Federal Reserve policymaking. I will then explain why I think constrained discretion is the best operating framework for monetary policy, and in particular why it constitutes the best approach for achieving the economic goals that the Congress has set for the Fed. Finally, I will briefly discuss the close relationship between constrained discretion and the strategy for monetary policy known as inflation targeting. Before proceeding, though, I should note that my remarks today do not necessarily represent the views of my colleagues on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee. What is constrained discretion? The approach to monetary policy that I call constrained discretion can be defined by two simple and parsimonious principles. First, through its words and (especially) its actions, the central bank must establish a strong commitment to keeping inflation low and stable . Second, subject to the condition that inflation be kept low and stable , and to the extent possible given our uncertainties about the structure of the economy and the effects of policy, monetary policy should strive to limit cyclical swings in resource utilization . In short, under constrained discretion, the central bank is free to do its best to stabilize output and employment in the face of short-run disturbances, with the appropriate caution born of our imperfect knowledge of the economy and of the effects of policy. However, a critical proviso is that, in conducting stabilization policy, the central bank must also maintain a strong commitment to keeping inflation--and, hence, public expectations of inflation--firmly under control. Because monetary policy influences inflation with a lag, keeping inflation under control may sometimes require the central bank to anticipate and move in advance of inflationary developments--that is, to engage in "preemptive strikes" on inflation. In my view, constrained discretion characterizes the current monetary policy framework of the United States. And it has done so to an increasing degree over time. First, since the Fed under Chairman Paul Volcker broke the back of inflation in the early 1980s, inflation in the United States has been both declining and becoming more stable. From a high of nearly 10 percent in 1980, inflation (as measured by the core PCE deflator, twelve-month rate of change) fell to 4 percent by the end of 1984 and to 3 percent by the end of 1992. Inflation breached the 2 percent barrier in the spring of 1996 and has remained consistently within the narrow range of 1.5 to 2 percent for the past six and a half years--for practical purposes, a good approximation to price stability. Likewise, expected inflation--as measured by financial-market indicators as well as surveys of both professional forecasters and consumers--has stabilized at a low level. Thus, the Fed in recent years has demonstrated a commitment to keeping inflation low and stable--the first principle of constrained discretion. The Fed's commitment to low inflation has not, however, prevented it from being flexible in implementing policy in the short term; in particular, the Fed has not been precluded from responding to adverse shocks to the economy (the second principle). Since the taming of inflation by the Volcker Fed, the United States has faced two recessions, in 1990-91 and in 2001. In both cases, as you know, the Fed eased policy significantly to support real activity. In particular, in 2001 the Federal Open Market Committee lowered the federal funds rate target by 475 basis points in a period of just under a year. Importantly, inflation and inflation expectations seem to have been virtually unaffected by this large move--a direct benefit, I argue, of the Fed's previous investment in establishing a commitment to price stability. Moreover, both output and employment have become considerably more stable in the past twenty years, relative to previous decades--a result I attribute in substantial part to improvements in monetary policy. The Fed has also responded aggressively and flexibly to crisis conditions in financial markets, in episodes ranging from the 1987 stock market crash to the 1998 Russian crisis to the aftermath of the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. In the United States, the Congress has assigned to the Federal Reserve the objectives of maintaining price stability, maximum employment, and moderate long-term nominal interest rates. Of course, the Federal Reserve System, and in particular the Federal Open Market Committee, treats each part of this congressional mandate with utmost seriousness. Because the Fed appears to an increasing degree to be following a policy of what I have called constrained discretion, one must ask: Is this policy approach consistent with the Congress's mandate for monetary policy? My answer is absolutely yes. In my view, this policy framework achieves each of the goals set by the Congress with greater consistency and effectiveness than any alternative of which I am aware. Broadly, there are three reasons why successful monetary policy is built on a foundation of price stability, as implied by the framework of constrained discretion. First, of course, price stability is one of the objectives for monetary policy set by the Congress and, indeed, is highly desirable in its own right. And, of course, the price level is the macroeconomic variable over which a central bank exerts the most direct control in the long run. Second, in the long run price stability promotes high employment and low nominal interest rates--the other objectives set by the Congress--as well as productivity and economic growth. Third, and most subtly, in the short run a record of consistently low inflation increases central bank credibility and stabilizes inflation expectations, effects that in turn actually increase the flexibility of the central bank to respond to shocks to the economy. I will discuss each of these points, beginning with the importance of price stability in the long run and then turning to the short-run issues. Price stability and economic performance in the long run Constrained discretion, at its foundation, recognizes the critical importance of maintaining price stability, both in the long run and in the short run. The desirability of maintaining price stability in the long run is by now hardly a matter for dispute, with virtually all economists in agreement that, in the long run, low inflation confers many benefits on the economy. Most fundamentally, only when inflation is low do nominal--that is, dollar--values provide a reasonably stable measure of real economic values. We should not underestimate the importance of this simple point. Although economists are used to the idea of "real" or inflation-adjusted quantities, making inflation adjustments in practice requires significant information, expertise, and effort. Thus, instability in the price level significantly impedes the ability of the typical household to make long-term financial plans, for example, or to compare prices of goods and services separated in space and time. (In a high-inflation economy, price information grows "stale" more quickly than newly baked bread.) Planning, investment, and pricing decisions by firms are likewise complicated and often distorted by inflation. Because prices constitute the market economy's fundamental means of conveying information, the increased "noise" that inflation adds to prices raises transactions costs and erodes the efficiency of the free market system. In a similar vein, as economist Martin Feldstein has frequently pointed out, price stability permits contracts, tax laws, accounting rules, and the like to be expressed in nominal (dollar) terms without concern about fluctuations in the value of money. If prices are instead variable and unpredictable, then contracts or laws written in dollar terms will produce unintended and probably undesired economic outcomes. Feldstein, for example, has emphasized how the interaction of inflation with the tax code leads to unintended increases in the real cost of capital, which inhibit investment and reduce economic growth. Likewise, because debt contracts are written in nominal terms, unanticipated inflation transfers wealth from creditors to debtors, adding to the risk of financial contracting and at times posing a significant threat to the financial system itself. For example, the savings and loan crisis of the 1980s, which cost U.S. taxpayers hundreds of billions of dollars, was to a substantial extent the result of the unexpected inflation of the 1970s, which greatly reduced the real value of mortgage loans made by the S&Ls in an earlier, low-inflation era. These losses effectively de-capitalized the savings and loans, setting the stage for the problems that followed. Given the Congress's mandate to the Federal Reserve, the long-run relationship between price stability and employment is an issue of particular importance. Our understanding of this relationship has evolved considerably over the past forty years. During the 1960s, U.S. policymakers appeared to believe that a long-run tradeoff between these two objectives existed and that that tradeoff could be exploited for policy purposes (Samuelson and Solow, 1960). That is, it was thought that by accepting a modest increase in the inflation rate, policy could achieve a permanently lower rate of unemployment. Both economic theory and U.S. economic experience have shown this view to have been in error, and that no long-run tradeoff between inflation and unemployment exists is now widely accepted. Indeed, because price stability promotes efficiency, productivity, and capital investment, one can reasonably presume that low inflation actually increases employment and real wages in the long run. Because price stability also promotes moderate long-term nominal interest rates, a commitment to price stability clearly is fully consistent in the long run with the objectives set by the Congress. Price stability and economic performance in the short run That price stability is beneficial to the economy in the long run is well established. As economists and policymakers have increasingly come to recognize, however, the benefits of a commitment to price stability in the short run are probably at least as significant. I think it worthwhile, before discussing the short-run benefits of price stability for the economy, to note the simple fact that, historically, periods of unstable prices have also tended to be periods of marked instability in output and employment. In the nine decades since the founding of the Federal Reserve System, the United States has experienced two large, sustained departures from price stability. The first was the precipitous deflation of 1929-33, during which prices fell at a rate of about 10 percent per year; the second was the prolonged inflationary period that began in the latter part of the 1960s and did not end until the early 1980s. Of course, each of these episodes was associated not only with instability of prices but also with exceptionally poor economic performance more generally. The 1929-33 deflation ushered in, and to a significant extent was the cause of, the broad economic collapse we now know as the Great Depression. The inflation that began in the United States in the second half of the 1960s was associated with slow growth, bouts of high unemployment, and instability in economic activity, including the two worst recessions of the postwar period in 1973-75 and 1981-82. What is the link between price instability and instability in output and employment in the short run? In a previous talk I focused on the risks, so evident in the 1930s, that uncontrolled deflation poses for the economy, and I doubt that many of my listeners today will require much convincing on that point. So that no misunderstanding occurs, however, let me state clearly that the commitment to price stability under constrained discretion entails strict avoidance of deflation as well as of inflation . That said, I will concentrate for the remainder of the talk on the risks that inflation creates for economic stability in the short run. For illustration, I will emphasize the U.S. "Great Inflation," the experience of the late 1960s through the early 1980s. The primary cause of the Great Inflation, most economists would agree, was over-expansionary monetary and fiscal policies, beginning in the mid-1960s and continuing, in fits and starts, well into the 1970s. The fiscal expansion of this period had a variety of elements, including heavy expenditures for the Vietnam War and President Johnson's Great Society initiatives. Monetary policy first accommodated the fiscal expansion, and then--for reasons I will note--began to power the inflationary surge on its own. The breakdown of the price stability that had characterized the 1950s and early 1960s was remarkably quick; inflation was perceived as a problem by the late sixties. Though temporarily restrained by the Nixon price controls, inflation (again as measured by the core PCE deflator) rose from 2.6 percent in February 1973 to 9.8 percent in February 1975. After the deep 1973-75 recession, inflation fell back to the range of 6 to 7 percent for several years before rising again to 9.8 percent in September 1980. Like inflation, the real economy was also highly volatile during this whole period. The civilian unemployment rate, below 4 percent throughout the second half of the 1960s, rose above 6 percent during the 1969-70 recession, declined briefly, then rose again to 9 percent in May 1975. Unemployment declined slowly from there, falling below 6 percent only in late 1978 and early 1979. But during the 1981-82 recession, unemployment peaked at 10.8 percent--a rate not seen since the 1930s--and remained above 10 percent as late as June 1983. Taking the inflation and unemployment performance together, one should not be surprised that a recent chronicler of the period called the Great Inflation the 1970s "the greatest failure of American macroeconomic policy in the postwar period" (Mayer, 1998, p. 1). Why was this episode so dismal? Critically, although Fed officials often mentioned the importance of keeping inflation low during the 1960s and 1970s, the record of inflation outcomes during that period shows that their commitment to maintaining price stability was spotty. Several factors contributed to the Federal Reserve's inflationary policies, including the political pressures exerted by the Johnson and Nixon administrations (Mayer, 1998, chapter 5). Mistakes of analysis--among them a tendency to blame nonpolicy factors (such as union wage pressures) for inflation, a misplaced belief in the potential efficacy of wage-price controls, and overly optimistic assessments of the economy's growth potential in both the 1960s (DeLong, 1997; Romer and Romer, 2002) and early 1970s (Orphanides, 2001)--also played a key role. Yet another miscalculation, particularly important in the early stages of the Great Inflation, was the already-mentioned idea of an exploitable long-run tradeoff, according to which policymakers supposedly would be able to achieve permanently lower unemployment by accepting a bit more inflation. Indeed, initially the tradeoff idea appeared to be valid, for unemployment fell while inflation rose only moderately during the latter part of the 1960s. However, as we now understand, in this early period the Fed was living off the capital of two previous decades of price stability, which had conditioned the public to expect low inflation. Because the period began with expected inflation under control, monetary expansion in the latter part of the 1960s stimulated real spending and production without leading immediately to wage and price pressures. As the public woke up to the new reality of high and rising inflation, however, inflation expectations began to rise as well. Within a few years, the Federal Reserve found itself in a situation in which inflation and inflation expectations had risen considerably, while the earlier gains in terms of lower unemployment and higher growth had dissipated. The high and erratic inflation of this period contributed to instability of output and employment in a number of ways. I will highlight two. First was the pattern of go-stop policies followed by the Fed. The Fed understood in principle that stabilizing inflation and inflation expectations was important, but--knowing that a slowdown in spending and output (of a magnitude difficult to guess) would be an unwelcome side effect--it was extremely reluctant to tighten monetary policy enough to do the job. The resulting compromise has been appropriately described as "go-stop" policy. First, over-expansion led to inflation, the "go" phase. Then, periodically, when inflation became bad enough, the Fed would tighten policy (the "stop" phase), only to loosen again when the resulting slowdown in the economy began to manifest itself. The net result of this policy pattern was to exacerbate greatly the instability of both inflation and unemployment, while making little progress toward restoring price stability or re-anchoring inflation expectations. This cycle ended only under Chairman Volcker, who (together with his colleagues on the FOMC) had the courage to keep policy tight until inflation and inflation expectations finally began to stabilize in the early 1980s. Of course, the cost of this critical stabilization was the high unemployment and lost output associated with the sharp 1981-82 recession. The second link between the instability of inflation and that of unemployment in the Great Inflation operated through the behavior of inflation expectations . As I have noted, when the episode began in the 1960s, inflation expectations were well anchored, in the sense that the public was conditioned by long experience to expect low inflation. Hence, the first expansionary policy moves of the 1960s did succeed in raising output and employment without much initial effect on prices. As demand pressures accumulated and inflation rose, however, the Fed's credibility as an inflation-fighter was lost and inflation expectations began to rise. The unmooring of inflation expectations greatly complicated the process of making monetary policy; in particular, the Fed's loss of credibility significantly increased the cost of achieving disinflation. The severity of the 1981-82 recession, the worst of the postwar period, clearly illustrates the danger of letting inflation get out of control. This recession was so exceptionally deep precisely because of the monetary policies of the preceding fifteen years, which had unanchored inflation expectations and squandered the Fed's credibility. Because inflation and inflation expectations remained stubbornly high when the Fed tightened, the impact of rising interest rates was felt primarily on output and employment rather than on prices, which continued to rise. One indication of the loss of credibility suffered by the Fed by the time of the 1981-82 episode, and the difficulty of getting it back once lost, was the behavior of long-term nominal interest rates. For example, the yield on 10-year Treasuries peaked at 15.3 percent in September 1981--almost two years after Volcker's Fed announced its disinflationary program in October 1979--suggesting that long-term inflation expectations were at that point still in the double digits. The 10-year Treasury yield did not fall below 10 percent until November 1985. Remarkably, 30-year Treasury yields were only slightly lower than 10-year yields throughout the episode, implying that the markets had no confidence that inflation would ever return to 1950s or 1960s levels. The behavior of long-term nominal interest rates in the early 1980s can be contrasted with that of more recent years. Today the 10-year Treasury yield is approximately 4 percent, suggesting substantial confidence on the part of financial market practitioners that inflation will remain low for the next decade. Indeed, we have the benefit of a developed market for indexed debt to make that inference more precise: The expected inflation rate inferred from the yield on 10-year inflation-protected Treasury bonds is now about 2.0 percent for CPI inflation. Also notable is the fact that the substantial easing of monetary policy during 2001 appeared to generate no concerns about future inflation, as evidenced by the record low long-term interest rates and stable survey-based inflation expectations that we are still seeing. You may have noticed that I have discussed the Great Inflation of the 1970s with an emphasis on Federal Reserve behavior but without mentioning oil prices. My reading of the evidence suggests that the role the conventional wisdom has attributed to oil price increases in the stagflation of the 1970s has been overstated, for two reasons. First, the large increases in oil prices that occurred in this period would not have been possible in an environment that was not already highly inflationary because of previous monetary expansion. In an important paper, Barsky and Kilian (2001) make this case in some detail. They note, for example, that prices of other industrial commodities and raw materials rose substantially at the same time as oil prices, suggesting that broader monetary forces--and not factors specific to the oil market--account for much of the rise in the oil price in 1973. Second, without Fed accommodation, higher oil prices abroad would not have translated into domestic inflation to any significant degree. To see this point, note that oil prices do not directly affect the measure of inflation that I have been using here--the change in the core PCE deflator, which excludes energy prices. Thus, any link of oil prices to inflation must be through so-called second-round effects, in which increased fuel prices push up wages and other costs. Comparison of the 1970s and the 1990s confirms the common finding in the literature that the degree of "pass-through" to core inflation from supply shocks, such as a rise in oil prices or a depreciation of the exchange rate, depends strongly on how well domestic expectations of inflation are anchored. Because inflation expectations were not well anchored in the 1970s, the oil price shocks were in fact associated with substantial pass-through, that is, increases in core inflation. As already noted, core PCE inflation rose by a whopping 7 percentage points in the years 1973-74, the period of the sharpest increase in oil prices. In the 1990s, by contrast, oil price changes seemed to have no noticeable effect on core inflation. For example, the price of oil at the end of 1998 was a little more than $11 per barrel; over the next two years the price of oil tripled, exceeding $34 per barrel late in 2000. Then, over the subsequent year, the price of oil suddenly reversed itself, dropping 40 percent. Despite these gyrations, core inflation remained firmly anchored throughout the period, registering between 1.5 percent and 2.0 percent on a twelve-month basis in every month. Although structural changes have occurred in the economy since the 1970s, including increased energy efficiency, this difference in the degree of pass-through from oil prices to general inflation can be explained, in my view, only by differences in the stability of inflation and inflation expectations. Overall, it is reasonable to conclude that macro policy, particularly monetary policy, was the most important single reason for the poor economic performance experienced during the U.S. Great Inflation. Constrained discretion and inflation targeting I mentioned at the beginning of the talk that constrained discretion characterizes at least to some degree the policy approach of many of the major central banks around the world. It is, in fact, closely related to the policy framework known as inflation targeting. Let me take a moment to explain the relationship between what I have termed "constrained discretion" and the more familiar concept of inflation targeting. It is useful, I think, to divide monetary policymaking into two parts--roughly, what you do and what you say about it. "What you do" covers the operational aspects of policy--the assessment of economic conditions and the setting of policy instruments (such as the federal funds rate in the United States). "What you say" is about how you talk to the public and relates to the issues of central bank transparency, communication, and accountability. "What you do" is certainly the more important of the two, though I think most central bankers understand that communication is a valuable tool. The details of inflation-targeting regimes vary by country and have evolved over time. Broadly speaking, however, the operational, or "what you do," side of what I consider to be best-practice inflation targeting is well described as constrained discretion, as I have characterized it here. Specifically, most inflation-targeting central banks try to stabilize output and employment subject to the constraint that inflation remain low and stable--in the case of formal inflation targeters, of course, within the declared target range for inflation. As I have noted, constrained discretion also describes reasonably well the recent policy approach of the Federal Reserve, though of course the Fed does not have publicly announced inflation targets. Thus, on the operational side, the policy frameworks of the Federal Reserve and of the leading central banks with formal inflation targets are today rather similar. The second element of inflation targeting--the communication, or "what you say," side--consists of not only a public announcement of a target range for inflation (the hallmark of inflation targeting) but also a variety of other mechanisms for talking to markets and the public. These include the regular publication of so-called Inflation Reports, release of forecasts, prompt release of minutes, and other measures. Here is the principal area in which the Federal Reserve--though it has certainly become markedly more transparent in the past decade--has not chosen to adopt the whole framework of inflation targeting. Many have concluded that central banks that have adopted the transparency and communication aspects of inflation targeting have strengthened their overall policy performance--through enhanced communication to the public of their objectives and plans, improved management of expectations, greater consistency of policy, and heightened accountability. The Fed has much in common with other major central banks, but of course it also differs in important ways, including its history, legal framework, and institutional structure. Whether adopting any or all of these communication strategies would be useful for the Federal Reserve is an important issue about which I hope to say more in the future. Conclusion My objective today has been to lay out the advantages of using a framework of constrained discretion for making monetary policy. The essence of constrained discretion is the central role of a commitment to price stability. Not only does such a commitment enhance efficiency, employment, and economic growth in the long run , but--by providing an anchor for inflation expectations--it also improves the ability of central banks to stabilize the real economy in the short run as well. An important and interesting implication is that, under a properly designed and implemented monetary policy regime, the key social objectives of price stability and maximum employment tend to be mutually reinforcing rather than competing goals. Thank you very much for your attention. Endnotes The Bank of England's capable "management" of the pre-war gold standard was an important element in its success; after the war, Great Britain no longer had the economic and financial power needed to occupy a central position in the world monetary system. Proponents of discretion do not necessarily reject the use of "rules" or formulas--such as the famous Taylor rule (Taylor, 1993)--as rough guides to policy, so long as policymakers remain free to deviate from the rule as they see fit. John Taylor himself advocates using his eponymous rule in this way. For example, even the classical gold standard contained important elements of discretion in practice, as when countries took measures to prevent their domestic money supplies from being influenced by international gold flows. Moreover, the gold standard often was suspended during wars or national emergencies. To the best of my knowledge, this term was first used in connection with monetary policy by Bernanke and Mishkin (1997). Throughout this talk I follow a common Fed practice in using the core personal consumption expenditure (PCE) deflator to measure inflation. Relative to the more familiar consumer price index (CPI), the PCE deflator (1) has broader coverage, (2) is believed to be based on more accurate expenditure weights, (3) is constructed in a manner that reduces so-called substitution bias, (4) is measured more consistently over time, and (5) arguably does a better job measuring medical inflation. The core PCE deflator excludes volatile components, notably the prices of food and energy. Core inflation measures in general are probably better indicators of the underlying rate of inflation, with which central banks are typically most concerned. Standard inflation measures probably overstate increases in true inflation by about 1.0 percentage point. For example, Lebow and Rudd (2002) estimate that measured inflation using the consumer price index overstates the actual change in the cost of living by about 0.9 percentage points per year, with a confidence interval ranging from 0.3 percentage point to l.4 percentage points per year. (The bias in the PCE deflator, which is chain-weighted, may be a bit less.) In addition, as I discussed in a previous talk, aiming for an inflation rate modestly above zero provides a useful buffer against deflation risk. Stock and Watson (2002) note that the standard deviation of annual growth rates in real GDP fell from 2.7 percent during 1960-83 to only 1.6 percent in 1984-2001. They attribute 20 to 30 percent of this reduction in volatility to improvements in monetary policy. Arguably, however, stabilizing factors that Stock and Watson treat as exogenous, such as the reduced variability of commodity prices (other than oil), are actually in part the result of more stable policies. See Feldstein (1997) and references therein. In principle, indexation to the price level could remove or moderate the unanticipated consequences of inflation in laws and contracts. In practice, however, indexation can be costly and complex, as suggested by the fact that people seem reluctant to adopt indexation even when inflation is relatively high. The shortcomings of indexation as a solution to high inflation have been illustrated by the experience of many developing countries in recent years. See "Deflation: Making Sure that 'It' Doesn't Happen Here", November 21, 2002, . Romer and Romer (2002) make this argument and provide historical documentation. See also Taylor (1997) and Mayer (1998). In an important paper, Orphanides and Williams (2003) use a theoretical model to show that when the public forms its expectations of inflation behavior by observing the actual behavior of inflation, the importance of the central bank keeping inflation low and stable--and thereby "anchoring" the public's inflation expectations--is greatly increased. In related work, Bohi (1989) and Bernanke, Gertler, and Watson (1997) provide evidence that macroeconomic policy, rather than the behavior of oil prices, was the most important source of macroeconomic instability in the 1970s. In a study of OECD countries, Ball and Sheridan (2003) find that the effect of commodity price shocks on inflation in recent years has dropped by a factor of ten, relative to earlier decades. The Federal Reserve has a dual mandate, with responsibility for both employment and inflation. The formal mandates for inflation-targeting central banks vary, but in practice virtually all take employment and output into consideration as well as prices--that is, they practice what is sometimes referred to as "flexible" inflation targeting. Among the steps taken by the Federal Reserve to increase transparency in recent years include immediate announcement of changes in the target for the policy rate, the issuance of a "balance of risks" statement, and the publication of minutes and (with a five-year lag) the transcripts of each FOMC meeting. Case studies of several inflation-targeting central banks are presented in Bernanke, Laubach, Mishkin, and Posen (1999). Ball and Sheridan (2003) find that there has been substantial improvement in monetary-policy outcomes in OECD countries generally in the 1990s, a result that can reasonably be attributed to widespread adoption of what I have here referred to as constrained discretion. Ball and Sheridan also find that inflation-targeters improved by somewhat more than non-inflation-targeters, but they attribute this finding to the phenomenon of "regression toward the mean" rather than to any benefits of formal inflation-targeting per se. REFERENCES Ball, Laurence, and Niamh Sheridan (2003). "Does Inflation Targeting Matter?", preliminary manuscript, Johns Hopkins University, January. Barsky, Robert, and Lutz Kilian (2001). "Do We Really Know That Oil Caused the Great Stagflation? A Monetary Alternative", in B. S. Bernanke and K. Rogoff, eds., Macroeconomics Annual , Cambridge Mass.: MIT Press for NBER, pp. 137-82. Bernanke, Ben, Mark Gertler, and Mark Watson (1997). "Systematic Monetary Policy and the Effects of Oil Price Shocks," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity , vol. 1, pp. 91-142. Bernanke, Ben, Thomas Laubach, Frederic Mishkin, and Adam Posen (1999). Inflation Targeting: Lessons from the International Experience , Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press. Bernanke, Ben, and Frederic Mishkin (1997). "Inflation Targeting: A New Framework for Monetary Policy?" Journal of Economic Perspectives , vol. 11 (Spring), pp. 97-116. Bohi, Douglas (1989). Energy Price Shocks and Macroeconomic Performance , Washington DC: Resources for the Future. DeLong, J. Bradford (1997). "America's Peacetime Inflation: The 1970s," in C.D. Romer and D. H. Romer, eds., Reducing Inflation: Motivation and Strategy , Chicago: University of Chicago Press for NBER, pp. 247-75. Feldstein, Martin (1997). "The Costs and Benefits of Going from Low Inflation to Price Stability", in C. D. Romer and D. H. Romer, eds., Reducing Inflation: Motivation and Stategy , Chicago: University of Chicago Press for NBER, pp. 123-56. Friedman, Milton (1960). A Program for Monetary Stability , New York: Fordham University Press. Lebow, David, and Jeremy Rudd (2002). "Measurement Error in the Consumer Price Index: Where Do We Stand?", working paper, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October. Mayer, Thomas (1998). Monetary Policy and the Great Inflation in the United States: The Federal Reserve and the Failure of Macroeconomic Policy, 1965-79 , Cheltenham, U.K.: Edward Elgar. Orphanides, Athanasios (2001). "Monetary Policy Rules, Macroeconomic Stability, and Inflation: A View from the Trenches", Finance and Economic Discussion Series number 2001-63, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, December. Orphanides, Athanasios, and John Williams (2003). "Imperfect Knowledge, Inflation Expectations, and Monetary Policy," working paper, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January. Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer (2002). "The Evolution of Economic Understanding and Postwar Stabilization Policy", National Bureau of Economic Research working paper no. 9274, October. Samuelson, Paul, and Robert Solow (1960). "Analytical Aspects of Anti-Inflation Policy", American Economic Review (May), pp. 185-97. Stock, James, and Mark Watson (2002). "Has the Business Cycle Changed and Why?" National Bureau of Economic Research working paper no. 9127, September. Taylor, John (1993). "Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice", Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 39 (December), pp. 195-214. Taylor, John (1997). "Comment", in C.D. Romer and D. H. Romer, eds., Reducing Inflation: Motivation and Strategy , Chicago: University of Chicago Press for NBER, pp. 276-80.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Premier Financial Bancorp, Inc., Huntington, West Virginia, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
Remarks by Vice Chairman Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. At Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee February 5, 2003 September 11, the Federal Reserve, and the Financial System Thank you for the invitation to speak, and thank you all for being here. Certainly most of you have heard of the Federal Reserve and understand that it plays a role in the maintenance of our domestic economy. But that is not what I am here to discuss. I was invited here to speak to you about the actions of the Federal Reserve after the terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001. As the central bank of the United States, the Federal Reserve seeks to establish through the implementation of monetary policy, an economic environment that encourages stable prices over time, a high level of employment, and moderate long-term interest rates. Additionally, the Fed shares, with a few other regulatory bodies, the duty of overseeing the banking industry. In a broader context, the Federal Reserve also shares the responsibility of maintaining the stability of the financial system and containing systemic risks that may arise in financial markets. And in carrying out that responsibility, we have never been confronted with a situation remotely resembling the grave reality of September 11, 2001. On that morning, sitting in my office in Washington, I watched television with horror as the second plane crashed into the World Trade Center. Not long after, I could see thick smoke billowing above the trees in the direction of the Pentagon. As events were unfolding, one could easily envision the risks that confronted the United States--and especially the risks to which the Federal Reserve, as the nation's central bank, would have to respond. It was clear that the loss of so many key resources at the core of the financial capital of the United States would strain markets. If allowed to mount, those strains could prompt a chain reaction drying up liquidity, which, unchecked, could lead to real economic activity seizing-up. The shocks to the financial system and the economy that were possible could have been disastrous to the confidence of businesses and households in our country and, to a significant degree, the rest of the world. Besides these very visible external risks, the Federal Reserve System had to cope effectively in a threatening environment. The employees of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, being a few blocks away from "ground zero," had the exceedingly difficult challenge of maintaining operations in the midst of terrifying and chaotic surroundings. All parts of the Fed System, wherever located, faced the challenge of maintaining ongoing operations, including discount window lending and check clearing, in the period of heightened uncertainty that followed those horrific attacks. In short, on the morning of September 11, the Fed, as monetary authority, as payment system operator, as banking supervisor, and as employer, faced an unfolding crisis, and the risks were all to the downside. The outlook was at best uncertain, and potentially quite bleak. Against this background, the Federal Reserve System organized a response that emphasized three objectives. First, as central bank we needed to provide sufficient liquidity through as many means as possible to maintain stability. In doing so, we would further our obligation to the broader citizenry to maintain public confidence so that the crisis in New York and Washington, D.C. would not spread across the country. Second, as operator and overseer of key payment systems we had to ensure that our systems, as well as those in the private sector, were operational. Third, we worked with critical public- and private-sector participants to keep markets open or, if circumstances forced them to close, to return them quickly to normal operations. Obviously, we had to balance the need to perform these public functions with the need to be a sensitive and responsible employer. Recognizing these multiple challenges, we responded in several ways. We attempted to maintain confidence by indicating through our public statement that the Federal Reserve was open and operating and that we were ready to provide liquidity. We issued this statement after consultation with the Reserve Bank presidents, so that it represented a statement of the entire System. Why were we so concerned about maintaining liquidity in the financial system? Liquidity, as you know, serves as the oil lubricating the engine of capitalism to keep it from burning itself out. The efficiency of our financial system at maintaining adequate liquidity is often taken for granted. But on September 11, it could not be taken for granted. The bottlenecks in the pipeline became so severe that the Federal Reserve stepped in to ensure that the financial system remained adequately liquid. In other words, our massive provision of reserves made sure that the engine of finance did not run out of oil and seize up. The massive damage to property and communications systems at the hub of financial activity in this country made it more difficult, and in some cases impossible, for many banks to execute payments to one another. The failure of some banks to make payments also disrupted the payments coordination by which banks use incoming payments to fund their own transfers to other banks. Once a number of banks began to be short of incoming payments, some became more reluctant to send out payments themselves. In effect, banks were collectively growing short of liquidity. We recognized this disturbing trend toward illiquidity in the pattern of funds movement among the accounts held by commercial banks at the Federal Reserve. Before September 11, banks held approximately $13 billion in their Fed accounts. In the days after September 11, these balances ballooned to more than $120 billion because some banks could not move funds out of their accounts. The large buildup of Federal Reserve account balances was limited to only a few banks, but it meant that a number of other banks were running huge negative positions in their Federal Reserve accounts and needed to find other sources of liquidity before the close of business. Further evidence of disruption in the flow of payments among banks at this time is quite clear from data for the Federal Reserve's large-value electronic payment system, known as Fedwire. Banks use Fedwire to make payments to one another to settle their customers' as well as their own transactions. Just before September 11, the number of transfers sent over Fedwire on a normal day was around 430,000, with a total value of $1.6 trillion. On September 11, the number of transfers was down more than 40 percent, with fewer than 250,000 transfers being sent over Fedwire, and the total value was down 25 percent. If liquidity had continued to dry up, both business and consumer confidence could have been severely affected. Imagine businesses unable to promptly withdraw funds from checks deposited in their banks, even though those checks paid for goods or services already provided. Imagine international banks running out of dollars, a serious impediment to international trade and finance. As we know now, the situation never reached those extreme conditions because, fortunately, the Federal Reserve System has numerous means providing liquidity. One tool used to provide needed liquidity was the discount window, through which the Fed lends in certain circumstances to help banks maintain smooth day-to-day operations. In essence, in more normal times the discount window serves a function similar to that of a pressure valve. During the crisis, as the volume of borrowing requests increased dramatically, the discount window served as something closer to the floodgates of a great dam. On September 12, lending to banks through the discount window totaled about $46 billion, more than two hundred times the daily average for the previous month. The flood of funds released into the banking system reduced the immediate need for banks to rely on payments from other banks to make the payments they themselves owed others. Open market operations were a second tool at our disposal for pumping additional liquidity into the system. Indeed, as you may know, open market operations are the chief tool employed by the Federal Reserve to affect the global supply of dollars in circulation. In these operations, our trading desk at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York enters the market daily to buy or sell Treasury securities. Contrary to one of the early fears, most of our counterparties in these transactions, the community of primary dealers, were generally functioning starting on September 12. Our trading desk in New York met all propositions at the intended funds rate from September 12 through September 17, and the System engaged in a record level of open market operations through overnight repurchase agreements. To accommodate these demands, the trading desk operated later in the day than normal, giving dealers an opportunity to assess their financing needs. Also, the Fed's securities lending program expanded its provision of securities to the marketplace, and those securities in turn could be used as the collateral for private-sector liquidity arrangements. The staff of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, having evacuated its main site and gone to its backup facility, performed heroically in running the open market operations. Despite the increased liquidity resulting from discount window lending and open market operations, some institutions still had difficulty exchanging payments and lending or borrowing funds because of connectivity problems and the closure of key markets. As a result, many depository institutions incurred larger-than-usual daylight overdrafts on their accounts at the Federal Reserve. To help in this situation, the Federal Reserve waived the overdraft fees it normally charges. Between September 11 and September 21, peak and average daylight overdrafts incurred by depository institutions were approximately 35 percent and 30 percent higher than normal levels, respectively. On September 14, daylight overdrafts peaked at $150 billion, more than 60 percent higher than usual, despite Federal Reserve opening account balances of slightly more than $120 billion. The destruction of infrastructure in Lower Manhattan meant that some foreign financial institutions might not be able to provide sufficient collateral to underpin funding from their usual counterparties and correspondent banks. These foreign firms turned to their national central banks for dollar-based liquidity. The Federal Reserve arranged for the availability of reciprocal currency facilities of up to $50 billion with the European Central Bank and $30 billion with the Bank of England, both in the form of thirty-day swaps. We also lifted the ceiling of a preexisting swap with the Bank of Canada to $10 billion. The Federal Reserve's role as a provider of check collection services presented another opportunity for providing liquidity. Check collection relies on a fleet of airplanes to fly checks all around the country so that the checks can be presented to their home bank for payment. Though U.S. airspace was closed for several days after the attacks, the Federal Reserve Banks continued to provide credit for checks on the usual availability schedules. This accommodation allowed businesses and consumers that depended on the prompt availability of their check deposits to withdraw the proceeds of these check deposits as they expected. With other regulators and supervisors, the Federal Reserve issued a statement on Friday, September 14, encouraging state member banks and bank holding companies to work with customers affected by the events of September 11. The Board has a long-standing policy of encouraging bankers to work flexibly with customers affected by disasters. That policy recognizes the need for taking prudent steps to make credit available to sound borrowers and for adjusting terms and conditions of loans and transactions to take account of the stresses during a crisis. I am sure that several Reserve Bank Presidents and Directors of Supervision communicated this message directly to commercial bankers in their Districts. We also recognized that the banks' balance sheets might expand as businesses and consumers turned to banks for funding. Through an interagency statement, we invited banks that experienced such an expansion of their balance sheets to contact their regulator to discuss ways to respond. Ultimately, to further increase liquidity, on the morning of September 17, the policymaking body of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Open Market Committee, met by teleconference and then publicly announced a 50 basis point decrease in the intended federal funds rate from 3.5 percent to 3.0 percent. The Federal Reserve also worked with other regulators through the President's Working Group on Financial Markets to monitor developments in financial markets. As you know, the government securities market postponed settlements for a few days, the commercial paper market experienced significant problems, and the New York Stock Exchange remained closed until September 17. We supported fully restoring financial markets to normal operations as soon as practical. However, in working with the Securities and Exchange Commission, the Department of the Treasury, market participants, and other stakeholders to reopen these markets, we had to balance the benefit of a prompt return to business against the risk that the supporting infrastructure would be unable to handle what would certainly be a record volume of trades. Paramount in that consideration was the safety of the men and women working in Lower Manhattan. The SEC and the New York Federal Reserve Bank, along with the leaders in these various markets, deserve a great deal of credit for ably managing the process of reopening, making judgments that allowed all markets to return to normal functioning quickly and effectively. As I look back, I am comforted that the financial and monetary effects of the horrible and tragic events on that day were less severe than one might have imagined. The aftershocks were less sizable than one might have feared they might be, largely because of the action taken by major market participants and the regulatory community, including the Federal Reserve System. The incidents of September 11 taught us many lessons relating to central banking and financial stability. First and foremost, they reinforced the importance of the Federal Reserve's role as lender of last resort. Second, we again saw that the multiple roles the Federal Reserve plays--in this instance, central bank, supervisor and regulator, and payment systems operator--give us many tools to apply during a crisis. While I have been a member of the Board, I have from time to time heard some question the wisdom of our central bank's being involved in supervision and regulation and continuing to provide payment services, particularly retail payment services. To my mind the events of September 11 should put such question to rest. From our experience, we should recognize the benefits of a central bank that can influence the economy and enhance financial stability through several mutually reinforcing tools. A third lesson is that having diversified forms of risk intermediation makes the financial system more robust. In this instance, having markets and banks that performed similar financial intermediation roles accounted for much of our financial system's ability to withstand the shock of September 11. Fourth, the attacks remind us that operational risk, which is hard to quantify with any model, may at times be the paramount risk. We recognized this in the abstract in our planning for the Y2K century-date change. Now we have seen the real results of a massive disruption in infrastructure. Fortunately, the preparations for Y2K helped the financial system of our country withstand the September 11 crisis. Even now, financial institutions are working hard to update their contingency plans on the basis of a new understanding of the risks that confront our country. Having layers of redundancy, each calibrated to a different level of emergency need, is one potentially successful strategy. A fifth lesson is the importance of ongoing communication and, when required, coordination among domestic authorities and across borders. The ability to communicate seamlessly with other members of the President's Working Group and with fellow central bankers, in both cases on the basis of trust developed in the course of pre-existing relationships, proved to be very helpful. Obviously, even without those well-established relationships, we would still have reached decisions. The decisions may not have come as quickly nor been as well informed, however. The amount of trust needed to successfully coordinate in the midst of stressful situations is high, and coordinating with familiar colleagues is much easier than working with relative strangers. Finally, in the wake of those events, we must address the possibility of major disruptions in areas in which financial markets or operational centers are concentrated. We will not accomplish our task if one or two organizations strengthen their resilience and others do not. Instead, we need to work hard to adopt consistent strategies for reducing risks that together address prevention, management, and testing. In conclusion, I must admit that the farther we move away in time from the tragic events of September 11, 2001, the more the lessons come into focus. We in the United States are very fortunate to have created, through the efforts of private industry at times pushed by regulators, the most robust, most efficient financial system in the world. But at the same time, it is clear that the events should remind us to redouble our efforts to make our financial system even stronger. It has been a pleasure to address you all this afternoon. Thank you.
Financial Services Policy Committee Thomas L. Lavelle Public Information Officer 617-973-3647 Federal Reserve Banks Announce Changes to Increase Efficiency In Check Services as Check Volumes Decline Nationwide Boston, MA, February 6, 2003-The Federal Reserve Banks, collectively the nation's largest processor of checks, today announced changes to their back office check-processing operations intended to improve operating efficiency while maintaining high-quality check services to depository institutions nationwide. Reflecting the ongoing shift in consumer and business preferences from checks to electronic payments, the Reserve Banks will reduce their check service operating costs through a combination of streamlining their check management structure, reducing staff, decreasing the number of check-processing locations, and increasing processing capacity in other locations. "The Federal Reserve Banks are committed to remaining a leader in providing payment services, including check processing. Adjusting our operations to respond to changes in the marketplace will position the Banks to continue to fulfill this role," said Cathy Minehan, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston and Chair of the Reserve Banks' Financial Services Policy Committee. Even though check payments remain the most popular form of noncash retail payment, they make up only 60 percent of all noncash retail payments today compared to 85 percent in 1979. Recent Federal Reserve studies suggest that roughly 40 billion checks were written in the United States in 2002, down from about 50 billion in 1995. The Reserve Banks handle about 17 billion of these checks annually, and this volume is expected to decline as well. The changes announced today reflect this changing market environment and will enable the Reserve Banks to continue to meet the requirements of the Monetary Control Act of 1980. That act requires the Reserve Banks to set prices to recover, over the long run, their total costs of providing payment services to depository institutions, including the imputed costs they would have incurred and imputed profits they would have expected to earn had the services been provided by a private business firm. The changes, approved by the Reserve Banks' Conference of Presidents, are expected to reduce operating costs for check services by about $60 million in 2005 and about $300 million over the next five years. The changes also are consistent with a decision reached following a 1998 Federal Reserve study of the payments system that the Reserve Banks would remain a provider of check services. "Nationwide, consumers and businesses have made a significant shift in how they make payments, substituting electronic payments for checks. This development is good news for the nation's payments system, and the Federal Reserve has strongly supported this shift," Minehan said. "But declining check volumes are requiring the Reserve Banks to make changes in their check operations to address the challenges posed by the changing market. The changes we are announcing today will help us meet these challenges." Reserve Banks will continue to provide check services on a nationwide basis and are working to maintain deposit times and availability as close to current service levels as possible for depository institutions in the affected markets. In addition, new check-imaging and check-adjustments technology should enable the Reserve Banks to provide new services and help maintain the high quality of Reserve Bank check services offered to the nation's depository institutions. With the changes announced today, Reserve Bank check processing will be performed at 32 sites, down from 45. Additionally, the Reserve Banks will streamline their check-adjustment functions, now being handled in 43 locations, to 12 of their current locations nationwide. (The term "check adjustments" refers to the part of the check-processing operation in which check-processing errors are resolved.) Of the 13 offices that will no longer process checks (see table 1 below), the five regional sites that only process checks will close. The volume from these 13 offices will be handled by nine offices (see table 2 below). (The provides a listing of the affected Reserve Bank offices, including an indication of where each office's check functions will be shifted.) Table 1 Offices That Will No Longer Process Checks Pittsburgh, Pa. Peoria, Ill. Richmond, Va. Little Rock, Ark. Charleston, W.Va. Louisville, Ky. Columbia, S.C. Omaha, Neb. Miami, Fla. El Paso, Texas Indianapolis, Ind. San Antonio, Texas Milwaukee, Wis. Table 2 Offices That Will Expand Check-Processing Capacity Cleveland, Ohio Chicago, Ill. Cincinnati, Ohio Des Moines, Iowa Baltimore, Md. Memphis, Tenn. Charlotte, N.C. Dallas, Texas Jacksonville, Fla. As a result of these changes, the Reserve Banks will reduce their overall check staff by slightly more than 400 positions, representing about 8 percent of their current check service positions. In the offices where check processing will be eliminated, almost 1,300 positions will be affected. At this time, however, the number of involuntary separations is unclear. Some staff reductions will occur through attrition, and there will be some opportunities for reassignment. In addition, the Reserve Banks estimate that they will add about 900 positions at the offices that will continue processing checks. The Reserve Banks will offer a variety of programs to assist affected staff. These programs include separation packages, enhanced pension benefits for some longer-service staff nearing retirement, extended medical coverage, and career transition assistance. The changes being announced today are projected to begin in some offices in the second half of this year and to continue through 2004, with an expected completion at all offices by the end of that year. According to Minehan, "One of the missions of the Federal Reserve System is to foster the efficiency, accessibility, and integrity of the nation's payments system. We believe that the changes we are announcing are essential because they will provide the Reserve Banks greater flexibility to manage check operations in an environment of declining volumes. We regret that this decision will affect a portion of the Fed's check-processing management and staff, but we have a range of programs in place to help ease the transition for affected staff members." From 1992 to 2001, the Reserve Banks earned an average annual after-tax return on equity for all priced payment services of 12.2 percent. In 2002, however, mainly because of declining check volumes, the Reserve Banks' after-tax return on equity for all priced payment services declined to 4.2 percent. In 2003, the Reserve Banks expect to post an after-tax loss reflecting the up-front costs associated with the changes being announced today. The Reserve Banks project that these changes will position check services to return to full cost recovery by 2005. Attachment Federal Reserve Banks Check-Processing and Check-Adjustment Changes Office Locations Move Check Processing to Move Check Adjustments to District One (Boston) Boston, Mass., main office Windsor Locks, Conn. Windsor Locks, Conn., check-processing site District Two (New York) New York, N.Y., (ops. in E. Rutherford, N.J.) Utica, N.Y., check-processing site District Three (Philadelphia) Philadelphia, Pa., main office District Four (Cleveland) Cleveland, Ohio, main office Cincinnati, Ohio, branch Cleveland, Ohio Columbus, Ohio, check-processing site Pittsburgh, Pa., branch Cleveland, Ohio Cleveland, Ohio District Five (Richmond) Richmond, Va., main office Baltimore, Md. Charlotte, N.C. Baltimore, Md., branch Charlotte, N.C. Charleston, W.Va., check-processing site Cincinnati, Ohio Cleveland, Ohio Charlotte, N.C., branch Columbia, S.C., check-processing site Charlotte, N.C. Charlotte, N.C. District Six (Atlanta) Atlanta, Ga., main office Jacksonville, Fla. Birmingham, Ala., branch Jacksonville, Fla. Jacksonville, Fla., branch Miami, Fla., branch Jacksonville, Fla. Jacksonville, Fla. Nashville, Tenn., branch Jacksonville, Fla. New Orleans, La., branch Jacksonville, Fla. District Seven (Chicago) Chicago, Ill., main office (ops. at Midway) Detroit, Mich. Des Moines, Iowa, check-processing site Detroit, Mich. Detroit, Mich., branch Indianapolis, Ind., check-processing site Cincinnati, Ohio Cleveland, Ohio Milwaukee, Wis., check-processing site Chicago, Ill. Detroit, Mich. Peoria, Ill., check-processing site Chicago, Ill. Detroit, Mich. District Eight (St. Louis) St. Louis, Mo., main office Little Rock, Ark., branch Memphis, Tenn. St. Louis, Mo. Louisville, Ky., branch Cincinnati, Ohio Cleveland, Ohio Memphis, Tenn., branch St. Louis, Mo. District Nine (Minneapolis) Minneapolis, Minn., main office Helena, Mont., branch Minneapolis, Minn. District Ten (Kansas City) Kansas City, Mo., main office Denver, Colo., branch Kansas City, Mo. Oklahoma City, Okla., branch Kansas City, Mo. Omaha, Neb., branch Des Moines, Iowa Detroit, Mich. District Eleven (Dallas) Dallas, Texas, main office Houston, Texas El Paso, Texas, branch Dallas, Texas Houston, Texas Houston, Texas, branch San Antonio, Texas, branch Dallas, Texas Houston, Texas District Twelve (San Francisco) San Francisco, Calif., main office Portland, Ore. Los Angeles, Calif., branch Portland, Ore. Portland, Ore., branch Salt Lake City, Utah, branch Portland, Ore. Seattle, Wash., branch Portland, Ore. Federal Reserve System Check Re-engineering Initiative Fact Sheet Federal Reserve locations: In addition to the Board of Governors in Washington, D.C., the Federal Reserve System has the following locations nationwide: 12 Reserve Bank head offices in Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, St. Louis, Kansas City, Chicago, Minneapolis, Dallas, and San Francisco 25 branch offices 9 other locations where checks are processed. Currently, checks are processed at 45 of these locations (see a listing of specific locations below). Locations after changes are implemented: Based on the Systemwide changes announced today, check processing will continue to take place in 32 of the current 45 processing locations. Five of the offices that will no longer process checks will close. The offices that are closing are Peoria, IL; Milwaukee, WI; Indianapolis, IN; Charleston, WV; and Columbia, SC. Additionally, the Reserve Banks will streamline their check adjustment functions, now being handled in 43 locations, to 12 of their current locations nationwide. Staff levels: The Federal Reserve System, including the Board of Governors, employs approximately 24,000 staff nationwide; approximately 5,000 of these employees work in the check function. As a result of the changes announced today, the Reserve Banks will reduce their overall check staff by slightly more than 400 positions, representing about 8 percent of their current check service positions. In the offices where check processing will be eliminated, almost 1,300 positions will be affected. At this time, however, the number of involuntary separations is unclear. Some staff reductions will occur through attrition, and there will be some opportunities for reassignment. In addition, the Reserve Banks estimate that they will add about 900 positions at the offices that will continue processing checks. National check volumes: By Federal Reserve estimates, roughly 40 billion checks were written in the United States in 2002, down from about 50 billion in 1995. The Reserve Banks handle about 17 billion, or 42 percent, of these checks today. Despite the decline in check volume, checks remain the most popular form of noncash retail payment Federal Reserve Locations District 1: Boston, Mass. (head office); Windsor Locks, Conn. (check processing site) District 2: New York City, N.Y. (head office; the payments processing center is located in East Rutherford, N.J.); Buffalo, N.Y. (branch, but no check processing); Utica, N.Y. (check processing site) District 3: Philadelphia, Pa. (head office) District 4: Cleveland, Ohio (head office); Cincinnati, Ohio (branch); Pittsburgh, Pa. (branch); Columbus, Ohio (check processing site) District 5: Richmond, Va. (head office); Baltimore, Md. (branch); Charlotte, N.C. (branch); Columbia, S.C. (check processing site); Charleston, W.Va. (check processing site) District 6: Atlanta, Ga. (head office); Birmingham, Ala. (branch); Jacksonville, Fla. (branch); Miami, Fla. (branch); Nashville, Tenn. (branch); New Orleans, La. (branch) District 7: Chicago, Ill. (head office; the payments processing center is located at Midway Airport); Detroit, Mich. (branch); Des Moines, Iowa (check processing site); Indianapolis, Ind. (check processing site); Milwaukee, Wis. (check processing site); Peoria, Ill. (check processing site) District 8: St.Louis, Mo. (head office); Little Rock, Ark. (branch); Louisville, Ky. (branch); Memphis, Tenn. (branch) District 9: Minneapolis, Minn. (head office); Helena, Mont. (branch) District 10: Kansas City, Mo. (head office); Denver, Colo. (branch); Oklahoma City, Okla. (branch); Omaha, Neb. (branch) District 11: Dallas, Texas (head office); El Paso, Texas (branch); Houston, Texas (branch); San Antonio, Texas (branch) District 12: San Francisco, Calif. (head office); Los Angeles, Calif. (branch; additional cash processing facility in Phoenix, Ariz.); Portland, Ore. (branch); Salt Lake City, Utah (branch); Seattle, Wash. (branch) Footnote to table 1.These offices will close. Footnotes to attachment 1.The check adjustment function at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York's East Rutherford, N.J., payments processing office was previously moved to the Utica, N.Y., office. The check adjustment function at the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland's Columbus, Ohio, office was previously moved to the Cincinnati, Ohio, office. Cincinnati's check adjustment function will now move to the Cleveland, Ohio, office. 2.Site will close. 3.Indicates no change in the processing site or the adjustment site. Table 1 Offices That Will No Longer Process Checks Pittsburgh, Pa. Peoria, Ill. Richmond, Va. Little Rock, Ark. Charleston, W.Va. Louisville, Ky. Columbia, S.C. Omaha, Neb. Miami, Fla. El Paso, Texas Indianapolis, Ind. San Antonio, Texas Milwaukee, Wis. Table 2 Offices That Will Expand Check-Processing Capacity Cleveland, Ohio Chicago, Ill. Cincinnati, Ohio Des Moines, Iowa Baltimore, Md. Memphis, Tenn. Charlotte, N.C. Dallas, Texas Jacksonville, Fla. Office Locations Move Check Processing to Move Check Adjustments to District One (Boston) Boston, Mass., main office Windsor Locks, Conn. Windsor Locks, Conn., check-processing site District Two (New York) New York, N.Y., (ops. in E. Rutherford, N.J.) Utica, N.Y., check-processing site District Three (Philadelphia) Philadelphia, Pa., main office District Four (Cleveland) Cleveland, Ohio, main office Cincinnati, Ohio, branch Cleveland, Ohio Columbus, Ohio, check-processing site Pittsburgh, Pa., branch Cleveland, Ohio Cleveland, Ohio District Five (Richmond) Richmond, Va., main office Baltimore, Md. Charlotte, N.C. Baltimore, Md., branch Charlotte, N.C. Charleston, W.Va., check-processing site Cincinnati, Ohio Cleveland, Ohio Charlotte, N.C., branch Columbia, S.C., check-processing site Charlotte, N.C. Charlotte, N.C. District Six (Atlanta) Atlanta, Ga., main office Jacksonville, Fla. Birmingham, Ala., branch Jacksonville, Fla. Jacksonville, Fla., branch Miami, Fla., branch Jacksonville, Fla. Jacksonville, Fla. Nashville, Tenn., branch Jacksonville, Fla. New Orleans, La., branch Jacksonville, Fla. District Seven (Chicago) Chicago, Ill., main office (ops. at Midway) Detroit, Mich. Des Moines, Iowa, check-processing site Detroit, Mich. Detroit, Mich., branch Indianapolis, Ind., check-processing site Cincinnati, Ohio Cleveland, Ohio Milwaukee, Wis., check-processing site Chicago, Ill. Detroit, Mich. Peoria, Ill., check-processing site Chicago, Ill. Detroit, Mich. District Eight (St. Louis) St. Louis, Mo., main office Little Rock, Ark., branch Memphis, Tenn. St. Louis, Mo. Louisville, Ky., branch Cincinnati, Ohio Cleveland, Ohio Memphis, Tenn., branch St. Louis, Mo. District Nine (Minneapolis) Minneapolis, Minn., main office Helena, Mont., branch Minneapolis, Minn. District Ten (Kansas City) Kansas City, Mo., main office Denver, Colo., branch Kansas City, Mo. Oklahoma City, Okla., branch Kansas City, Mo. Omaha, Neb., branch Des Moines, Iowa Detroit, Mich. District Eleven (Dallas) Dallas, Texas, main office Houston, Texas El Paso, Texas, branch Dallas, Texas Houston, Texas Houston, Texas, branch San Antonio, Texas, branch Dallas, Texas Houston, Texas District Twelve (San Francisco) San Francisco, Calif., main office Portland, Ore. Los Angeles, Calif., branch Portland, Ore. Portland, Ore., branch Salt Lake City, Utah, branch Portland, Ore. Seattle, Wash., branch Portland, Ore.
Remarks by Governor Mark W. Olson At the conference on the implementation of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, American Law Institute and the American Bar Association, Washington, D.C. February 6, 2003 The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act and Corporate Misbehavior--Coincidence or Contributor? Introduction Good morning and thank you for inviting me again this year to speak at your conference. The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLBA) was indeed landmark legislation, and as the financial services industry continues to evolve, this conference on implementing GLBA will remain an important event. It is quite remarkable the difference a year makes. During 2002, serious accounting improprieties and internal control failures at some of the country's preeminent corporations dealt additional blows to a national economy already suffering from a downturn. Inquiries into aggressive, and in some cases wholly inappropriate, accounting practices revealed losses that propelled investment-grade companies into bankruptcy. Managers and other employees of some of the largest financial institutions were called to account for apparent conflicts of interest between the research functions and investment banking operations. The practices of allocating shares of initial public offering were similarly harshly criticized. And, of course, some financial institutions were roundly criticized for structuring transactions to arbitrage accounting, disclosure, and tax rules-- most notably those structured for Enron. Appropriately, the questionable practices uncovered in the past year were denounced in congressional hearing rooms and covered extensively in the national press--to the extent that the companies, and even some of the individuals involved, are now household names. It had occurred to some industry observers that these practices coincided with the final phase-in of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act. That timing raises an obvious question: Did passage of the GLBA merely coincide with these corporate governance and conflict of interest problems, or was it a contributing factor? In my presentation today I will address that issue so that both public and private resources are appropriately targeted to correct the problems of the past and properly focused in ways that promote standards of appropriate conduct for the industry as well as the continuing implementation of the GLBA. To provide some perspective on the relationship between some of the more notable issues involving corporate governance, accounting, and conflicts of interest that surfaced in 2002 and their implications for implementing the GLBA, it is useful to step back and review, in turn, the forces that gave rise to the GLBA; the nature of the recent abuses that have occurred; and some of the issues that confront us as we move forward. Forces Leading to the GLBA As I noted in my talk last year, one of the primary objectives accomplished by the GLBA was to bring the statute more in line with market changes. By 1999, when the GLBA was passed, significant cross-industry affiliations had occurred without the benefit of legislation. As you know, GLBA modernized a statutory and regulatory framework grounded in the 1930s that was unresponsive to the needs of financial markets and the consumers of financial services in the late twentieth century, much less the twenty-first century. Advances in technology, innovations in financial markets, and globalization over the past few decades rendered anachronistic a statutory and regulatory scheme that viewed banking organizations as only lenders and deposit-takers. Technological and financial innovation in the last twenty years gave rise to new products, new delivery channels, linked international markets, and faster transaction speeds. Consumer demand for innovative financial products and services expanded dramatically, not only for traditional banking products, such as credit cards or traditional stock brokerage services, but for products that combined the characteristics of banking, securities, and insurance products, such as mutual funds and annuities. Because of the limitations imposed by the Glass-Steagall Act and other statutory restrictions, much of this innovation occurred outside the banking industry. For example, Merrill Lynch's Cash Management Account was more than twenty-five years old when the GLBA was enacted. Corporate and institutional demand for financial services had also evolved dramatically. As the capital markets developed and corporations gained increased access to the commercial paper and bond markets, corporate chief financial officers were offered a broadening array of potential financing vehicles and financial services such as commercial paper. Moreover, innovations in risk management fueled increasing demand for customized over-the-counter derivatives. As a result of these and other influences, the boundaries between commercial and investment banking products and services became less clear. Also, with the declining spreads from traditional bank lending products, as well as the more favorable economics of fee-based services, banking organizations throughout the past decade became increasingly interested in providing a full range of financial products and services. In some cases, providing a broader array of financial services became a competitive necessity given the changes in the capital markets and the inroads made by nonbank financial institutions in the 1990s. Before the GLBA, banking organizations responded to these competitive pressures in several ways, including using the bank holding company structure. For example, the provision of securities underwriting and dealing was accomplished through so-called section 20 subsidiaries, which were authorized in 1987. Initially, underwriting and dealing activities were limited to 5 percent of the bank holding company section 20 income, but the limits were progressively expanded by the Board throughout the 1990s. After the limit was increased to 25 percent in 1997, we began to see significant merger activity between securities firms and bank holding companies. As a result of this merger activity as well as an expansion of existing business in the late 1990s, several major banking organizations had dramatically advanced up the securities underwriting league tables or were well positioned to do so. Thus, banking organizations were major factors in the securities industry before passage of the GLBA. Globalization was also an important force that increased competitive pressures on large U.S. banks. Competition with universal banks in foreign markets necessarily required U.S. banking organizations to build securities business infrastructures overseas. With the increasingly global, 24/7 marketplace for financial services, and expanding cross-border asset holdings, trading, and credit flows, such infrastructures were needed to meet the demands of foreign customers as well as the demand for global financial services by U.S. customers. Of course, the economic prosperity and bull markets of the past decade were also significant forces in driving evolution in the financial services market. Given these circumstances, traditional bank deposit products were often unable to meet customer demand. Economic prosperity and trends in the equity markets fueled increased demand by consumers for alternatives to deposit products, such as mutual funds and annuities. The bull market obviously drove demand for securities brokerage services--both discount and full service. In this economic environment, the constraints of a statutory environment designed for a simpler age became all too obvious, and the GLBA stood as an affirmation of economic reality. Recent Issues in Financial Services Business Lines This brings us to current times and current issues. We must remember what the GLBA did not do. It did not alter the fundamental business lines and established practices of investment and commercial banking. Upon review, many of the issues of corporate governance and conflict of interest that surfaced in 2002 appear to have been a direct result of inappropriate business practices as well as inadequate internal controls and risk-management practices applied to business lines that were well established before the enactment of the GLBA. Let's now turn to some of the corporate governance issues and examine their relationship to the GLBA. One example is the well-publicized conflicts of interest between the research and investment banking functions of investment banks. Institutional investors have always been aware of the need to add a grain of salt to sell-side research reports, and Institutional Investor magazine has long had separate rankings for buy-side as well as sell-side analysts. For a sophisticated investor, that judgment is as intuitive as taking with a grain of salt a comparative analysis of competing toothpaste brands conducted by a toothpaste manufacturer. But in recent years the long-held distinction between sell-side and buy-side research became less clear. One reason could be that the skepticism of institutional investors may have diminished in light of the record profits to be made in the equity bull market. Added to this was an influx of both new institutional players and individual investors who did not fully understand some of the traditional conflicts within the origination and distribution channels in investment banking--especially given the star status accorded to some sell-side analysts. In hindsight, it becomes clear that the management of some investment banking firms did not fully understand the risks that some established business practices posed to their organization in a changing market. At some securities firms, poor internal controls and management's shortsighted focus on the rewards available from one element of the equity financing business placed other important elements of this business, such as institutional and retail distribution channels, at significant risk. Despite these problems, I am reassured to see that change is occurring. Importantly, changes being made by financial institutions themselves in response to the forces of market discipline and changes imposed through various settlement agreements are making positive progress in correcting those practices embedded in traditional investment banking business lines that are inappropriate for today's markets. A second group of corporate governance issues, like those involving Enron, involves structured financing. As you know, structured financing transactions have long been conducted by both commercial and investment banks. Before examining the corporate governance issues involving structured financing, we need to identify the components of these transactions. Structured financing is the customization of financial products using various types of financial instruments as "building blocks" to achieve a customer's stated objectives. The basic building block instruments used can include both physical and financial assets and liabilities, various types of derivative instruments, and several types of legal entities structured to isolate legal liability and ownership. All these building blocks are long-standing components of financial transactions and do not carry inherent undue risks. As they became used in structured transactions, the sophistication grew and the inherent risk increased. The origin of structured transactions can be traced back to the Chicago futures and options exchanges, the development of the interest rate swap in the early 1980s and the subsequent development of the over-the-counter derivative markets, and the securitization of residential mortgages and various other types of consumer debt. As financial markets have grown and evolved over the past few decades, innovations in financial instruments have facilitated the structuring of cash flows and the allocation of risks among borrowers and a range of investors in more efficient ways. In this respect, the abuses that have received recent attention have obscured their risk-mitigation value. Aggressive interpretations of accounting rules and misuse of structured transactions have cast a shadow over a wide array of financial instruments that have dramatically enhanced the efficiency of financial markets and the availability of funds to all sectors of the economy. Financial derivatives, asset-backed securities, and a myriad of other "structured" products have, in the vast majority of cases, served the legitimate business purposes of borrowers and investors alike. Both commercial banks and securities firms have played important roles in structuring, arranging or participating in these transactions to the economy's great benefit. To be sure, as these products evolved and became more complex, they placed increasing pressure on the interpretation of accounting rules that were established in simpler times. Despite attempts to keep pace with financial innovation, traditional accounting rules were severely challenged to appropriately reflect the economic substance of some transactions. This strain progressively increased as some corporations, with professional and legal advice, exploited the ambiguities in the accounting rules. These efforts not only pushed the envelope of acceptable accounting practices but, in some cases, intentionally hid the true economic substance of a transaction while staying in technical "compliance" with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles, or GAAP. The new initiatives by the Financial Accounting Standards Board to revise the accounting treatment of some special purpose entities (now termed variable interest entities) are attempts to address abuses that may result from these practices--as are the measures being implemented through the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. Regardless of the specific measures under way, however, both corporations and financial institutions must recognize that the analysis of whether an accounting treatment for a particular transaction is appropriate should not be based on technically meeting GAAP requirements. Rather, such analysis must look beyond technical compliance to determine whether the accounting treatment actually reflects the economic substance of the transaction. What Are the Lessons? Once again, review of the underlying causes of the abuses uncovered involving structured financing can be traced to several factors, starting with internal control lapses within this specific business line at commercial and investment banks alike. Other contributing factors include the continual reach to maximize earnings, which encouraged aggressive accounting treatments, and extraordinary financial rewards accorded financial professionals who created and executed these transactions. In ascertaining the relevant facts and circumstances surrounding these lapses and in identifying appropriate responses, Federal Reserve supervisors have discovered some initial lessons to be used by both supervisors and financial institutions in guiding future efforts. These lessons are relatively straightforward, reaffirm basic risk-management principles, and can easily be seen in hindsight. Perhaps the most fundamental lesson is the need to fully assess the character of a borrower, counterparty, or customer and to incorporate that assessment into the entire relationship between the institution and the customer. Traditional suitability standards, which evaluated only whether a customer understood the risks of a given transaction, are no longer sufficient for adequate risk management. Financial institutions must recognize that, although they are not directly accountable for the actions of their customers, to the extent that their name or product is implicitly associated with their customer's misconduct, they may be significantly exposed to additional legal and reputational risks. Financial institutions appear to have learned some of these lessons and are establishing policies and procedures that require management to understand the totality of the business relationships. Several institutions have adopted internal policies regarding their willingness to do business with a customer based on the customer's disclosure of the transactions. Some have also revised their approval processes for new products to better incorporate considerations of legal and regulatory risk. Many of these changes are being made in response to market demand. Thus far, market discipline has played a critical role in effecting needed change. The Federal Reserve will continue to review complex structured transactions to identify further lessons for supervisory guidance. An important element in our supervisory process has always been the periodic identification of best practices compiled from our supervisory reviews. And we will be looking for these best practices over the coming year--as institutions implement their improved risk-management structures--with the expectation of communicating any pertinent findings to the industry at large. We are revising our supervisory guidance to emphasize the need for more-comprehensive approaches to the legal and reputational risks entailed in customer relationships. Challenges Moving Forward Earlier I noted questions about the relationship between the abuses uncovered over the past year and the implementation of the GLBA. In fact, some have even blamed the abuses on the GLBA, questioned its merits, and called for its substantive review. As I have pointed out, the abuses recently brought to light are the result of corporate governance issues, such as lax internal controls, that had not kept pace with the changing financial markets. They are not related to the GLBA. Breakdowns in internal controls and relaxation of basic risk-management fundamentals do not indict the objectives, principles, or the statutory structure for implementing the GLBA. The merits of the GLBA remain as valid today as when the law was enacted in 1999, despite the recent problems of internal control and risk management in some individual business lines. However, this statement does not mean that financial institutions and their supervisors do not face significant challenges as they implement the GLBA or as they refine existing business lines. The financial services sector continues to evolve in directions that could not have been predicted even at this time last year. As institutions confront today's market conditions and trends, significant rationalization and focusing of business strategies and tactics are under way. The GLBA provides opportunities for financial entities to combine in a single financial holding company to respond better to marketplace changes. The GLBA is still relatively young, and institutions are continually in the process of identifying the right mix of products and services to meet the changing demands of their customers. Clearly, this challenge of finding the appropriate product mix has increased substantially in the current market environment. In the 1990s, leading up to the passage of the GLBA and directly thereafter, many financial institutions positioned themselves to offer a myriad of products to both retail and corporate customers. As in the financial supermarket trend of the 1980s, some institutions readied themselves to offer all things to all customers and to take advantage of all possible business lines. Now, in today's business circumstances, financial institutions are more willing, and in some cases are compelled, to better focus business strategies on core competencies--to be all things to only certain people or one thing to many. Institutions are increasingly rationalizing and focusing their product offerings--shedding some businesses while expanding others. A particularly pertinent example of the way the changing market environment has affected businesses and business strategies is merchant banking, a business that was a centerpiece of the GLBA deliberations four or so years ago. Market trends have dramatically taken the bloom off the merchant banking rose, with some institutions trying aggressively to downsize or, and in some cases, drop their merchant banking businesses. And for their part, bank supervisors in implementing the GLBA continue to face the challenge of reconciling the need for markets to function efficiently while protecting the deposit insurance fund and the safety net. This challenge can manifest itself in the applications process, when the Board must consider approving new activities as financial or as complementary or incidental to a financial activity. To date, the Board has not considered many of these applications; however, as the marketplace evolves, we expect financial institutions to propose new activities that may fit the definitions of financial, complementary, or incidental. Another challenge is continuing to balance functional regulation and umbrella supervision. Functional regulation is a recognition of the importance of decentralized authority and checks and balances--principles on which this country was founded. It is also a recognition that the supervisory approach best suited to one line of business may not be well suited to another in the same consolidated organization. While, as many in this audience can attest, the presence of several different regulators in a complex financial institution is sometimes cumbersome, it is intrinsic to a decentralized regulatory scheme. Our challenge as umbrella supervisor is to work with our fellow regulators to improve the efficiency of the regulatory process by enhancing cooperation and communication. In fact, we have improved interagency cooperation and communication in the post-GLBA environment. In one well-publicized case, the Federal Reserve took coordinated action with the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the Securities and Exchange Commission to address inappropriate accounting practices at a large banking organization. We need to continue to share information and discuss issues with our fellow regulators if we are going to minimize risks to an ever more-complex banking system. Another challenge inherent in the Federal Reserve's role as umbrella supervisor is finding the proper balance between the objectives of protecting the depository institution subsidiaries of increasingly complex organizations and not imposing an unduly duplicative or onerous regulatory burden on the nonbank entities that are part of the consolidated organization. Though our focus is on consolidated risk management and capital adequacy, we must also consider how the activities conducted in various legal entities and business lines affect the overall risk profile of the consolidated organization and the safety and soundness of affiliated depository institutions. Our ability to share information with the functional regulators of nonbank entities in the holding company structure will enhance our ability to minimize regulatory burden while protecting depository institutions and the insurance fund. Conclusion While 2002 undoubtedly was a difficult year that focused a number of supervisory issues for the Federal Reserve and its fellow regulators, our analysis to date suggests that these issues were neither caused nor exacerbated by the GLBA. Rather, they were largely the result of corporate governance and internal control weaknesses in individual business lines. I believe that the progress already made by banking organizations and other participants in the financial markets in addressing some of these problems should give us optimism for the future. This effort toward self-correction will go a long way to reduce the need for additional legislation and regulation to correct what are essentially internal weaknesses of corporate governance and control. The legal community has an essential role to play in facilitating the self-correcting tendencies of the market, a role I encourage all of you to embrace.
No content found
Remarks by Governor Susan Schmidt Bies At Thunderbird, The American Graduate School of International Management, Glendale, Arizona February 11, 2003 Financial Markets and Corporate Governance in the United States and Other Countries I appreciate the opportunity to speak with you today. My remarks will focus on issues relating to corporate governance and the evolution of banking and financial markets. I will also compare international perspectives on these issues using Japan and Germany as examples. The governance problems that have come to light over the past year have thrust the quality of accounting standards, the professionalism of auditors, and governance practices of major companies into the limelight. These issues have triggered a spate of regulatory reforms in the United States. Besides these issues, some broader, longer-term issues that have not been the center of the recent debate affect accounting and corporate governance and I want to talk about these as well. Looking beyond the isolated cases of outright fraud, I believe a fundamental problem is this: As organizations have grown in size and scope, innovative financing techniques have made it more difficult for outside investors to understand a particular firm's risk profile and the performance of its various lines of business. Traditional accounting standards have not kept pace with the risk-management tools employed by sophisticated corporations. Thus, the disclosure of firms' risk-management positions and strategies is crucial to improve corporate transparency for market participants. The second issue I want to explore is how financing patterns in different countries emphasize different stakeholders in the corporate governance process. For instance, in Germany and Japan, corporations rely heavily on bank loans for external financing, whereas in the United States most funds are raised through public capital markets. Therefore, it is not surprising that the corporate governance issues in Japan and Germany revolve around the role of banks as delegated monitors. In contrast, corporate governance issues in the United States relate primarily to the conflict between shareholders and corporate executives, a conflict that may be affected by the increasing importance of institutional investors, such as mutual funds and pension funds, as major holders of public equity. In all three countries, adequate disclosure and accounting are fundamental to efficient governance; and because of the recent wave of financial innovation, a combination of increased transparency and market discipline applied by creditors such as banks, counterparties, and investors--including the institutional investors in the United States that hold a large share of corporate equity--is required. Financial Innovation and Risk Management The last decades of the twentieth century were, without doubt, a period of dramatic change in financial engineering, financial innovation, and risk-management practices. Over this period, firms acquired effective new tools to manage financial risk, one of which was securitization. Many assets on a firm's balance sheet, such as receivables, can now be securitized--that is, grouped into pools and sold to outside investors. Securitization helps a firm manage the risk of a concentrated exposure by transferring some of that exposure outside the firm. By pooling a diverse set of assets and issuing marketable securities, firms obtain liquidity and reduce funding costs. Of course, moving assets off the balance sheet and into special-purpose entities, with the attendant creation of servicing rights and high-risk residual interests retained by firms, generates its own risks. Several types of securitization have grown rapidly over the past decade. One of the fastest growing has been asset-backed commercial paper, which soared from only $16 billion outstanding at the end of 1989 to about $700 billion as of year-end 2002. Commercial mortgage securitizations have also proliferated noticeably since the early 1990s. The dollar amount of outstanding securities backed by commercial and multifamily mortgages has risen from $36 billion at the end of 1989 to just over $400 billion as of this past September. In addition, commercial banks and finance companies have moved business loans off their books through the development of collateralized debt obligations. Securitized business loans amounted to $110 billion in the third quarter of 2002, up from a relatively miniscule $2 billion in 1989. Derivatives are another important tool that firms use to manage risk exposures. In the ordinary course of business, firms are exposed to credit risk and the risk of price fluctuations in currency, commodity, energy, and interest rate markets. For example, when an airline sells tickets months before a flight, the airline becomes exposed to fluctuations in the price of jet fuel. A higher price of jet fuel translates directly into lower profits and, perhaps, a greater risk of bankruptcy. Firms can now use derivatives--options, futures, forwards, and so on--to mitigate their exposure to some of these risks. The risk can be transferred to a counterparty that is more willing to bear it. In my example, the airline could buy a forward contract or a call option on jet fuel to hedge its risk and thereby increase its financial stability. A relatively new type of derivative--credit derivatives--has gotten considerable attention lately because of its very rapid growth. Credit derivatives allow a firm to purchase protection against the risk of loss from the default of a given entity. By doing so, financial and nonfinancial firms alike can limit or reduce their exposures to given borrowers or counterparties. In addition, credit derivatives allow financial firms to achieve a more diversified credit portfolio by acquiring credit exposure to borrowers with which they do not have a lending relationship. For example, European insurance companies reportedly have used credit derivatives to acquire exposure to European corporations that, because they rely primarily on bank lending, have little publicly traded debt outstanding. The use of derivatives, like securitizations, has been growing rapidly in recent years. The most recent statistics from the Bank for International Settlements indicated that the notional amount of over-the-counter derivatives outstanding totaled $128 trillion in June 2002, up from $81 trillion just three years earlier. For exchange-traded derivatives, notional amounts outstanding rose from $14 trillion to $24 trillion over the same period. Credit derivatives are small by comparison, with a notional value of just under $700 billion as of the end of June 2001. However, this number reflects an increase of more than 500 percent from three years earlier. Complex Organizations Are Opaque As indicated by my brief discussion of securitization and derivatives, financial innovations have facilitated the separation and reallocation of risks to parties more willing and able to bear them. In the twenty-first century, businesses will use almost limitless configurations of products and services and sophisticated financial structures. A byproduct of these developments will be that outsiders will have ever more difficulty understanding the risk positions of many large, complex organizations; and traditional financial reporting--which provides a snapshot at a particular moment--will be even less meaningful than it is today. The intended or unintended consequences of the opaqueness that comes with complexity raise serious issues for financial reporting and corporate governance. Effective governance requires investors and creditors to hold firms accountable for their decisions. But its prerequisite is having the information necessary to understand the risks that the firm is bearing and those that it has transferred to others. With sufficient, timely, accurate, and relevant information, market participants can evaluate a firm's risk profile and adjust the availability and pricing of funds to promote a better allocation of financial resources. Lenders and investors have an obvious interest in accurately assessing a firm's risk-management performance, the underlying trends in its earnings and cash flow, and its income-producing potential. In this regard, transparency is essential to providing market participants with the information they need to effect market discipline. Sound, well-managed companies will benefit if enhanced disclosure enables them to obtain funds at risk premiums that more accurately reflect their lower risk profiles. Without such disclosure, otherwise well-managed firms will be penalized if market participants cannot perceive their fundamental financial strength and sound risk-management practices. I have been heartened to see that renewed market discipline appears to be forcing companies to compete for investors' support by improving the transparency of corporate reporting. Improving Accounting and Disclosure for Complex Firms Most firms and market participants favor sound accounting standards and meaningful disclosure, but some companies have not been completely transparent in their application of accounting and disclosure standards to specific transactions. In these situations, financial reports have neither reflected nor been consistent with the way the business has actually been run or the risks to which the business has actually been exposed. In some of these cases, the company's external auditors appear to have forgotten the lessons they learned in Auditing 101. Auditors have focused on form over substance when looking at risk-transfer activities, and they have failed to maintain the necessary independence from the client. But the issues run deeper than just a breakdown of basic auditing standards. As a result of the recently recognized failures of accounting, auditing, and disclosure, the market was unable to appropriately discipline the risk-taking activities of these firms on a timely basis because outsiders lacked the information from financial statements or other disclosures to do so. As critical information became available, the market reflected its concerns about underlying business practices and accounting through the declining values of equity and debt. The Sarbanes-Oxley Act, which became law in July of last year, contains a number of provisions to improve accounting and disclosure. Chief executive and financial officers are now required to certify that their financial reports fairly represent the financial condition of the company, not just that the reports comply with generally accepted accounting principles. Sarbanes-Oxley directed the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) to issue new rules on the disclosure of off-balance-sheet transactions. It also required that audit committees be composed exclusively of independent directors, and it empowered the audit committees to hire, fire, and determine the compensation of outside auditors, eliminating the incentive for auditors to rubber-stamp the books to please the chief executive officer. To bolster the independence of external auditors, Sarbanes-Oxley prohibited them from providing certain internal audit and other consulting services to their clients. Finally, the act created a new Public Company Accounting Oversight Board, independent of the accounting industry, to regulate audits of public companies. The New York Stock Exchange and NASDAQ boards issued their own proposals which are currently under consideration at the SEC. Besides adopting the Sarbanes-Oxley rules for strengthening the roles of audit committees, these proposals add new rules relating to executive compensation and board independence. The new rules essentially require that shareholders approve all stock-option plans, that independent directors approve CEO compensation, that there be a majority of independent directors on the board, and that the board of directors meet in "executive" sessions without company management. The list of reforms is indeed impressive and encouraging. However, I feel strongly that another important and necessary reform is absent from the regulatory agenda. In particular, we need to insist on higher professional standards for corporate financial officers and outside auditors that emphasize consistent compliance with the fundamental principles underlying accounting standards. Accounting policies used by companies should clearly and faithfully represent the economic substance of business transactions. Accounting standards in the United States have become very detailed over the years. Several reasons are given for this detail: the evolution to more-complicated financial transactions, the risk of litigation, and an approach to accounting to "game" the rules for the benefit of the reporting entity. The Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) has recently indicated that it is committed to work with the International Accounting Standards Board to make U.S. and international standards more consistent. As part of this discussion, we hear of the benefits of the international framework that places more reliance on the principles informing the accounting standard rather than on lengthy rule writing, as in the United States. Principles-based accounting standards, however, cannot succeed without strong professional ethics, since they rely on the business judgment of preparers and auditors. Until the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants takes a stronger role to enforce its code of conduct, or until the new Public Company Accounting Oversight Board becomes an effective regulatory body, principles-based accounting cannot successfully restore consistency in financial reporting that our capital markets require. The scandals of the past year were due to fraud and breakdowns in auditing not to inadequate accounting standards. Besides applying sound accounting treatments, company managers must ensure that public disclosures clearly identify all significant risk exposures--whether on or off the balance sheet--and their effect on the firm's financial condition and performance, cash flow, and earnings potential. With regard to securitizations, derivatives, and other innovative risk-transfer instruments, traditional accounting disclosures of a company's balance sheet at any one time may be insufficient to convey the full impact of a company's financial prospects. Equally important are disclosures about how risks are being managed and the underlying basis for values and other estimates that are included in financial reports. Unlike typical accounting reports, information generated by risk management tends to be oriented less to a particular time and more to a description of the risks. To take an example from the world of banking, where the discipline of risk management is relatively well developed, an accounting report might say that the fair value of a loan portfolio is $300 million and has dropped $10 million from the previous report. However, the bank's internal risk report would show much more extensive information, such as the interest rate and credit quality of the assets and the range of values the portfolio would take under alternative future scenarios. The user of a risk-management report could determine whether changes in value were due to declining credit quality, rising interest rates, or sales or payoffs of loans. Corporate risk officers have developed other types of reports that provide information on the extent to which the total return in a particular line of business compensates for the line's comprehensive risk. On an enterprise basis, a reader of such a report can determine whether the growing lines of business have risk exposures that tend to offset those in other business lines--thereby resulting in lower volatility for the earnings of the corporation as a whole. Complex organizations should continue to improve their risk-management and reporting functions. When they are comfortable with the reliability and consistency of the information in these reports, they should begin disclosing this information to the market, perhaps in summary form, paying due attention to the need for keeping proprietary business data confidential. Not only would such disclosure provide more qualitative and quantitative information about the firm's current risk exposure to the market, it would help the market assess the quality of the risk oversight and risk appetite of the organization. A sound risk-management system in a complex organization should continually monitor all relevant risks--including credit, market, liquidity, operational, and reputational risks. Reputational risk, which recent events have shown can make or break a company, becomes especially hard to manage when off-balance-sheet activities conducted in a separate legal entity can affect the parent firm's reputation. For all these risks, disclosures consistent with the information used internally by risk managers could be very beneficial to market participants. Companies should ensure that not only do they meet the letter of the standards that exist but also that their financial reports and other disclosures focus on what is really essential to help investors and other market participants understand their businesses. I particularly want to emphasize that disclosure need not be in a standard accounting framework nor exactly the same for all organizations. Rather, we should all be insisting that each entity disclose the information its stakeholders need to evaluate the entity's risk profile. Companies should be less concerned about the vehicle of disclosure and more concerned with the substance of the information made available to the public. And we should keep in mind that disclosure without context may not be meaningful. These improvements in transparency are a necessary response to the recent corporate scandals and will help strengthen corporate governance in years to come. Financing Patterns and Corporate Governance My remarks thus far have centered on the situation in the United States, but corporate governance is clearly an international issue. The specific governance issues in each country will be influenced by patterns of finance as well as by institutional differences. In my remaining remarks, I will discuss some of the key corporate governance issues in Germany, Japan, and the United States. Bank-Based Financial Systems The German and Japanese financial systems are well known for being predominantly bank-based systems. In Germany and Japan, bank loans are the primary source of finance, while in the United States, corporations rely heavily on public capital markets. In both Germany and Japan, total bank assets are around 100 percent of GDP, whereas in the United States, total bank assets are only around 60 percent of GDP. Given their importance as providers of finance, banks in Germany and Japan not surprisingly play a significant role in the governance of nonfinancial firms. Some observers have argued that the superior information that banks obtain through their lending relationships may give them more influence in governing borrowers. If this argument is correct, then such influence is likely heightened because bank-firm relationships in Germany and Japan tend to be long-term, stable relationships. In Germany, it is likely also heightened because German banks are universal banks--that is, they perform investing banking as well as commercial banking functions--and thus may control firms' access to capital markets. The role of banks in corporate governance can also be affected by equity ownership. Japanese banks hold about 20 percent of the country's total corporate equity. Up-to-date figures on German bank equity holdings are difficult to obtain, nevertheless, some reports suggest that German banks hold around 10 percent of the country's corporate equity. These figures contrast with those of the United States, where banks hold less than 2 percent of corporate equities. Banks in both Germany and Japan likely have control rights that exceed their ownership stakes. In Germany, banks may act as custodians for customers who own equities, and banks are commonly given the proxy voting rights of these shares. The influence of proxy voting is increased by restrictions in many German corporate charters that cap the voting rights of shareholders, regardless of the amount of voting shares they may own. Typical caps are 5 percent or 10 percent of total voting shares. Most of these restrictions were adopted in the 1970s, when investors from oil-producing countries were looking for places to invest their petro-dollars and began buying shares in German companies. Although these restrictions limit the power of any large blockholder, including banks, the restrictions rarely apply to the proxy votes that banks may cast on behalf of dispersed shareholders. In Japan, large banks and other firms in unrelated lines of business make cross-shareholding agreements to form stable shareholding blocks. It is customary for members of such blocks to follow banks' leads in governance decisions, effectively giving banks control rights that can exceed their ownership stake, much in the same way that proxy voting does for German banks. Banks in Germany and Japan frequently exert control through direct involvement in the management of their borrowers. For instance, in Germany banks sometimes have a representative on a borrower's supervisory board. In Japan, banks may place staff on a borrower's board of directors, and former bank employees often serve as both managers and board members of borrowing firms. There has been a lively debate in the academic literature as to whether the strong role that banks play in corporate governance in Germany and Japan is good or bad for the firms to which they lend. One of the arguments in favor of a strong role for banks is that it mitigates problems stemming from informational asymmetries. Banks have extensive information about borrowers through their lending relationship, and this information may be much better than the information available to other outside stakeholders. When the bank is also a shareholder or acts on behalf of shareholders, this information can reduce the informational asymmetries between firm owners and managers. For example, if a firm seeks external funds, a bank with close ties to the firm can know with greater certainty whether this need is a sign of temporary illiquidity or bad firm management. This knowledge, in turn, can increase the ability of a firm to raise external funds when it has liquidity needs. Banks can also act as delegated monitors of borrowers on behalf of other outside stakeholders to help ensure that firm managers apply sufficient effort and do not misuse firm resources. A common argument against a strong role for banks in corporate governance is that, because of their lending activities, they do not act in the interests of shareholders, even when they have an equity stake in a firm. For example, consider the incentives of a bank when one of its large borrowers is having financial difficulty. From the perspective of the bank, the best way to ensure that its loans are repaid might be a merger between the weak borrower and a healthy rival. If the bank has significant control rights over the healthy firm, it might try to use these rights to press for such a merger, as has happened in Germany on at least several occasions. Yet other owners of the healthy firm--owners who have no claims on the weak firm--might find such an action suboptimal, because it would require the healthy firm to assume all the debts of its weaker rival. Conflicting interests of banks and other shareholders might also be manifested through banks encouraging firms to take on more debt, to pay higher interest rates on their debt, or to undertake less-risky projects than would be optimal from the point of view of shareholders. Whatever the manifestation, the result would be the same--lower profits for the firm. Although the empirical evidence for Japan has been somewhat mixed, on balance it suggests that membership in stable shareholding agreements is associated with lower profitability and higher interest rates on loans. Studies of German firms show less of a consensus--some studies suggest that firms with closer ties to banks are less profitable, whereas other studies suggest the opposite. Other observers have raised a more fundamental question about the role banks play in governing nonfinancial firms in Germany and Japan. They point out that banks are subject to the same moral hazard issues that firms face--without sufficient monitoring, managers may not apply sufficient effort or may waste firm resources. They ask: "Who monitors the monitor?" In other words, how can bank shareholders be sure that bank managers use bank resources efficiently and apply appropriate effort to their tasks, including the governance of borrowers? This problem can be especially vexing in the case of banks, which, as naturally opaque institutions, are difficult for outsiders to monitor. Moreover, when bank deposits are insured, a whole class of bank stakeholders--depositors--has little incentive to monitor the bank. In most countries, bank supervisory authorities monitor banks on behalf of bank creditors. However, the low profitability of banks in both Germany and Japan and the prolonged weak condition of Japanese banks suggest that bank supervision is not a panacea for the monitoring problem and that the other stakeholders have an important role to play. This is one reason that market discipline, even in a bank-based system, is an important element of sound corporate governance, and it highlights the importance of adequate disclosure. Market Based Financial System In a market-based financial system, like that in the United States, market discipline and adequate disclosure are perhaps even more important, as the burden of monitoring corporate insiders rests mainly in the hands of shareholders. Besides the changes in transparency to which I alluded earlier, the increasing portion of public equity held by institutional investors on behalf of households is another development that may affect the ability of shareholders to mitigate corporate governance conflicts. According to the most recent flow of funds accounts published by the Federal Reserve, the combined share of household equity managed by mutual funds, pension funds, and life insurance companies grew from only 3 percent in 1952 to more than 50 percent at the end of 2001. Mutual funds held 16 percent of household equity at the end of 2001, and public and private pension funds held about 10 and 20 percent, respectively. Life insurance companies held about 7 percent of household equity at that time, mainly through separate accounts that were, in effect, mutual funds with insurance wrappers. These changes are indeed dramatic, but it is not obvious whether we should be comforted or concerned that an increasing share of household equity is in the hands of institutional investors. A primary issue is whether institutional investors are more "active shareholders" than individual investors. That is, are institutional investors more likely than individual investors to actively monitor and influence both management actions and corporate governance mechanisms at the firms in which they invest? Shareholder activism may provide market discipline directly by preventing management from pursuing its own interests at the expense of shareholders. Shareholder activism may also pave the way for other forms of market discipline--such as corporate takeovers, share price changes, and funding cost changes--by eliminating management-takeover protections and by inducing greater transparency. Unfortunately, whether institutional investors have more or less incentive to be activist shareholders than individual investors is not clear. On the one hand, because institutional investors make large investments in companies, they will have more bargaining power with company management than individual investors have, and they will derive more benefits from mitigating corporate malfeasance than individual investors will. Among institutional investors, pension funds and insurance companies are thought to benefit the most from shareholder activism because they tend to have relatively long-term investment horizons. On the other hand, managers of index mutual funds have little interest in shareholder activism since they merely adjust their holdings when the mix of the index changes and want only to follow the index, not influence it. In addition, mutual funds and pension funds may have conflicts of interest that encourage passivity. Activism by a mutual fund complex or a pension fund manager could strain its relationships with corporate clients. For example, a fund manager bidding for the management of a firm's 401(K) plan may be reluctant to vote against the Board of Directors' proxy recommendations. In practice, institutional investors appear to have been relatively passive shareholders, in the sense that they have tended to initiate relatively few reform proposals. Before the past twenty years, most reform proposals were submitted by a handful of individuals and religious groups. Since the mid-1980s, some institutional investors--mainly large public pension funds and a few union funds--have stepped up to the plate and offered their own proposals, but corporate pension funds, mutual funds, and insurance companies have remained on the sidelines. Appearances can be misleading, however. Some institutional investors are active behind the scenes, keeping close contact with the management of the firms in their portfolios directly rather than through reform proposals. Moreover, passive institutional investors may still benefit shareholders as a whole by facilitating the building of shareholder coalitions that are initiated by others or by posing a possible threat to managers who might fail to act in the interest of shareholders. Ultimately, the question of whether institutional investors mitigate corporate governance problems is an empirical one. Academic work in this area has not convincingly linked institutional holdings to firm performance, but some studies have shown that institutional shareholder activism does appear to be motivated by efforts to increase shareholder value, and other studies have confirmed that institutional activism is associated with a greater incidence of corporate governance events, such as shareholder lawsuits and corporate takeovers. Based on these findings, it would be premature to conclude that the rising share of household equity held by institutional investors is clearly good in terms of sound corporate governance. That said, it does seem reasonable to believe that institutional shareholder activism has benefits and that these benefits may help pave the way for market discipline in a broader sense. I am hopeful that changes in the regulatory environment will promote greater attention to corporate governance. The SEC proposed a rule this past December that would require mutual funds to disclose their entire portfolio holdings every quarter rather than every six months, and only a few weeks ago the SEC finalized a rule calling for compulsory disclosure of mutual fund proxy voting records. As we go forward in the United States, even if transparency through corporate financial reports improves, shareholder activism will continue to be important for mitigating conflicts between management and shareholders. However, we must recognize that shareholder activism is not a substitute for disclosure. Neither activism nor the more common discipline device of selling the firm's debt and equity can work well without accurate and complete disclosure. And in bank-based systems, the experience of Japan and Germany suggests that, while banks may have some advantages over shareholders in mitigating governance problems, transparency and market discipline are still fundamental to sound corporate governance.
Remarks by Vice Chairman Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. At the University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia February 12, 2003 Rules and Flexibility in Monetary Policy Thank you for honoring me with this opportunity to deliver a Charter lecture. As you know, these lectures are designed to commemorate the high ideals highlighted in the charter that established the University of Georgia in 1785. In broad terms, the charter defines some of the fundamental objectives for this university, including working to foster an informed public and thereby promoting an effectively functioning democracy. In addition, the charter describes the key instrument by which the university is to pursue these objectives--namely providing higher education to the public. The charter is also notable for what it does not describe. It does not, for example, lay out a rigid curriculum that all students must complete. The founders no doubt recognized that the university would need a degree of flexibility in designing its programs to suit the needs of a changing student body and changing times. As it happens, academics as well as practicing central bankers around the world have devoted a great deal of thought over the past ten to twenty years to defining the goals and objectives that should be included in central bank charters and also to describing how central banks should go about achieving these goals. In many ways, this discussion has led to a fair degree of consensus around a model similar to that embodied in the University of Georgia charter; that is, central bank charters should clearly state key objectives and describe in general terms the tools that central banks can use to pursue those objectives. However, central bankers, like educators, require some flexibility in applying their tools in order to respond appropriately to changing circumstances over time. The emergence of sustained inflationary pressures in the 1960s and 1970s and central banks' long and difficult struggle to combat these pressures helped forge this consensus. Inflation began to drift higher during the Vietnam War and flared into double digits following the sharp increases in oil prices in the middle and late 1970s. Although snapping the inflationary spiral was painful for our nation--the recession of the early 1980s was the deepest since the Great Depression--the subsequent prosperity in terms of income growth and economic stability has been unprecedented. The experience deepened the conviction of many economists and central bankers that economic policies that push an economy to operate beyond its long-run potential to produce inevitably lead to rising rates of inflation. Moreover, the strong economic performance of the U.S. economy following the taming of inflation has supported the view that price stability fosters economic efficiency and higher productivity. Indeed, price stability is now a formal objective included in the charters of nearly all central banks. A firm long-run focus on price stability does not mean that the central bank cannot have other economic goals, although central bankers disagree on this somewhat, at least in emphasis and priority. Many nations or economic regions, including the United Kingdom and the euro area, have adopted price stability as their primary objective. But in our case, we often summarize the multiple statutory goals of the Federal Reserve in terms of the "dual objectives" of price stability and sustainable economic growth. We see these twin objectives as fully compatible in the long run. Our experience in the United States has been that multiple objectives for policy do not undermine policy performance when the public is convinced that the central bank is committed to price stability over the long run. Indeed, the commitment to long-run price stability can afford the central bank some flexibility in employing its tools to address shorter-run economic issues. Certainly such has been the case for the United States in recent years. Since I joined the Federal Reserve in 1997, the U.S. economy has weathered a remarkable series of economic shocks--both positive and negative--and the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has adjusted the stance of monetary policy over a wide range in response to those shocks. And yet, through it all, long-term inflation expectations have remained very stable and at very low levels. Partly as a result, long-term nominal interest rates, which contain a premium reflecting long-term inflation expectations, are as low as they have been in fifty years. Although central bankers have focused much of their attention on combating and containing inflation pressures over recent decades, the very low levels of inflation and recent sluggish economic growth in the United States have prompted worries in some quarters about the potential for deflation in this country. The case of Japan in recent years serves as a cautionary tale about the dangers of deflation, especially when a central bank has pushed its traditional policy tool--the short-term interest rate--to zero. However, I believe that the risks of a general deflation in the United States are minimal. First, further aggressive monetary and, in all probability, fiscal stimulus would be brought to bear in the unlikely event that deflation were to become a threat. Furthermore, unlike the situation in Japan, the balance sheets of financial firms in this country are fundamentally sound, and so the U.S. financial system seems less prone to debt-deflation dynamics. And perhaps even more important, the U.S. economy has proven enormously resilient and productive in recent years, and the gains in productivity have continued even as the economy has experienced subpar growth. Finally, current rates of inflation depend to a large extent on the inflation rates that people expect in the future, so the stability of inflation expectations over recent years should be a factor working against any buildup of deflationary pressures. Inflation expectations are so stable in part because central bankers have been increasingly clear about both their long-run inflation objectives and their shorter-run tactics in pursuing those objectives. As a case in point, the increase in the transparency of U.S. monetary policy over the past two decades has been quite significant. Twenty years ago the monetary policy decisions of the FOMC were inferred by legions of Fed-watchers who gleaned information from slight variations in how we conducted our open market operations. In the mid-1990s, we began to announce our policy in general terms after each meeting. Now not only do we announce our short-term operating target for the federal funds rate, but we also explain the rationale for our actions, immediately identify the members of the FOMC favoring and dissenting from a policy decision, and announce how we view the risks facing the economy. I am pleased to have been associated with some of the Federal Reserve's more recent initiatives to foster greater transparency and believe that the FOMC should be, and is, willing to consider ideas for greater transparency as they arise. Even with that intent, there are practical limits on how transparent any central bank, including the Federal Reserve, can be. The FOMC is, after all, a committee of individuals with regularly changing membership. As any of you who has ever served on a committee knows, reaching a consensus can be difficult, and explaining a group decision that has resulted from the interplay and balancing of individual views can be challenging to say the least. And the economy is complex, changing, and at best imperfectly understood. As a result, explaining the current economic situation and the way the economy will be affected by our policy actions is not a straightforward task. Still, within those limits we seek to be as clear as possible in our intentions and reasons for our actions. This striving for transparency is a common principle that most central banks have adopted. Reinforcing the trend to transparency, central banks have arguably become more systematic in their responses to the economy over the past several decades. Systematic policy setting is easier to explain and anticipate and, as a consequence, helps to limit economic uncertainty associated with the conduct of monetary policy. A resurgence in interest and research about systematic approaches to monetary policy was sparked by the observation of John Taylor, currently Undersecretary of the Department of the Treasury, that the FOMC's conduct of monetary policy since the late 1980s has been well explained by a simple formula, often called the Taylor rule, that relates the level of the federal funds rate to the observed levels of the inflation and the unemployment rates. John Taylor's keen insight was offered originally as a rough benchmark for policy and not as a binding, prescriptive "rule." And, in fact, the difference between the actual setting of the federal funds rate and the Taylor rule can be large at times, particularly at critical points when the economic outlook has changed suddenly. The part of policy not explained by the rule then reflects the large volume of information about the economy and its prospects that is not captured by current inflation and unemployment rates but that the FOMC does take into account. The FOMC uses all this information in an attempt to anticipate developments; the Taylor rule is backward looking. These differences between actual policy and policies predicted by a backward-looking rule also reflect our imperfect and constantly evolving understanding of the structure of the economy. The success of the Taylor rule in capturing the broad contour of policy actions in recent years has prompted an enormous amount of economic research in search of refinements to or extensions of the original Taylor rule that could provide an even more precise guide for central bankers--in effect, a rule that could serve as an "automatic pilot" for monetary policy. In my view, rules, including the Taylor rule and its many variations, are useful benchmarks, but following an automatic policy prescribed by any pre-established rule would unnecessarily and undesirably limit the flexibility and judgment necessary in setting monetary policy. I have similar misgivings about other formulaic monetary policy proposals--sometimes referred to as strict inflation targeting--that would require the Federal Reserve to announce a numerical inflation target or range and conduct monetary policy at all times so as to keep actual inflation close to that objective. In effect, advocates of strict inflation targeting would have the central bank follow an amended Taylor-type rule in which the setting of interest rates is determined solely by the deviation of actual or projected inflation from a target. I would argue that the conduct of monetary policy and the associated economic performance in the United States in recent years clearly demonstrate that a central bank can and, if directed by the elected officials who create the central bank, should do more than this. As I've noted, the Federal Reserve has successfully established a credible commitment to long-term price stability while operating within a framework that allows flexibility in adjusting the stance of policy in the near-term in response to fluctuations in both economic activity and inflation. Although our understanding of the economy and monetary policy has improved considerably over the past several decades, it is not nearly advanced enough to allow us to pre-specify an optimal policy rule or to adopt a rigid targeting framework that will serve well in all circumstances. And an important part of our understanding of the economy is the lesson that people's behavior may change over time. Furthermore, while requiring the Federal Reserve to target an inflation rate might seem to make our intentions more transparent and credible, the existing twin goals of stable prices and maximum sustainable growth, as I noted, are mutually compatible. Given that inflation is low and stable and that the Federal Reserve has achieved credibility in its commitment to maintain price stability while still acting to buffer employment and output from excessive variability, I see no advantage to taking away our mandate to be concerned about developments other than inflation rates or inflation prospects. What I have just outlined, and rejected, are the strictest forms of rule-based guidance for the Federal Reserve. Strict inflation targeting and other rule-based approaches are ideas put forward by some central bank observers. However, a more nuanced proposal has emerged more recently, known as flexible inflation targeting. Under this regime, a central bank, in this case the Federal Reserve, announces an inflation target and commits to keeping inflation near the target at some horizon while recognizing that inflation may deviate from the target on occasion as other important objectives take on temporary urgency. This approach is in interesting middle ground, but I think advocates of it must recognize some concerns. In particular, I wonder if a central bank announcing the flexible pursuit of a specific numerical target could suffer some loss of credibility. Such an approach might leave the central bank open to the criticism that it has adopted only the language of a more formal inflation target without any of the constraints that normally go with such a regime and, in doing so, is being less transparent, not more. Having an announced inflation target that is pursued flexibly might also lead to greater uncertainty about policy. Deviations of inflation from the target would be highly visible, and the public might not know whether the central bank would choose to return inflation immediately to the target or allow the deviation from target to persist for some time. Allowing inflation to persist by exercising the various escape clauses embedded in many flexible inflation-targeting regimes might also erode central bank credibility. Most important, I believe that the quantified inflation target would come to take greater prominence over other important and consistent objectives implied by the flexible approach, with an inevitable reduction in flexibility and a downplaying of those other objectives. Finally, I believe that proponents of these various rule-based and formulaic approaches put too little weight on the institutional strength of the FOMC. The committee's members, being well-versed in the monetary history of the 1970s and 1980s, recognize the great effort that previous incarnations of the FOMC expended to gain credibility as a central bank committed to price stability, and I expect that future generations of the committee will share that understanding. I do not believe that the current members of the committee will let that position of public trust slip away through inattention, and future members, if they are well selected, should do likewise. To this point, I've noted my concerns about strict rule-based or other formulaic approaches to monetary policy for the United States mostly at an abstract level. But my views have been shaped importantly by the many practical challenges we've faced just in the time that I've been a member of the Board and the FOMC. One of the most notable economic developments in recent years has been the evident step-up in the rate of productivity growth. That development resulted in a considerable divergence of the actual level of inflation from the levels that would have been anticipated based on historical relationships. An automatic, rule-based approach to policy almost surely would have led us in the late 1990s to tighten policy much too aggressively. Instead, the Federal Reserve recognized the changes under way and took account of the step-up in productivity growth in reaching a judgment about the rate of "sustainable economic growth." This judgment permitted more-rapid income growth and considerable progress in reducing unemployment while containing the risk of inflation. Episodes of financial turmoil in recent years have also provided examples of the need for flexibility and discretion in the conduct of monetary policy--and the potential pitfalls of rigid rule-based policy. In the fall of 1998, for example, in the wake of the default by Russia and with financial markets still rattled by the Asian crisis a year earlier, a large hedge fund nearly failed, and several other financial institutions took large losses. Many investors appeared to revise upward their assessments of the riskiness of various counterparties and investments and to become less willing to bear risk. The resulting loss of confidence was described by the Secretary of the Treasury as the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression. Even though the unemployment rate was reaching new lows--which according to standard relationships would lead to higher inflation and which standard monetary policy rules would recommend addressing by tightening policy--the FOMC judged that the severity of the financial crises was likely to imperil future growth and lowered interest rates substantially. By early 1999, financial markets had improved, and the FOMC began to raise rates in view of strong growth in aggregate demand and resulting pressures on our nation's labor and capital resources, which, if left unchecked, could have resulted in greater inflation. As you may remember, concerns were widespread during 1999 that computer systems controlling everything from cash registers to power grids could fail because of Y2K bugs in computer code. Given the pervasiveness of automated systems in the financial sector, concerns about fixing the Y2K bug in that sector were particularly severe. Despite intensive and careful preparations, market participants and others remained concerned that computer failures could result in problems for individual firms and, conceivably, even for the economy. Firms, for example, were extremely reluctant to be exposed to the risk that on January 1, 2000, they would be unable to roll over their debt, and banks similarly were concerned about their own access to funding. In view of these concerns, the Federal Reserve put in place a number of contingency measures to ensure the availability of adequate liquidity to the economy. Moreover, to minimize the risk that monetary policy would inadvertently trigger problems, the monetary tightening process was put on hold at the December 21, 1999, meeting to minimize the uncertainty when everyone was concerned about the century date change. As it turned out, the careful planning and massive investment in updated and more-robust information technology paid off--computers functioned smoothly. Again, our approach to monetary policy in the run-up to Y2K would have been very difficult to capture in a simple rule, or in a complicated one for that matter. A few months following Y2K, the stock markets began the steep decline that has reversed much of the remarkable rise witnessed over the latter half of the 1990s. That decline has been one source of the weakness that has undermined the expansion of the economy over the past two years. In recognition of that experience, many have characterized the extraordinary rise in stock prices in the late 1990s as a bubble--a significant and protracted departure in asset prices from fundamentals--and the subsequent decline as a popping of that bubble. Our recent experience has given renewed spark to a vigorous debate about the appropriate response of monetary policy to financial bubbles, with some economists criticizing the Federal Reserve for not having done more to stem the expansion of the bubble. Economists agree that bubbles can impair the functioning of the economy by promoting a misallocation of resources when they are inflating and by provoking severe dislocations when they pop. But because we are talking about economists, you can be sure their opinions differ substantially after that. One branch of economists holds the view that monetary policy should not be influenced by any perceived financial market bubbles. An extreme version of this view is that bubbles probably do not exist--that rational market processes always price assets at their fundamental value. A more moderate version is that even if bubbles do exist, they cannot reliably be identified, and even if bubbles can be identified, we do not know how they respond to monetary policy. The extreme view at the other end of the spectrum holds that central banks should pop bubbles as soon as they can. According to this view, by raising interest rates when a bubble begins, the central bank can avoid the volatility that occurs when a bubble fully inflates and then pops. Central bankers need to be practical, not extreme, and consequently my view falls somewhere in between. On the one hand, I am skeptical that central bankers or anyone else can accurately identify bubbles as they are inflating, and I know of no central banker who understands with great certainty how bubbles respond to monetary policy. On the other hand, the FOMC does attempt to take into account the effect of asset values on the economy when setting interest rates and does consider the likely reaction of asset prices to our policy decisions. Another type of financial instability that can influence monetary policy in a way that is very difficult to embed in a rule occurs when important intermediaries--banks, securities dealers, hedge funds--fail or when markets seize up in a financial crisis. This can happen when a financial bubble pops but also after a large swing in interest rates, commodity prices, or other prices or even, as I will discuss in a moment, a terrorist attack that causes financial market participants to pull back from risk-taking. The Federal Reserve was organized, in part, to combat such financial instability, and economists broadly agree that a central bank should respond to this sort of financial crisis. Generally, in severe financial crises, central banks inject liquidity into the financial system to meet temporarily higher demands and may even inject enough liquidity to lower short-term interest rates if a crisis seems likely to damp economic activity. The goal is to provide liquidity for the market as a whole, not assistance to specific institutions. Some may argue that either type of financial instability--that associated with the formation and popping of bubbles and that associated with the breakdown of markets or the failure of intermediaries--can be incorporated into a policy rule by simply making the rule more forward-looking. The central bank responds to the financial difficulties precisely because they threaten to imperil future economic growth. I would certainly agree that forward-looking rules--rules that take into account likely future developments--are likely to be better bases for monetary policy than backward-looking rules. But I remain convinced that the appropriate response to complex, rapidly changing financial developments cannot be simply quantified even when mapped through forecasts of economic activity, and hence it requires flexibility and judgment on the part of the policymakers. Events in 2001 could not have more clearly demonstrated the need for flexibility in monetary policymaking and the inevitable shortcomings of rigid monetary policy rules. When terrorists destroyed the World Trade Center, they disrupted our financial system on an unprecedented scale. Nonetheless, by that afternoon or the next day, most financial institutions had moved to backup sites, using contingency arrangements that had in many cases been strengthened for the century date change; within several days the financial system had recovered most of its functionality. Still, the Federal Reserve needed to respond to the initial dislocations as well as the more enduring economic fallout. In the days following the attacks, we provided a massive injection of liquidity, initially in the form of direct lending through the discount window and subsequently through open market operations. Shortly thereafter, in view of signs that the attacks had caused a severe negative shock to confidence, the Federal Reserve began to ease monetary policy to cushion the likely resulting pullback in spending by households and businesses, again departing from the prescriptions of monetary policy rules based solely upon available backward-looking data for the recent values of variables such as inflation and unemployment. In sum, over the past twenty-five years some important consensuses have been achieved on the best way to conduct monetary policy. Central banks have adopted price stability as a key long-term objective, and they have become more transparent and systematic in their operations. However, opinion on how to conduct policy divides in at least two critical areas--how rigidly monetary policy should be determined by rules and the way monetary policy should respond to financial instability. In my view, these are closely related: Because responding to financial crises requires flexibility, policy cannot be tied too tightly to a rule. As long as policymakers are clear about their aversion to price instability and act in accordance with that aversion, they can respond flexibly to economic and financial developments without losing credibility as fighters for price stability. Therefore, rules and targets may not be an improvement over flexible implementation of policy with multiple objectives. This statement, of course, assumes that the central bank has and maintains its credibility in the pursuit of price stability. As I noted at the beginning of my remarks, the need for clear fundamental objectives and for flexibility in the pursuit of those objectives was recognized in the charter of this university more than 200 years ago. I believe that the central banking community can be equally clear in recognizing the importance of flexibility in the conduct of monetary policy in the context of clear fundamental objectives.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced the issuance of a Final Decision and Order of Prohibition against Cynthia Rowe, a former employee of Key Bank, N.A., Cleveland, Ohio. The Order, the result of an action brought by the Office of Comptroller of the Currency, prohibits Ms. Rowe from participating in the conduct of the affairs of any financial institution or holding company. Attached are the Board's Final Decision and Order relating to this action.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced Friday that the Consumer Advisory Council will hold its next meeting on Thursday, March 13. The meeting will take place in Dining Room E, Terrace level, in the Board's Martin Building. The session will begin at 9:00 a.m. and is open to the public. Anyone planning to attend the meeting should, for security purposes, register no later than Tuesday, March 11, by completing the form found on-line at: . Additionally, attendees must present photo identification to enter the building. The Council's function is to advise the Board on the exercise of its responsibilities under various consumer financial services laws and on other matters on which the Board seeks its advice. Time permitting, the Council will discuss the following topics: Check Bounce Protection Predatory Lending Truth in Lending Act Reports by committees and other matters initiated by the Council members may also be discussed. The Board invites comments from the public on any of these matters.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday approved a final rule amending Regulation B, which implements the Equal Credit Opportunity Act (ECOA). Among other things, the final rule addresses the collection of applicants' personal characteristics in connection with nonmortgage credit and record retention for prescreened solicitations. The final rule amending Regulation B is effective April 15, 2003. However, to allow time for any necessary operational changes, the mandatory compliance date is April 15, 2004. The ECOA prohibits discrimination on the basis of a credit applicant's national origin, marital status, religion, color, sex, race, age, receipt of public assistance benefits, or the exercise of rights under the Consumer Credit Protection Act. In 1976, the Board adopted a general prohibition against creditors inquiring about, or noting, applicant characteristics such as race or national origin in connection with nonmortgage credit. By restricting access to such information, the existing prohibition serves to deter credit discrimination. But it also prevents creditors from examining their own lending policies and practices using information about applicant characteristics. The Board is now creating an exception that will allow creditors to collect personal characteristics in a self-test for compliance with the ECOA. This exception will enable creditors to develop compliance programs that utilize applicant data in a controlled and targeted manner. The self-test must meet standards set by the regulation, which carries out a provision contained in the ECOA. Under the regulation, a self-test is a program, practice, or study designed and used by a creditor specifically to determine compliance with the ECOA. The regulation requires the creditor to take corrective action when the results of the self-test indicate that "it is more likely than not" that a violation occurred. The results of a self-test can be made privileged, provided the creditor carries out corrective action where appropriate. This means, for example, that the results cannot be obtained in an examination or investigation alleging a violation of the ECOA. Other information--such as whether a creditor conducted a self-test, the methodology used, or the scope of the test--is not privileged. Creditors that conduct a self-test and request information about personal characteristics must disclose to applicants that providing the information is optional, that it is being collected to monitor for compliance with the ECOA, that it will not be used in making the credit decision, and, where applicable, that information may be noted based on visual observation or surname. A model form is contained in the regulation to ease compliance. The final rule also requires creditors to retain for 25 months certain records related to prescreened solicitations, such as the list of criteria used to select potential customers. The retention of these records is intended to allow the systematic review and analysis of creditors' possible use of race, age, national origin, and other prohibited bases of credit discrimination in connection with prescreened solicitations. The Board has also amended the official staff commentary to Regulation B that gives guidance on the requirements of the regulation.
Remarks by Governor Ben S. Bernanke At the 41st Annual Winter Institute, St. Cloud State University, St. Cloud, Minnesota February 21, 2003 Balance Sheets and the Recovery Economic growth and prosperity are created primarily by what economists call "real" factors--the productivity of the workforce, the quantity and quality of the capital stock, the availability of land and natural resources, the state of technical knowledge, and the creativity and skills of entrepreneurs and managers. But extensive practical experience as well as much formal research has highlighted the crucial supporting role that financial factors play in the economy. An entrepreneur with a great new idea for building a better mousetrap or curing the common cold needs access to financial capital--provided, for example, by a bank or a venture capitalist--to transform that idea into a profitable commercial enterprise. To expand and modernize their plants and increase their staffs, most firms must turn to bond markets, stock markets, or banks to obtain the necessary financial resources. And without a well-functioning mortgage market, most families would not be able to buy homes, undercutting one of our most vital industries. In short, healthy financial conditions help a country to realize its full economic potential. For this reason, one of the first priorities of developing nations is often to establish a modern, well-functioning financial system. Just as a strong financial system promotes growth, adverse financial conditions--for example, a weak banking system grappling with nonperforming loans and insufficient capital, or firms and households whose creditworthiness has eroded because of high leverage, poor income prospects, and assets of declining value--may prevent an economy from realizing its potential. A striking contemporary case is that of Japan, where the financial problems of banks and corporations have contributed substantially to a decade of subpar growth. Likewise, the severity of the Great Depression of the 1930s was greatly increased by the near-collapse of banking and financial systems in a number of major countries, including the United States. Changes in financial conditions may also play a prominent role in the contraction and recovery phases of business cycles, although the specific aspects of the financial system most affected vary from cycle to cycle. For example, recovery from the 1990-91 recession was delayed by the "financial headwinds" arising from regional shortages of bank capital (Bernanke and Lown, 1991). From a financial perspective, the most striking developments of the most recent recession have been sharp declines in equity values (particularly in the high-tech sector) and a series of large, high-profile corporate bankruptcies. Other financial developments have been the subject of comment, however, including the rise in various indicators of financial stress among both consumer and corporate borrowers. Like many others, we at the Federal Reserve are trying to peer into the future and divine the shape of the U.S. economic recovery in 2003 and beyond. In doing so, we have necessarily had to ask: Will financial conditions--as reflected in, for example, the balance sheets and income statements of households, firms, and financial intermediaries--support a strong recovery? Or will financial problems in one or more sectors restrain spending and economic growth? These are the questions I will address today. To anticipate, I will conclude that--although areas of financial weakness are certainly present in the economy, as in every recession--the financial problems that currently exist do not seem sufficient to prevent an increasingly robust economic recovery during this year and next. In particular, households and the banking system seem to be in good financial condition for this stage of the business cycle. The story for firms is more mixed, with some companies and sectors under significant financial pressure. However, as I will discuss, many firms have taken advantage of low interest rates to restructure their balance sheets and most seem financially capable of undertaking new capital investment and of ramping up hiring. I will talk briefly about each of these vital sectors: households, firms, and banks. Before continuing, however, I should remind you that the views I express today are mine alone and do not necessarily represent the opinions of my colleagues at the Federal Reserve System or on the Federal Open Market Committee. The financial health of households Let's start our financial checkup of the economy with the critical household, or consumer, sector. Consumer spending accounts for more than two-thirds of gross domestic product (GDP), and residential investment--the construction of new homes--makes up another 4 percent or so of GDP. In 2002, with firms extremely reluctant to make new capital investments or build inventories, strong consumer spending was instrumental in supporting the early stages of the recovery. However, concerns have been raised about the ability of households to continue "shouldering the load," so to speak. Are consumers overburdened, financially speaking? Or do they have the capacity to continue to keep spending at a reasonable pace? According to virtually all studies of household expenditure, two principal factors affect the consumer's ability and willingness to spend. The first factor is real (that is, inflation-adjusted) after-tax income, also called real disposable income, and the second is real wealth. Taken together, disposable income (both current and expected) and wealth summarize the household's lifetime command over resources and thus are major determinants of willingness to spend. A principal reason for the consumer's resilience during the past two years has been continued healthy growth in real disposable income. Real disposable income typically declines at some point during a recession, and indeed the National Bureau of Economic Research's business cycle dating committee treats a period of decline in real income as a primary indicator that a recession has begun. In this latest downturn, however, unlike most recessions, real income never did stop growing; instead it rose by 1.8 percent in 2001 and by a surprisingly strong 4.5 percent in 2002. These increases in real income were made possible to a significant extent by tax cuts and increased transfer payments, although increases in real wages played a role as well. Expectations for future increases in real disposable income also appear to be relatively optimistic, perhaps reflecting the recent strong performance of labor productivity. For example, the most recent Blue Chip consensus forecast is for real disposable income to grow 3.1 percent in 2003 and 3.5 percent in 2004 and to average growth of 3.2 percent per year over the 2004-13 period. For comparison, the average growth in real disposable income between 1993 and 2000 was 3.4 percent. In short, there is a reasonable chance that, in terms of real income growth, the next decade should be as good for households as the nineties were. Although income and income prospects are positive factors for household spending, the behavior of wealth--that is, household assets minus household liabilities--has been more of a mixed bag. Between 1980 and 1994, the ratio of household wealth to household disposable income remained roughly stable, hovering between about 4.3 and 5.0. Then, beginning in 1994, the ratio of household wealth to income surged, peaking at more than 6.0 in 2000. In the past three years or so, however, the ratio of wealth to income has fallen back to about the 1994 level, at just under 5.0. As you might guess, almost all of this large swing is attributable to the recent boom and bust in the stock market. The aggregate value of U.S. equities, which approximately equaled household disposable income at the end of 1994, reached 2.5 times disposable income at the beginning of 2000, but then it fell back to 1.3 times disposable income by the end of 2002. Most of us have heard the wry joke that our 401(k)s are now 201(k)s! Although in dollar terms, stockholdings remain concentrated in the upper income brackets, the pain of falling stock prices during the past three years has been widely shared: More than half of all U.S. households now own at least some equities, either directly or indirectly through such vehicles as mutual funds, pension plans, variable annuities, and personal trusts (Aizcorbe, Kennickell, and Moore, 2003). For some households at least, losses in stock portfolios have been mitigated by significant increases in the value of residential real estate. These rises in house prices have led some to worry about the possibility of a "bubble" in housing prices and the associated risks of further losses in household wealth, should this putative bubble pop. Let me digress for a moment to address this issue. Although bubbles in any asset are notoriously hard to spot in advance (if they were obvious to the naked eye, they would not arise in the first place), in my judgment there is today little evidence of serious or systematic overvaluation in the U.S. residential housing market. In particular, for the nation as a whole, the rise in house prices appears to have closely tracked economic fundamentals--including rising household incomes, high rates of household formation, and historically low mortgage interest rates. Also, the U.S. housing market is not a single market but many markets that are highly dispersed geographically across dozens of disparate standard metropolitan statistical areas, or SMSAs. Experience suggests that house prices across SMSAs are rather imperfectly correlated and that price reversals, when they occur, are typically localized. Moreover, the ratio of the value of mortgage loans outstanding to home values in the aggregate has been roughly constant over the past few years, and most homeowners have substantial equity in their homes; thus even if moderate declines in house prices were to occur, they would not impose financial hardship on the great majority of households. Returning to the main thread of the discussion, I now address two related questions: First, how has the overall decline in wealth associated with the fall in stock prices affected consumer spending thus far, and second, how is it likely to affect spending in the next year or so? Statistical analyses by economists have found that a one-dollar change in wealth leads to a permanent change in consumption spending, in the same direction, of about three to five cents--the so-called "wealth effect." The full effect of a major shift in wealth on consumption spending appears to take place over a period of one to three years. Fed staff estimates are that wealth effects held back the growth in consumption spending by about 1-1/2 percentage points last year, relative to what it would have been otherwise. Assuming no further major declines in the ratio of wealth to income, this drag should diminish a bit, to about 1 percent this year and  percent next year. In short, the largest part of the negative wealth effect created by the fall in stock prices is probably behind us. One might wish to dig deeper, of course. For example, disaggregating wealth into asset and liability components is sometimes useful. Breaking out household liabilities reveals that aggregate household debt and the debt service burden--that is, interest on debt measured relative to disposable income--rose to fairly high levels in recent years. For example, the ratio of debt service to disposable income peaked at 14.4 percent in the fourth quarter of 2001, although it fell somewhat in 2002 as disposable income rose and interest rates declined. A few other indicators of financial pressures have also risen. For example, personal bankruptcies rose 5 percent between 2001 and 2002 to hit a new high, and have continued to be elevated. Do these indicators imply that the consumer is financially overextended? Broadly, I think the answer is "no." In this regard, two items are worth stressing: first, the composition of the recent surge in consumer debt and, second, the role of the recent growth of the subprime credit market. Regarding the composition of debt, a key fact is that most of the recent expansion in consumer debt has been in the form of mortgage debt. Indeed, in 2002 new mortgage debt accounted for close to 90 percent of the overall growth in household debt. This recent growth in mortgage debt continues a marked trend. Between 1992 and 2002, mortgage debt of households rose from 59 percent of aggregate disposable income to 74 percent of disposable income. Why has mortgage debt risen by so much in the past decade? One very positive factor is the secular increase in U.S. homeownership rates. Because of rising incomes, increased rates of family formation, and the expansion of so-called subprime mortgage lending, more people have chosen to buy homes rather than to rent, increasing the value of mortgages outstanding. A second factor is favorable tax treatment: The 1986 tax reform act, which retained the tax-deductible status of mortgage interest but eliminated it for other types of loans, spurred a substitution of mortgage debt for consumer credit (for example, through the popularization of home equity lines of credit). Finally, most recently, mortgage debt has been powerfully boosted by the low mortgage interest rates available in the past couple of years. These low rates have stimulated record amounts of new home construction, which has not only permitted a growing number of Americans the opportunity for home ownership but has played a vital role in maintaining aggregate demand throughout the recession and recovery--not only in the construction industry but in ancillary industries such as home furnishings. As you may know, low mortgage rates have not only stimulated home construction but have also induced an enormous wave of refinancing of existing mortgages. According to a recent article in the Federal Reserve Bulletin (Canner, Dynan, and Passmore, 2002), 10 percent of U.S. households surveyed in the first half of 2002 reported having refinanced a home mortgage since the beginning of 2001. Refinancing has allowed homeowners both to take advantage of lower rates to reduce their monthly payments and, in many cases, to "extract" some of the built-up equity in their homes. According to the Fed study, the average amount of home equity extracted in cash-out transactions in 2001 and early 2002 was $27,000. Refinancing activity surged further in the second half of 2002: According to one set of Federal Reserve staff estimates, mortgage refinancings totaled $400 billion in the third quarter of 2002 and more than $550 billion in the fourth quarter of 2002, after averaging $325 billion (quarterly rate) over the preceding six quarters. From a macroeconomic point of view the refinancing phenomenon has very likely been a supportive factor. The precise effect is difficult to identify, since we cannot know for sure how much of the spending financed by equity cash-outs might have taken place anyway. Fairly generous assumptions about the propensity of households to devote equity cash-outs to new spending suggest that refinancings may have boosted annualized real consumption growth between  and  percentage point in the second half of 2002, the period of maximum impact. A fairly substantial gap still remains between the current level of mortgage interest rates and the average level of interest on the outstanding stock of mortgages, suggesting that refinancings should continue at a brisk pace in the early part of this year. As refinancings slow later this year, however, they will create a slight drag on consumption growth relative to 2002. An important aspect of the surge in mortgage refinancings is that, on the whole, they have probably improved rather than worsened the average financial condition of the household sector. Notably, a substantial portion of equity extraction, probably about 25 percent, has been used to pay down more expensive, nondeductible consumer credit (such as credit card debt or auto loans), with additional funds used to make purchases (such as cars or tuition) that would otherwise have been financed by more expensive and less tax-favored credit. In short, the consumer has taken advantage of an unusual opportunity to do some balance sheet restructuring. This restructuring has not come at the cost of a dangerous increase in leverage. As already noted, loan-to-value ratios for home mortgages have barely changed in recent years. Moreover, analysis by members of the Federal Reserve staff suggests that the great bulk of cashed-out equity has been taken out by older, long-tenure homeowners who have gone into the transaction with high levels of home equity (often 100 percent equity) and have retained substantial equity after the transaction. In summary, a deeper analysis shows that much of the apparent recent increase in the household sector's debt burden reflects a combination of increased home ownership, partial liquidation of the home equity of long-tenure households, and balance-sheet restructuring by households toward a more tax-efficient and collateralized form of debt, that is, mortgage debt. For many families this restructuring has resulted in lower leverage and payments, rather than the reverse. I conclude, therefore, that the rise in consumer debt for the most part does not presage financial problems in the household sector. What then about the rise in bankruptcy rates and similar indicators? Bankruptcy rates are hard to forecast, as they vary over time with changes in law and financial practice; moreover, they themselves do not tend to forecast broad economic conditions very well. One partial explanation for their recent increase, as I intimated earlier, may be the expansion earlier in the decade of the so-called subprime lending market, in which lenders sought to make loans to households whose credit histories excluded them from the mainstream market. Although some legitimate concerns have been raised about lending abuses in this market, overall the expansion of the subprime market is a positive development, opening up as it does new opportunities for borrowers previously excluded from credit markets. Not unexpectedly, however, lenders, borrowers, and regulators have faced a significant learning curve as this market has developed, and perhaps we should not be surprised that some of the loans made in this market in a period of strong economic growth have become distressed in a period of recession and rising unemployment. Moreover, default rates tend to increase with loan age, so that even absent a macroeconomic downturn it would not be entirely unexpected to see a rise in defaults as the subprime loans made in the nineties begin to age. We hope that, as the market evolves and becomes more sophisticated, its sensitivity to cyclical fluctuations will decline, which--among other things--should reduce the cost of credit to subprime borrowers. Broadly speaking, the bottom line is that the consumer seems in pretty good shape for this stage of the cycle. As I indicated, I expect that household spending will continue into 2003 and 2004 at a pace consistent with a strengthening recovery. Probably the main risk to this forecast is not the state of household balance sheets but the state of the labor market, as a significant increase in unemployment might lead consumers to retrench. At this point, however, the labor market, while not nearly as robust as we would wish, appears at least to be stable. The financial health of firms If consumers have done their part and more for the economic recovery, so far the dog that hasn't barked is the business sector. True, firms have distinguished themselves in at least one way: The increases in productivity we have seen in the nonfarm business sector over the past two years have been truly remarkable, particularly in light of the fact that productivity growth is typically weak during cyclical declines. Clearly, managers have dedicated themselves to producing more with less and to raising profits by cutting costs. In another, critical sense, however, the business sector has not yet played its normal role in the recovery. Atypically for the post-World War II period, the current recession began as a slowdown in the business sector, particularly in capital investment, rather than as a retrenchment in household spending. Now, two years after the recession began, firms continue to be highly reluctant to expand operations--either by investing in new capital equipment or by adding to their workforces. What's going on? Let's start by discussing the fundamentals underlying firms' investment and hiring, and then ask whether financial conditions can support the fundamentals. As I speak, the enormous uncertainty regarding the situation in Iraq and other foreign hot spots still continues to cast a heavy pall on firms' planning for the future. That uncertainty will have to be significantly reduced, I think, before we can get a real sense of the strength of the underlying economic forces driving the nascent recovery. However, a number of factors suggest that investment and hiring should pick up in the months ahead. For some time now, the business sector has been meeting a growing final demand without adding capital or employees. Presumably, businesses cannot indefinitely squeeze increasing productivity out of fixed resources and eventually will need to invest and add workers to meet the demand for their output. Moreover, much of the investment done during the 1990s boom was in relatively short-lived equipment, which may soon need replacement. Inventories are also currently lean and will likely need replenishment if final demand grows as forecast. Other fundamental factors support the idea that investment will gradually increase this year. The cost of capital remains low for most firms, reflecting the attractive long-term interest rates for borrowers with good prospects and the tax benefits to investing in equipment created by the partial expensing provision. Cash flows are improving. Ongoing technological changes imply that adding the newest generation of equipment should make possible still greater gains in productivity. Indeed, aggregate investment is currently well below what standard econometric models would predict, an effect that I attribute primarily to an unusually high level of uncertainty about geopolitical events and, to a lesser extent, about the likely near-term evolution of the economy. If that interpretation is correct, then, as uncertainty diminishes, investment should increase. One argument against this relatively upbeat assessment is the view that a "capital overhang" remains from the high investment rates of the late 1990s. I will leave a fuller discussion of the putative overhang problem to another time, saying here only that I believe that whatever significant overhang remains is localized in a few industries--possible examples being telecommunications, commercial aircraft, and commercial structures--and is probably not a major negative factor for investment in the broader economy at this juncture. Accepting provisionally that (pending some reduction in uncertainty) economic fundamentals support a near-term expansion of capital investment and hiring, we now ask: Do firms have the financial capacity to undertake substantial expansion? From a financial perspective, the nonfinancial corporate sector presents a mixed picture, one distinctly weaker than that of the household sector. We have already mentioned the poor performance of the stock market. Corporate profitability has recently shown some signs of recovery; however, at about 8 percent of GDP last quarter, nonfinancial corporate profits are still quite low relative to output, considerably below their 1997 peak of about 13 percent of GDP. The general weakness in the economy has, of course, played a role in holding down profits, but, ironically, the stock market's decline itself has also been a factor. By some estimates, because of asset-price declines, the defined-benefit pension plans of U.S. firms swung from being about $250 billion overfunded to being $200 billion to $250 billion underfunded between 2000 and 2002, necessitating large contributions to these plans that must be charged against operating profits. As these losses on pension fund assets are by convention amortized over time, firms' pension contributions will depress reported profits at least for the next couple of years (and, incidentally, raise reported compensation to workers). I think one should note, however, that from a purely economic point of view, losses associated with pension fund commitments should be treated as bygones and thus in principle should not affect the willingness of firms to undertake new capital investments, except to the extent that they affect firms' ability to finance those investments. Besides weak profits and the large decline in stock prices, the other obvious negative for the corporate sector is the evident deterioration in aggregate credit quality. The average spreads between yields on risky corporate bonds, such as BBB-rated bonds or high-yield corporate debt, and the yields on safe debt of comparable maturities are currently at elevated levels, equal to or above those seen in the 1990-91 recession. Many companies have had their debt downgraded by ratings agencies, and corporate bond defaults during 2002 amounted to 3.2 percent of the value of bonds outstanding, a rate above the 1991 peak in default rates. Although these statistics are certainly worrisome, a closer examination reveals several mitigating factors. First, though average spreads of risky corporate debt remain high on an absolute basis, they have recently improved substantially. Spreads on BBB-rated corporate debt have come down nearly one-third since their October 2002 peak, and high-yield spreads are down about one-fifth. Risk as measured by credit default swaps has also come down substantially over the same period. At least some of the recent marked improvement in perceived default risk and market liquidity must arise from increasing confidence among investors that we have seen the last of the major accounting scandals that rocked the markets during the summer. If more time passes without new revelations of corporate wrongdoing and if the generally high level of risk aversion in markets continues to moderate (perhaps with decreasing geopolitical risks), we should see further declines in corporate yield spreads over this year. A second mitigating factor is that much of the measured deterioration in aggregate credit quality is actually concentrated in a few seriously distressed sectors, such as telecommunications, airlines, and energy trading firms, with a few high-profile cases making significant contributions. In particular, yield spreads in the telecom, cable, and media industries reached dizzying heights in mid-2002, though recently these spreads have fallen quite markedly. Remarkably, for the entire year 2002, telecom firms accounted for 55 percent of corporate bond defaults, by value. A similar story, though not quite so extreme, applies to energy and utility firms. When these most troubled sectors are excluded, the recent behavior of financial indicators for the corporate sector looks far less unusual. Though less evident than the headline statistics about earnings and stock prices, there is also a positive financial story to tell about corporate America over the past couple of years. Specifically, as in the case of households, the recent low-interest-rate environment has allowed firm managers to restructure their balance sheets in ways that have made them financially better prepared to expand their businesses when they judge that the time is right. First, by borrowing at lower rates and refinancing old loans, firms have been able to significantly reduce their current interest charges. The ratio of interest expenses to outstanding debt for nonfinancial firms indicates that the average interest rate has fallen about 1-1/4 percentage points from its recent high at year-end 2000, to under 6 percent on average. With lower interest rates and higher profits, the average ratio of firms' interest expense to cash flow improved considerably in 2002, to about 18 percent (compared with a peak of 27 percent in 1991). Second, firms have also restructured by substituting long-term debt for short-term obligations, resulting in a sharp decline in the average ratio of current debt to assets. Average liquidity also improved markedly in 2002, reflecting declines in short-term liabilities, higher cash flows, and reduced payouts to shareholders. Finally, on net, firms took on little new debt last year. The bottom line from this restructuring activity is healthier balance sheets for many firms. So, are firms financially able to fund new investment and new hiring, if and when they decide that expansion is justified by the fundamentals? I think that, for the most part, the answer is "yes." Most firms have ample cash and liquid assets to fund investment internally, and they have access to the capital markets as needed to fund investment externally. Though risk premiums remain elevated and lenders are selective, both the corporate bond markets and bank lending windows are "open" to reasonably sound borrowers. Indeed, over the past year gross issuance--even of speculative-grade bonds--continued at a moderate pace. The possible exceptions to the presumption that funds are available are the weakest firms in the most troubled sectors. These firms are generally also the ones with the poorest earnings prospects and the most severe problems of excess capacity, and hence they are likely the firms with the least promising opportunities for investment. The financial strength of the banking sector Finally, a brief word about banks. The availability of funds to households and firms depends, of course, on the financial stability of lenders as well as that of borrowers. Historically, there have been numerous occasions in which financial problems in the banking system have slowed economic growth, such as in the already-mentioned case of Japan. How has the U.S. commercial banking sector held up in the latest recession? Despite some high-profile lawsuits and regulatory settlements arising from the accounting and stock analyst scandals of last summer, the answer in this case is "quite well." Following the setbacks of the early 1990s, over the past decade U.S. commercial banks have maintained consistently high profits and returns on assets through their efforts to contain costs, to increase their sources of non-interest income (such as fee income), and to maintain high standards of credit quality. Loan-loss performance has improved steadily, not only because of better credit evaluation techniques but also because banks have learned how to manage credit risks better, by making much greater use of secondary loan markets, derivative instruments such as credit default swaps, and other tools. To a remarkable degree, the profitability and liquidity of the 1990s has been maintained through the past two years of economic weakness. Some of the factors supporting profitability in the banking sector since 2000 include large inflows of cheap core deposits (as households have retreated from riskier investments), booming business in mortgage originations and refinancings, strong demand for credit cards, and capital gains on securities holdings. Capital adequacy in the banking sector remains good; it has been boosted both by increased retained earnings and by banks' shifts into assets with relatively low risk weights, such as government securities and residential mortgages. Loan-loss experience in the past two years has worsened slightly; credit quality has been a particular concern in the corporate sector, with a number of high-profile bankruptcies affecting a number of large banks. In contrast, however, delinquency and charge-off rates on commercial real estate loans declined in 2002 from already low levels, despite negative trends in market rents and vacancy rates. The solid performance of commercial real estate loans contrasts sharply with the difficulties experienced in the late 1980s and early 1990s and may reflect, in part, tighter lending standards by banks, which were reported in the Federal Reserve's Senior Loan Officer Survey as early as 1998. Similarly, delinquency rates on residential mortgages held by banks declined in 2002, and charge-off rates on these loans remained near zero. Delinquency rates on credit card loans were flat in 2002, but remain fairly elevated, partly because of the expansion of subprime lending discussed earlier. Overall, the ratio of banks' bad-loan reserves to delinquent loans remains high, reflecting strong earnings that have allowed banks to step up their rate of provisioning for future defaults. Moreover, banks' ample capital provides a further important cushion against possible losses. Flush with deposits and with high levels of capital, most banks seem willing and able to lend, a situation much different from the period following the 1990-91 recession. The Fed's Senior Loan Officer Survey has found very little tendency toward tightening of loan standards for consumers, either in regard to residential mortgages or other types of consumer loans; and, as I have already discussed, the demand for mortgage loans and home equity loans has been exceptionally strong. Business lending, by contrast, has been weak. In part, reduced business lending may reflect some tightening of lending standards, particularly by larger banks and for riskier borrowers. Probably the more important factor depressing commercial and industrial lending, however, is the weak demand for business credit. As I have stressed, firms have displayed unusual reluctance to invest or to hire additional workers, and many of those who do wish to expand operations have been able to do so out of internal funds rather than go to banks or capital markets. Other firms have taken advantage of low long-term interest rates to substitute long-term financing for bank loans and other short-term liabilities. Reduced merger and acquisition activity has also reduced business demand for bank loans. As for the rest of this year and next year, the banking system seems well positioned to continue to support household spending and to accommodate increased credit demands by financially sound business borrowers. Conclusion My objective today was to assess whether there exist financial constraints that might impede the developing recovery in the U.S. economy. My sense is that the household and banking sectors are in good financial shape for this stage in the business cycle; and that, though financial problems exist, they should not in themselves restrain the building economic recovery. The corporate sector presents a more mixed picture. Equity prices have fallen significantly in the past three years, profits have made only a hesitant recovery, and aggregate indicators of financial stress remain at elevated levels. Still, closer examination of the corporate sector yields some grounds for optimism. Two points in particular deserve re-stating: First, many of the financial problems of the corporate sector are concentrated in just a few industries; excluding these industries, corporate financial conditions are not especially weak for this stage of the cycle. Second, and less widely recognized, many firms have used the past two years to significantly restructure their balance sheets, reduce their interest burdens, and increase liquidity. At such time that they feel they are ready to begin hiring and investing again, these firms should be financially capable of doing so. Thank you for your attention. Footnotes 1. Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist (2000) provide a formal quantitative model in which endogenous variation in balance sheet quality--the so-called financial accelerator--enhances the amplitude of business cycles. 2. I would like to thank Bill Bassett, Karen Dynan, Paul Harrison, and Karen Pence for their excellent assistance in the preparation of this talk. 3. According to the Bureau of the Census, the share of U.S. households that owned homes rose from 64.0 percent in 1990 to 67.9 percent in 2002, even as the population grew substantially. 4. Measured on a National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA) basis. The NIPA series provides the most comprehensive measure of profits for U.S. corporations. It is also defined to be consistent with GDP as a measure of output. 5. Additionally, many firms will be required to change accounting assumptions about expected rates of return in their pension plans, which may raise future contributions further. 6. Bassett and Carlson (2002) discuss bank performance in 2001. 7. That tightening has been most prevalent at the largest banks is suggested by analysis of the Senior Loan Officer Survey. In notable contrast to some of the results of this survey, respondents to the National Federation of Independent Businesses survey of small business--who deal primarily with smaller, regional banks--have not reported consistent tightening of loan terms for business. References Aizcorbe, Ana, Arthur Kennickell, and Kevin Moore (2003). "Recent Changes in U.S. Family Finances: Evidence from the 1998 and 2001 Survey of Consumer Finances," Federal Reserve Bulletin , vol. 89 (January), pp. 1-32. Bassett, William, and Mark Carlson (2002). "Profits and Balance Sheet Developments at U.S. Commercial Banks in 2001," Federal Reserve Bulletin , vol. 88 (June), pp. 259-88. Bernanke, Ben and Cara Lown (1991). "The Credit Crunch," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity , vol. 2, pp. 205-39. Bernanke, Ben, Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist (2000). "The Financial Accelerator in a Quantitative Business Cycle Framework," in J. Taylor and M. Woodford, eds., Handbook of Macroeconomics , chapter 21, Amsterdam: North-Holland. Canner, Glenn, Karen Dynan, and Wayne Passmore (2002). "Mortgage Refinancing in 2001 and Early 2002," Federal Reserve Bulletin , vol. 88 (December), pp. 469-81.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the applications and notice under sections 3 and 4 of the Bank Holding Company Act related to the proposal by Mizuho Financial Group, Inc., Tokyo, Japan to become a bank holding company by acquiring Mizuho Holdings, Inc., also in Tokyo, and thereby indirectly acquire the U.S. banking and nonbanking subsidiaries of Mizuho Holdings. Attached is the Board's Order relating to these actions.
Joint Press Release Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Office of the Comptroller of the Currency Office of Thrift Supervision For Immediate Release February 25, 2003 Agencies Issue Advisory on Mortgage Banking Activities Federal bank and thrift regulatory agencies on Monday jointly issued an advisory letter discussing risks related to mortgage banking activities. The letter highlights concerns and provides guidance regarding mortgage banking activities, primarily in the valuation, accounting, and hedging of mortgage servicing assets. The guidance, issued under the auspices of the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of Thrift Supervision), applies to all banks and thrifts; however, it is primarily applicable to those institutions that are actively involved in mortgage banking activities. While the number of institutions with significant exposure to mortgage banking assets is limited, mortgage banking is a significant and growing business line for many institutions. The agencies developed the guidance in response to recent examinations and market developments, especially the record volume of refinancings caused by the decline in interest rates. The guidance details the agencies expectations regarding risk management activities including valuation and modeling processes, hedging activities, management information systems, and internal audit. The guidance also notes that the agencies may require additional capital for institutions that fail to consider the sound practices set forth in this advisory in their risk management programs. Federal Reserve Andrew Williams 202-452-2955 FDIC David Barr 202-898-6992 OCC Kevin Mukri 202-874-5770 OTS Sam Eskenazi 202-906-6677
Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan Deposit insurance Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate February 26, 2003 Chairman Shelby, Senator Sarbanes, and members of the Committee, it is a pleasure to appear once again before this Committee to present the views of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System on deposit insurance. Rather than refer to any specific bill, I will express the broad views of the Federal Reserve Board on the issues associated with modifications of deposit insurance. Those views have not changed since our testimony before this Committee on April 23, 2002. At the outset, I note that the 2001 report of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) on deposit insurance highlighted the significant issues and developed an integrated framework for addressing them. Although as before the Board opposes any increase in coverage, we continue to support the framework constructed by the FDIC report for addressing other reform issues. Benefits and Costs of Deposit Insurance Deposit insurance was adopted in this country as part of the legislative effort to limit the impact of the Great Depression on the public. Against the backdrop of a record number of bank failures, the Congress designed deposit insurance mainly to protect the modest savings of unsophisticated depositors with limited financial assets. With references being made to "the rent money," the initial 1934 limit on deposit insurance was $2,500; the Congress promptly doubled the limit to $5,000 but then kept it at that level for the next sixteen years. I should note that the $5,000 of insurance provided in 1934, an amount consistent with the original intent of the Congress, is equal to slightly less than $60,000 today, based on the personal consumption expenditures deflator in the gross domestic product accounts. Despite its initial quite limited intent, the Congress has raised the maximum amount of coverage five times since 1950, to its current level of $100,000. The last increase, in 1980, more than doubled the limit and was clearly designed to let depositories, particularly thrift institutions, offer an insured deposit free of the then-prevailing interest rate ceilings on such instruments, which applied only to deposits below $100,000. Insured deposits of exactly $100,000 thus became fully insured instruments in 1980 but were not subject to an interest rate ceiling. The efforts of thrift institutions to use $100,000 CDs to stem their liquidity outflows resulting from public withdrawals of smaller, below-market-rate insured deposits led first to an earnings squeeze and an associated loss of capital and then to a high-risk investment strategy that led to failure after failure. Depositors acquiring the new larger-denomination insured deposits were aware of the plight of the thrift institutions but unconcerned about the risk because the principal amounts of their $100,000 deposits were fully insured by the federal government. In this way, the 1980 increase in deposit insurance to $100,000 exacerbated the fundamental problem facing thrift institutions--a concentration on long-term assets in an environment of high and rising interest rates. Indeed, it significantly increased the taxpayer cost of the bailout of the bankrupt thrift institution deposit insurance fund. Despite this problematic episode, deposit insurance has clearly played a key--at times even critical--role in achieving the stability in banking and financial markets that has characterized the nearly seventy years since its adoption. Deposit insurance, combined with other components of our banking safety net (the Federal Reserve's discount window and its payment system guarantees), has meant that periods of financial stress no longer entail widespread depositor runs on banks and thrift institutions. Quite the opposite: Asset holders now seek out deposits--both insured and uninsured--as safe havens when they have strong doubts about other financial assets. Looking beyond the contribution of deposit insurance to overall financial stability, we should not minimize the importance of the security it has brought to millions of households and small businesses with relatively modest financial assets. Deposit insurance has given them a safe and secure place to hold their transaction and other balances. The benefits of deposit insurance, as significant as they are, have not come without a cost. The very process that has ended deposit runs has made insured depositors largely indifferent to the risks taken by their depository institutions, just as it did with depositors in the 1980s with regard to insolvent, risky thrift institutions. The result has been a weakening of the market discipline that insured depositors would otherwise have imposed on institutions. Relieved of that discipline, depositories naturally feel less cautious about taking on more risk than they would otherwise assume. No other type of private financial institution is able to attract funds from the public without regard to the risks it takes with its creditors' resources. This incentive to take excessive risks at the expense of the insurer, and potentially the taxpayer, is the so-called moral hazard problem of deposit insurance. Thus, two offsetting implications of deposit insurance must be kept in mind. On the one hand, it is clear that deposit insurance has contributed to the prevention of bank runs that could have destabilized the financial structure in the short run. On the other, even the current levels of deposit insurance may have already increased risk-taking at insured depository institutions to such an extent that future systemic risks have arguably risen. Indeed, the reduced market discipline and increased moral hazard at depositories have intensified the need for government supervision to protect the interests of taxpayers and, in essence, substitute for the reduced market discipline. Deposit insurance and other components of the safety net also enable banks and thrift institutions to attract more resources, at lower costs, than would otherwise be the case. In short, insured institutions receive a subsidy in the form of a government guarantee that allows them both to attract deposits at lower interest rates than would be necessary without deposit insurance and to take more risk without the fear of losing their deposit funding. Put another way, deposit insurance misallocates resources by breaking the link between risks and rewards for a select set of market competitors. In sum, from the very beginning, deposit insurance has involved a tradeoff. Deposit insurance contributes to overall short-term financial stability and the protection of small depositors. But at the same time, because it also subsidizes deposit growth and induces greater risk-taking, deposit insurance misallocates resources and creates larger long-term financial imbalances that increase the need for government supervision to protect the taxpayers' interests. Deposit insurance reforms must balance these tradeoffs. Moreover, any reforms should be aimed primarily at protecting the interest of the economy overall and not just the profits or market shares of particular businesses. The Federal Reserve Board believes that deposit insurance reforms should be designed to preserve the benefits of heightened financial stability and the protection of small depositors without a further increase in moral hazard or reduction in market discipline. In addition, we urge that the implementing details be kept as straightforward as possible to minimize the risk of unintended consequences that comes with complexity. Issues for Reform The FDIC has made five broad recommendations. 1. Merge BIF and SAIF The Board supports the FDIC's proposal to merge the Bank Insurance Fund (BIF) with the Savings Association Insurance Fund (SAIF). Because the charters and operations of banks and thrift institutions have become so similar, it makes no sense to continue the separate funds. Separate funds reflect the past but neither the present nor the future. Merging the funds would diversify their risks, reduce administrative expense, and widen the fund base of an increasingly concentrated banking system. Most important, because banks and thrift institutions receive the same level of federally guaranteed insurance coverage, the premiums faced by each set of institutions should be identical as well. Under current arrangements, the premiums faced by equally risky institutions could differ significantly if one of the funds falls below the designated reserve ratio of 1.25 percent of insured deposits and the other fund does not. Should that occur, depository institutions would be induced to switch charters to obtain insurance from the fund with the lower premium, a result that could distort our depository structure. The federal government should not sell a single service, like deposit insurance, at different prices. 2. Reduce Statutory Restrictions on Premiums Current law requires the FDIC to impose higher premiums on riskier banks and thrift institutions but prevents it from imposing any premium on well-capitalized and highly rated institutions when the corresponding fund's reserves exceed 1.25 percent of insured deposits. The Board endorses the FDIC recommendations that would eliminate the statutory restrictions on risk-based pricing and allow a premium to be imposed on every insured depository institution, no matter how well capitalized and well rated it may be or how high the fund's reserves. The current statutory requirement that free deposit insurance be provided to well-capitalized and highly rated institutions when the ratio of FDIC reserves to insured deposits exceeds a predetermined ratio maximizes the subsidy provided to these institutions and is inconsistent with efforts to avoid inducing moral hazard. Put differently, the current rule requires the government to give away its valuable guarantee to many institutions when fund reserves meet some ceiling level. This free guarantee is of value to institutions even when they themselves are in sound financial condition and when macroeconomic times are good. At the end of the third quarter of last year, 91 percent of banks and thrift institutions were paying no premium. That group included many institutions that have never paid a premium for their, in some cases substantial, coverage, and it also included fast-growing entities whose past premiums were extraordinarily small relative to their current coverage. We believe that these anomalies were never intended by the framers of the Deposit Insurance Fund Act of 1996 and should be addressed by the Congress. The Congress did intend that the FDIC impose risk-based premiums, but the 1996 act limits the ability of the FDIC to impose risk-based premiums on well-capitalized and highly rated banks and thrift institutions. And these two variables--capital strength and overall examiner rating--do not capture all the risk that institutions could create for the insurer. The Board believes that the FDIC should be free to establish risk categories on the basis of any economic variables shown to be related to an institution's risk of failure, and to impose premiums commensurate with that risk. Although a robust risk-based premium system would be technically difficult to design, a closer link between insurance premiums and the risk of individual institutions would reduce moral hazard and the distortions in resource allocation that accompany deposit insurance. We note, however, that although significant benefits from a risk-based premium system are likely to require a substantial range of premiums, the FDIC concluded in its report that premiums for the riskiest banks would probably need to be capped in order to avoid inducing failure at these weaker institutions. We believe that capping premiums may end up costing the insurance fund more in the long run should these weak institutions fail anyway, with the delay increasing the ultimate cost of resolution. The Board has concluded, therefore, that if a cap on premiums is required, it should be set quite high so that risk-based premiums can be as effective as possible in deterring excessive risk-taking. In that way, we could begin to simulate the deposit insurance pricing that the market would apply and reduce the associated subsidy in deposit insurance. Nonetheless, we should not delude ourselves into believing that even a wider range in the risk-based premium structure would eliminate the need for a government back-up to the deposit insurance fund, that is, eliminate the government subsidy in deposit insurance. To eliminate the subsidy in deposit insurance--to make deposit insurance a real insurance system--the FDIC average insurance premium would have to be set high enough to cover fully the very small probabilities of very large losses, such as those incurred during the Great Depression, and thus the perceived costs of systemic risk. In contrast to life or automobile casualty insurance, each individual insured loss in banking is not independent of other losses. Banking is subject to systemic risk and is thus subject to a far larger extreme loss in the tail of the probability distributions from which real insurance premiums would have to be calculated. Indeed, pricing deposit insurance risks to fully fund potential losses--pricing to eliminate subsidies--could well require premiums that would discourage most depository institutions from offering broad coverage to their customers. Since the Congress has determined that there should be broad coverage, the subsidy in deposit insurance cannot be fully eliminated, although we can and should eliminate as much of the subsidy as we can. I note that the difficulties of raising risk-based premiums explain why there is no real private-insurer substitute for deposit insurance from the government. No private insurer would ever be able to match the actual FDIC premium and cover its risks. A private insurer confronted with the possibility, remote as it may be, of losses that could bankrupt it would need to set especially high premiums to protect itself, premiums that few, if any, depository institutions would find attractive. And if premiums were fully priced by the government or the private sector, the depository institutions would likely lower their offering rates, thereby reducing the amount of insured deposits demanded, and consequently the amount outstanding would decline. 3. Relaxing the Reserve Ratio Regime to Allow Gradual Adjustments in Premiums Current law establishes a designated reserve ratio for BIF and SAIF of 1.25 percent. If that ratio is exceeded, the statute requires that premiums be discontinued for well-capitalized and highly rated institutions. If the ratio declines below 1.25 percent, the FDIC must develop a set of premiums to restore the reserve ratio to 1.25 percent; if the fund ratio is not likely to be restored to its statutorily designated level within twelve months, the law requires that a premium of at least 23 basis points be imposed on all insured entities. These requirements are clearly procyclical: They lower or eliminate fees in good times, when bank credit is readily available and deposit insurance fund reserves should be built up, and abruptly increase fees sharply in times of weakness, when bank credit availability is under pressure and deposit fund resources are drawn down to cover the resolution of failed institutions. The FDIC recommends that surcharges or rebates be used to bring the fund back to the target reserve ratio gradually. The FDIC also recommends the possibility of a target range for the designated reserve ratio, over which the premiums may remain constant, rather than a fixed target reserve ratio and abruptly changing premiums. We support such increased flexibility and smoothing of changes in premiums. Indeed, we recommend that the FDIC's suggested target reserve range be widened to reduce the need to change premiums abruptly. Any floor or ceiling, regardless of its level, could require that premiums be increased at exactly the time when banks and thrifts could be under stress and, similarly, that premiums be reduced at the time that depositories are in the best position to fund an increase in reserves. Building a larger fund in good times and permitting it to decline when necessary are prerequisites to less variability in the premium. In addition to supporting a widening of the range for the designated reserve ratio, the Board recommends that the FDIC be given the latitude to temporarily relax floor or ceiling ratios on the basis of current and anticipated banking conditions and expected needs for resources to resolve failing institutions. In short, to enhance macroeconomic stability, we prefer a reduction in the specificity of the rules under which the FDIC operates and, within the broad guidelines set out by the Congress, an increase in the flexibility with which the board of the FDIC can operate. 4. Modify the Rebates System Since its early days, the FDIC has rebated "excess" premiums whenever it considered its reserves to be adequate. This procedure was replaced in the 1996 law by the requirement that no premium be imposed on well-capitalized and highly rated institutions when the relevant fund reached its designated reserve ratio. The FDIC's 2001 proposals would re-impose a minimum premium on all banks and thrift institutions and a more risk-sensitive premium structure. These provisions would be coupled with rebates for the stronger entities when the fund approaches the upper end of a target range and surcharges when the fund trends below the lower end of a target range. The FDIC also recommends that the rebates not be uniform for the stronger entities. Rather, the FDIC argues that rebates should be smaller for those banks that have paid premiums for only short periods or that have in the past paid premiums that are not commensurate with their present size and consequent FDIC exposure. The devil, of course, is in the details. But varying the rebates in this way makes considerable sense, and the Board endorses it. More than 900 banks--some now quite large--have never paid a premium, and without this modification they would continue to pay virtually nothing, net of rebates, as long as their strong capital and high supervisory ratings were maintained. Such an approach is both competitively inequitable and contributes to moral hazard. It should be addressed. 5. Indexing Ceilings on the Coverage of Insured Deposits. The FDIC recommends that the current $100,000 ceiling on insured deposits be indexed to inflation. The Board does not support this recommendation and believes that the current ceiling should be maintained. In the Board's judgment, increasing the coverage, even by indexing, is unlikely to add measurably to the stability of the banking system. Macroeconomic policy and other elements of the safety net--combined with the current, still-significant level of deposit insurance--continue to be important bulwarks against bank runs. Thus, the problem that increased coverage is designed to solve must be related either to the individual depositor, the party originally intended to be protected, or to the individual bank or thrift institution. Clearly, both groups would prefer higher coverage if it cost them nothing. But the Congress needs to be clear about the nature of a specific problem for which increased coverage would be the solution. Depositors. Our most recent surveys of consumer finances suggest that most depositors have balances well below the current insurance limit of $100,000, and those that do have larger balances have apparently been adept at achieving the level of deposit insurance coverage they desire by opening multiple insured accounts. Such spreading of assets is perfectly consistent with the counsel always given to investors to diversify their assets--whether stocks, bonds, or mutual funds--across different issuers. The cost of diversifying for insured deposits is surely no greater than doing so for other assets. A bank would clearly prefer that the depositor maintain all of his or her funds at that bank and would prefer to reduce the need for depositor diversification by being able to offer higher deposit insurance coverage. Nonetheless, depositors appear to have no great difficulty--should they want insured deposits--in finding multiple sources of fully insured accounts. In addition, one of the most remarkable characteristics of household holdings of financial assets has been the increase in the diversity of portfolio choices since World War II. And, since the early 1970s the share of household financial assets in bank and thrift deposits has generally declined steadily as households have taken advantage of innovative, attractive financial instruments with market rates of return. The trend seems to bear no relation to past increases in insurance ceilings. Indeed, the most dramatic substitution out of deposits has been the shift from both insured and uninsured deposits into equities and into mutual funds that hold equities, bonds, and money market assets. It is difficult to believe that a change in ceilings during the 1990s would have made any measurable difference in that shift. Rather, the data indicate that the weakness in stock prices in recent years has been marked by increased flows into bank and thrift deposits even without changed insurance coverage levels. Depository Institutions. Does the problem to be solved by increased deposit insurance coverage concern the individual depository institution? If so, the problem would seem disproportionately related to small banks because insured deposits are a much larger proportion of total funding at small banks than at large banks. But smaller banks appear to be doing well. Since the mid-1990s, adjusted for the effects of mergers, assets of banks smaller than the largest 1,000 have grown at an average annual rate of 13.8 percent, more than twice the pace of the largest 1,000 banks. Uninsured deposits, again adjusted for the effects of mergers, have grown at average annual rates of 21 percent at the small banks versus 10 percent at the large banks. Clearly, small banks have a demonstrated skill and ability to compete for uninsured deposits. To be sure, uninsured deposits are more expensive than insured deposits, and bank costs would decline and profits rise if their currently uninsured liabilities received a government guarantee. But that is the issue of whether subsidizing bank profits through additional deposit insurance serves a national purpose. I might add that throughout the 1990s and into the present century, return on equity at small banks has been well maintained. Indeed, the attractiveness of banking is evidenced by the fact that more than 1,350 banks were chartered during the past decade, including more than 600 from 1999 through 2002. Some small banks argue that they need enhanced deposit insurance coverage to compete with large banks because depositors prefer to put their uninsured funds in an institution considered too big to fail. As I have noted, however, small banks have more than held their own in the market for uninsured deposits. In addition, the Board rejects the notion that any bank is too big to fail. In the FDIC Improvement Act of 1991 (FDICIA), the Congress made it clear that the systemic-risk exception to the FDIC's least-cost resolution of a failing bank should be invoked only under the most unusual circumstances. Moreover, the resolution rules under the systemic-risk exception do not require that uninsured depositors and other creditors, much less stockholders, be made whole. The market has clearly evidenced the view, consistent with FDICIA, that large institutions are not too big for uninsured creditors to take at least some loss should the institution fail. For example, no U.S. banking organization, no matter how large, is AAA-rated. In addition, research indicates that creditors impose higher risk premiums on the uninsured debt of relatively risky large banking organizations and that this market discipline has increased since the enactment of FDICIA. To be sure, the real purchasing power of deposit insurance ceilings has declined. But there is no evidence of any significant detrimental effect on depositors or depository institutions, with the possible exception of a small reduction in those profits that accrue from deposit guarantee subsidies that lower the cost of insured deposits. The current deposit insurance ceiling appears more than adequate to achieve the positive benefits of deposit insurance that I mentioned earlier, even if its real value were to erode further. Another argument is often raised by smaller banks regarding the need for increased deposit insurance coverage. Some smaller institutions say that they are unable to match the competition from large securities firms and bank holding companies with multiple bank or thrift institution affiliates because those entities offer multiple insured accounts through one organization. I note that since the Committee's last hearings on this issue, the force of small banks' concerns has been reduced by recent market developments in which small banks and thrift institutions can use a clearinghouse network for brokered deposits that allows them to offer full FDIC insurance for large accounts. The Board agrees that such practices by both large and small depositories are a misuse of deposit insurance. Moreover, raising the coverage limit for each account is not a remedy for small banks because it would also increase the aggregate amount of insurance coverage that multidepository organizations would be able to offer. The disparity would remain. Conclusion Several aspects of the deposit insurance system need reform. The Board supports, with some modifications, all of the recommendations the FDIC made in the spring of 2001 except indexing the current $100,000 ceiling to inflation. The thrust of our recommendations would call for a wider permissible range for the size of the fund relative to insured deposits, reduced variation of the insurance premium as the relative size of the fund changes with banking and economic conditions, a positive and more risk-based premium net of rebates for all depository institutions, and the merging of BIF and SAIF. There may come a time when the Board finds that households and businesses with modest resources are having difficulty in placing their funds in safe vehicles or that the level of deposit coverage appears to be endangering financial stability. Should either of those events occur, the Board would call its concerns to the attention of the Congress and support adjustments to the ceiling by indexing or other methods. But today, in our judgment, neither financial stability, nor depositors, nor depositories are being disadvantaged by the current ceiling. Raising the ceiling now would extend the safety net, increase the government subsidy to depository institutions, expand moral hazard, and reduce the incentive for market discipline without providing any clear public benefit. With no clear public benefit to increasing deposit insurance, the Board sees no reason to increase the scope of the safety net. Indeed, the Board believes that as our financial system has become ever more complex and exceptionally responsive to the vagaries of economic change, structural distortions induced by government guarantees have risen. We have no way of ascertaining at exactly what point subsidies provoke systemic risk. Nonetheless, prudence suggests that we be exceptionally deliberate when expanding government financial guarantees.
Remarks by Governor Susan Schmidt Bies At a joint presentation to the National Economics Club and the Committee on the Status of Women in the Economics Profession of the American Economic Association, Washington, D.C. February 27, 2003 Retirement Savings, Equity Ownership, and Challenges to Investors Good afternoon. I am delighted to be here to speak about some of the new challenges and opportunities that American families face from changes in retirement savings and equity ownership in the United States. I know that many of your members are economists who work in policy advisory roles in government. As an economist who enjoys getting back to her Ph.D. roots, I want to also address how traditional economic theory about consumer behavior and corporate governance are, at times, in apparent conflict with the practices that we observe. This in turn raises issues about the appropriate economic and policy frameworks for decisionmaking. There has been a dramatic shift in employer-sponsored retirement plans over the past two decades--a shift from plans in which pension managers controlled most investments and retirees received preset benefits to plans in which workers directly control their investment portfolios and keep their investment returns. Many American families have responded by purchasing corporate equity--frequently through investments in mutual funds or other institutional accounts. With increasing control over their pensions, and broader participation in equity markets, Americans have far more options for financial planning than they did twenty years ago. But with the new opportunities come risks and responsibilities. Households with more control of their resources for retirement have a greater need to employ sound financial planning. Moreover, though many might be unaware of it, stock-owning households share responsibility for oversight and governance of the corporations they own. The headlines of the past couple of years have highlighted the importance of these risks and responsibilities. We have all witnessed a precipitous fall in stock prices and some spectacular corporate failures and have read accounts of retirement savings accrued over long careers only to be lost in a matter of weeks. Some of those corporate meltdowns were accompanied by the revelation of shoddy auditing practices and stock analyses tainted by conflicts of interest. And those who should have been ensuring sound corporate governance were often unwilling or unable to protect the interests of shareholders. Recent developments suggest that households may, in coming years, take on even more responsibility for their retirement saving and assume additional responsibilities for corporate governance. The President's recently released budget for 2004 would considerably expand tax-preferred savings accounts for American families. And newly adopted Securities and Exchange Commission rules that give investors unprecedented access to proxy-voting records of mutual funds will enable and encourage investors to take more active roles in corporate governance. With this backdrop, I would like to start by discussing some of the challenges confronting families, employers, and policymakers as workers assume greater control of their retirement planning. Later, I will turn to some issues related to individual investors' roles in corporate governance. Retirement Savings The American pension landscape has changed dramatically in the past twenty years. Mostly gone are the days when companies addressed their workers' retirement needs solely by paying fixed pensions from retirement until death. Today's workers are much more likely to manage their own retirement resources by participating in employee-directed savings accounts. This trend has greatly expanded workers' responsibilities for their retirement planning. But it has also raised significant new questions about how effectively employees are handling their new freedoms and responsibilities, and what the appropriate role for employers should be in helping their workers plan for retirement. What lies behind the two-decade trend toward worker-directed savings accounts? Companies like them because they relieve the firm of the burden of managing a pension fund to finance promised benefits. One need only scan a few recent headlines to be reminded of the difficulties that underfunded pension plans can impose on corporate balance sheets. With a savings-account plan, in contrast, companies need only set up the accounts and let their employees manage the investments. And workers also like savings account plans, because they provide more choices and because they are portable--that is, they can travel with the employee from job to job. A particularly popular type of savings plan is the 401(k), which lets workers make pre-tax contributions to retirement accounts through payroll deduction. Twenty-five years ago 401(k) plans did not exist. Today they cover more than 40 million workers, take in $150 billion in annual contributions, and hold assets worth more than $2 trillion. This is a significant development, because along with the greater flexibility of a 401(k) plan comes greater responsibility on the part of individuals to direct their own retirement saving. Workers must decide whether to participate in the plan, how much to contribute every pay period, where to invest contributions, when to rebalance their asset mix, and what to do with balances when changing jobs. Economic theory provides the basis for making these types of choices, but the problems are complex and the average employee may not have developed the skills to formally evaluate the alternatives. And, in fact, recent research has found some troubling patterns: Many workers do not participate in their employers' retirement plans, contribute a small proportion of their wages, and make questionable investment and distribution choices. Let me just take a minute to cite some telling facts about 401(k) plans. Despite the tax advantages of 401(k) contributions, one-quarter of workers eligible for 401(k) plans do not participate at all, even when their employers would match a portion of their contributions. These workers are effectively turning down a pay raise by leaving compensation on the table. And many who do participate save just a little. In a survey last year, one-quarter of firms reported that their rank-and-file 401(k) participants saved an average of less than 4 percent of pay. How will these plans affect retirement security in the long run? Several studies suggest that many workers are not saving adequately for retirement. In 2001, among households with retirement accounts who were approaching retirement age, one-half had balances of less than $55,000, and one-quarter had balances of less than $13,000. Clearly balances of this size will not be adequate to finance many economic emergencies and will barely supplement social security over the two or three decades that often follows retirement. There are other concerns about the way in which employees manage their 401(k) plans. Some seem to give little attention to the way their contributions are invested. For example, some participants divide assets equally across all available investment options, or simply invest contributions according to plan defaults. And, as was made painfully clear last year, many 401(k) participants seem to invest heavily in employer stock. Overall, about one-quarter of aggregate 401(k) balances are in company stock, but for many employees the share is far higher. Why do workers invest so much in company stock? The question is particularly pressing because workers' financial outcomes are already heavily dependent on the fortunes of their employer. Moreover, employers often require that the matching contributions they make on behalf of their employees be invested in company stock. Thus, when employees invest their own contributions in the company stock, they are ratcheting up an already-risky position. Elementary finance theory suggests they shouldn't do it. Yet many workers believe that their employer's stock is less risky than broad market averages. What explains this apparent disconnect? As someone who held a large fraction of my own 401(k) plan in my company's stock for many years, perhaps I can help answer this question. There is a difference between risk and uncertainty. Employees may feel less uncertain about the prospects of the company for which they work relative to other companies about which they know little. This may make them more comfortable about holding their company's stock--even at the cost of a poorly diversified and highly volatile portfolio. To summarize, experience has shown that while 401(k) plans offer workers unprecedented flexibility in managing their pensions, some workers do not seem to be using them effectively--they contribute too little, make questionable investment choices, or fail to participate at all. In response, some employers have expressed increased interest in employer-provided financial education. But employers' attention to plan design turns out to be just as important. Contrary to predictions of traditional finance theory, the way retirement-plan options are framed to workers affects the choices they make. This is where the new discipline of behavioral finance has begun to offer significant contributions. Some of the most innovative and apparently effective ideas about retirement-plan design owe to the insights of behavioral finance. As compelling evidence that framing matters, researchers have found that so-called "opt-out" plans, or plans that automatically enroll workers, have significantly higher participation rates than plans that require workers to sign up. Not surprisingly, employers have responded by making automatic enrollment more prevalent: A recent survey found that nearly a quarter of large plans either have adopted automatic enrollment or are considering adopting it. But automatic enrollment may not be enough, since automatically enrolled employees often give little attention to the default options of the plan. One study found that half of automatic enrollees had not moved from the defaults even three years after enrollment. This could be a problem because default contribution rates, which are typically 3 percent of pay, are often too low to allow workers to take full advantage of employer matches, let alone to build sufficient assets for retirement. In fact, there is some evidence that the low default rates reduce contributions among workers who would likely have saved more in the absence of the default. Finally, the default investment choice in automatic enrollment plans is typically the least risky, such as a money market or stable value fund. While these investments are especially safe, their expected returns may be too low to achieve long-term retirement security. Subsequent research has highlighted how employers might improve their automatic enrollment plans. For example, they might set higher default contribution rates and greater default exposure to a diversified set of higher-yielding assets. Another possibility is to bring new employees on board with low contribution rates--just as is often done currently--but then to nudge contribution rates up as the workers receive pay raises. Some studies have shown that workers are willing to pre-commit to such a plan, which eventually results in significantly higher rates of savings. But along with these new opportunities for employers come difficult new questions. How high should their employees' savings rates go? In an ideal world, all employees would be making well-informed savings decisions and wouldn't need any encouragement from their employers. But, in reality, a plan's design affects the financial well-being of its participants. And though a default savings rate of 3 percent of pay might seem too low, an employer is not necessarily in a good position to know what the appropriate saving rate should be. A high default rate may be inappropriate, particularly if employees respond by dissaving outside their retirement plan. Many employers will recoil from making these choices, because they do not want to become too paternalistic. But a significant and inescapable implication of this line of recent research is that employers cannot avoid responsibility in this area, because there is no "neutral" plan design--whatever design they choose will affect the retirement security of their employees. To summarize, the past two decades have brought remarkable expansion of the financial options available to ordinary workers, including significant new tools for retirement planning. But this experience has also revealed some important lessons for workers, companies, and policymakers. While many--perhaps most--workers effectively use the new tools to prepare for retirement, some do not. Moreover, participants' choices are often affected by the presentation of the options. Thus, companies offering retirement savings accounts such as 401(k) plans face a delicate balancing act. While they desire to shift the maximum degree of decisionmaking to workers, they must acknowledge that basic plan-design choices will affect the long-term retirement security of their employees. Companies that find the right combination of financial education and plan design will be in the best position to help their employees prepare adequately for retirement. Equity Ownership As Americans have stepped up their use of employee-directed savings accounts in the past couple of decades, many have also purchased their first shares of corporate equity--often within their 401(k) plans. More than half of U.S. households now own either stock or stock mutual funds. Moreover, equity ownership reaches further into younger generations and the middle class now than it did in the 1980s. From 1989 to 2001, the fraction of Americans younger than 35 who owned stock more than doubled, as did stock ownership among families with below-median income. This striking increase in equity ownership is, in part, an outgrowth of the move toward worker-directed savings plans, as I've already discussed. More than two-thirds of U.S. stockholders now hold some stock in an employer-sponsored retirement plan. In addition, the heightened popularity of owning stocks probably reflects a broadened understanding of the potential benefits of equity investments and perhaps an increased tolerance for financial risk. Also important, especially for investors of relatively modest means, is that mutual funds in particular have substantially reduced the cost of purchasing a diversified portfolio. Despite the ease with which corporate equities can be traded directly nowadays--through on-line brokerage accounts, for example--a recent survey found that two-thirds of stockholders first bought their equity shares through mutual funds. Besides its financial risks and potential rewards, stock ownership imparts important corporate governance responsibilities. In fact, economic theories of firm behavior often stress the competing interests of management and ownership. With an ownership share in a business, every stock investor has a role in providing oversight on how that company is run. The egregious corporate scandals in the headlines last year have highlighted the need for responsible oversight by corporate boards and shareholders alike to check the behavior of management. So, as we look for solutions to corporate governance problems, we should not forget that every individual who owns stock has a role--perhaps a small one, but an important one. Yet the growth in households' equity ownership has come with an ironic twist: While more households own shares of corporations, many of the new stockholders are unable to play a role in corporate governance. Why? Because Americans have largely purchased their shares through pension funds, mutual funds, insurance companies, and other financial institutions. These financial intermediaries, which act as the agents for household investors, have generally not made much, if any, effort to make their governance policies transparent and responsive to the preferences of their investors. So, as Americans have been purchasing most of their stock indirectly through institutional investors, the responsibilities for active monitoring of corporate management and governance mechanisms have been shifting to institutions. There's good news, bad news, and some promising news to report about this trend. The good news is that we may have reason to expect that institutional shareholders would be especially active in working for good corporate governance. An institutional investor holding a large block of stock naturally reaps more of the rewards of good corporate governance than an individual holding a small number of shares, and the big institutional investor undoubtedly has more leverage with management. In addition, as individuals buy their stock through institutions, the task of forming shareholder coalitions to effect good governance ought to become that much easier. The bad news is that, with some notable exceptions, institutional investors historically appear to have been fairly passive shareholders and have tended to shy away from challenging management directly and from initiating reform-oriented proxy proposals. Also some institutional investors may face conflicts of interest in providing active governance if they also compete to sell financial services--like pension-plan administration--to the firms whose shares they hold. To be sure, the evidence on institutional shareholder activism and conflicts of interest is limited, because few institutional investors provide any information about how they vote the shares in their portfolios. So, individual investors interested in corporate governance are unlikely to be able to ascertain anything about how an institutional investor has voted shares on their behalf. Although some institutional investors may have been active in behind-the-scenes attempts to promote good management decisions, few details about these efforts are made available to the public, which ultimately bears the risk of stock ownership. And the promising news? Just last month, the SEC approved new rules that will require investment advisers and mutual funds to disclose their proxy voting policies and specific proxy votes. For most investors in mutual funds, the new rule will provide unprecedented information about how votes are being cast on their behalf. In fact, some have criticized the new disclosure rules for imposing too great a burden on mutual funds and for providing too much information to be useful to most investors. But that criticism misses the point. Disclosure of proxy voting records will likely initiate new efforts to educate individual investors on corporate governance issues. Disclosures about proxy voting are especially important for index funds. Actively managed funds can signal dissatisfaction with corporate officers by selling shares, but index funds, which passively hold a basket of representative companies, cannot. Soon, by monitoring the proxy-votes of index-fund managers, investors will be able to gauge their fund managers' satisfaction with corporate officers. By the time the first proxy-voting reports are required to become public in 2004, I expect that the initial steps toward corporate governance education will already have been taken. Individual investors looking for guidance on the way mutual funds vote their proxies will be able to turn to a slate of organizations that monitor and analyze mutual funds' voting records. I look forward to learning how my mutual funds have voted their proxies and to comparing their voting records with those of other funds. As other investors do the same, the new disclosures will likely have the additional side benefit of directing new attention to corporate governance. Conclusion Some of last year's most striking developments--tumbling stock prices, evaporating retirement accounts, and improper corporate oversight--highlighted the importance of longer-term trends in pension plans and equity ownership. As more workers have managed their own retirement accounts and more become stockholders through pension plans and mutual funds, more have learned about both the rewards and the risks of investing in capital markets. With individuals' increasing exposure to market fluctuations and greater participation in equity markets come both new opportunities and new responsibilities, for both workers and employers. Today I've discussed some of the issues that have come to light as a result of long-term trends in pension plans and equity ownership. And I'd like to leave you on an optimistic note with this observation: The issues I discussed today are only possible because of the remarkable breadth and depth of capital markets in the United States. I am confident that over the long haul, the concerns I noted will simply represent the ordinary climb along the investment-learning curve as a broader segment of American households work to achieve their financial goals. Footnotes 1. Deloitte and Touche, 2002 401(k) Annual Benchmarking Survey. 2. Deloitte and Touche, 2002 401(k) Annual Benchmarking Survey. 3. For a review, see Olivia Mitchell, Brett Hammond, and Anna Rappaport, Forecasting Retirement Needs and Retirement Wealth , University of Pennsylvania Press, 2000. 4. Based on the Federal Reserve Board's 2001 Survey of Consumer Finances. 5. Nellie Liang and Scott Weisbenner, "Investor Behavior and Purchase of Company Stock in 401(k) Plans - The Importance of Plan Design," FEDS Working Paper 2002-36 and NBER Working Paper W9131, 2002. See also Shlomo Benartzi and Richard Thaler, "Nave Diversification Strategies and Retirement Savings Plans," American Economic Review , vol. 91 (2001), pp. 79-98. 6. Nellie Liang and Scott Weisbenner, "Investor Behavior and Purchase of Company Stock in 401(k) Plans - The Importance of Plan Design." See also Shlomo Benartzi, "Excessive Extrapolation and the Allocation of 401(k) Accounts to Company Stock," Journal of Finance , vol. 56 (2001), pp. 1747-64. 7. Vanguard Center for Retirement Research. Vanguard Participant Monitor: Expecting Lower Market Returns in the Near Term , December 2001. 8. Brigitte Madrian and Dennis Shea, "The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k) Participation and Savings Behavior," NBER Working Paper No. W7682, 2000. 9. Deloitte and Touche, 2002 401(k) Annual Benchmarking Survey. 10. James Choi, David Laibson, Brigitte Madrian, and Andrew Metrick, "For Better or for Worse: Default Effects and 401(k) Savings Behavior," NBER Working Paper No. W8651, 2001. 11. Richard Thaler and Shlomo Benartzi, "Save More Tomorrow: Using Behavioral Economics to Increase Employee Saving," unpublished Manuscript, 2001. 12. Aizcorbe, Ana, Arthur Kennickell, and Kevin Moore, "Recent Changes in U.S. Family Finances: Evidence from the 1998 and 2001 Survey of Consumer Finances," Federal Reserve Bulletin , vol. 89 (January 2003), pp. 1-32, and Federal Reserve Board staff calculations from the Survey of Consumer Finances. See also Investment Company Institute and Securities Industry Association (ICI and SIA), Equity Ownership in America , 2002. 13. Aizcorbe, Kennickell, and Moore, "Recent Changes in U.S. Family Finances: Evidence from the 1998 and 2001 Survey of Consumer Finances." 14. ICI and SIA, Equity Ownership in America . 15. ICI and SIA, Equity Ownership in America .
Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan Aging global population Before the Special Committee on Aging, U.S. Senate February 27, 2003 Mr. Chairman and other members of the committee, I am pleased to be here today to discuss the economic effects of the aging of the global population. In so doing, I would like to emphasize that the views I will express are my own and do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board. The world's population is growing older as a result of both declining fertility and increasing life expectancy. These trends manifest themselves in at least two important dimensions: a more slowly growing population and labor force, and an increase in the ratio of the elderly to the working-age population. The so-called elderly dependency ratio has been rising in the industrialized world for at least 150 years. The pace of increase slowed greatly with the birth of the baby-boom generation after World War II. But elderly dependency will almost certainly rise more rapidly as that generation reaches retirement age. The acceleration will be particularly dramatic in Japan and Europe. For example, in Japan the population share of the elderly, defined here as those at least 65 years of age, climbed from 12 percent to 17 percent in the past decade, and demographers expect it to reach 30 percent by 2030. The absolute size of Japan's working-age population is already declining and is projected to fall 20 percent over the next three decades. Europe's working-age population is also anticipated to recede, and the share of the elderly in its overall population is expected to rise markedly, though less so than in Japan. The changes projected for the United States are not so severe as those projected for Europe and Japan, but nonetheless present daunting challenges. Over the next thirty years, the growth rate of the working-age population in the United States is anticipated to slow, from about 1 percent per year today to about 1/2 percent per year by 2030. At the same time, the percentage of the population that is over 65 will rise markedly--from less than 13 percent today to perhaps 20 percent by 2030. Though the overall population is expected to continue to age, much of the aging of the labor force has already occurred with the aging of the baby-boom generation. Once the baby boomers begin to retire, the mean age of the U.S. labor force is expected to stabilize. These anticipated changes in the age structure of our population and work force result largely from the decline in fertility that occurred following the birth of the baby-boom generation. After peaking in 1957 at about 3-1/2 births over a woman's lifetime, the fertility rate in the United States fell to less than 2 by the early 1970s, and then rose to about 2.1 by 1990. Since then, the fertility rate has remained close to 2.1, the so-called replacement rate, or the level required to hold the population constant in the absence of immigration or changes in longevity. The decrease in the number of children per family since the baby boom has inevitably led, with a lag, to a projected increase in the ratio of elderly to working-age population. Increases in life expectancy, too, have been substantial. In 1950, a man 65 years of age could expect, on average, to live until age 78, whereas now he can expect to live until over 81. And if current trends continue, by 2025 he can expect to live to 83 and, by 2060, to 85. Women's life expectancy is projected to increase about the same amount, from 81 in 1950 to roughly 85 today, 86 in 2025 and 88 in 2060. Of course, it is difficult to predict the age structure of the population in the more distant future. Although we have a good idea of the size of the working-age population over the next twenty years or so--its members are largely already born--forecasting the number of children and future immigration and population growth is much more conjectural. Just recently, for example, the United Nations revised its forecast of world fertility rates downward from its projection only three years earlier; according to the new forecast, world population is expected to begin actually declining in the latter part of this century, whereas under the previous forecast, it was expected to continue growing. Even with the substantial uncertainty that surrounds these forecasts, population aging in the developed world is not likely to be a temporary phenomenon, associated solely with the retirement of the baby-boom generation. Rather, under current projections, the retirement of that generation should be viewed as hastening the transition between the current distribution of age and one in which the population is notably older. The populations in most developing countries likewise are expected to have a rising median age, but they will remain significantly younger and grow faster than our population over the foreseeable future. Eventually, declines in fertility rates and increases in longevity may lead to similar issues with aging populations in the developing world but likely only well after the demographic transition in the United States. As you know, the aging of the population in the United States will have significant effects on our fiscal situation. In particular, it makes our social security and Medicare programs unsustainable in the long run, short of a major increase in immigration rates, a dramatic acceleration in productivity growth well beyond historical experience, a significant increase in the age of eligibility for benefits, or the use of general revenues to fund benefits. Indeed, according to the intermediate projection of the social security trustees, the level of social security contributions under current law begins falling short of legislated benefits by approximately 2017. While the prospect of a shortfall in social security is reasonably certain given the changing composition of the population, the range of possible outcomes in Medicare is far wider. Rapidly advancing medical technologies, essentially inelastic demand for medical services for the elderly, and a subsidized third-party payment system have created virtually unconstrained demand. How the financing pressures that accompany increasing retirement are resolved will have profound, but uncertain, effects on the structure of both private and public pension plans. Private pension assets already account for about 12 percent of household financial assets in the United States, a level that will almost certainly increase over the next decade. The total investment income of these funds, in conjunction with retirees' other forms of income, must be sufficient to finance a satisfactory standard of living. The real resources available to fund pension benefits depend on the economy's long-term growth rate, which in its simplest terms is determined by the growth rate of labor employed plus the growth rate of the productivity of that labor. As already noted, by 2030 the growth rate of our working-age population is expected to decline by half. The fraction of the working-age population actually employed will doubtless be affected by improvements in health or changes in the economic returns to working. Labor productivity has historically been affected by changes in the amount of capital available to each worker, the pace of technical progress and, perhaps more subtly, changes in the experience of our workforce. These elements are key to assessing the economic effects of aging. One natural response to population aging will almost surely be for a more fit elderly population to increase their participation in the labor force. Americans not only are living longer, but they are generally living healthier. Rates of disability for the elderly have been declining, reflecting both improvements in health and changes in technology that accommodate the physical impairments that are associated with aging. In addition, work is becoming less physically strenuous but more demanding intellectually, continuing a century-long trend toward a more conceptual and a less physical economic output. For example, in 1900, only one out of every ten workers was in a professional, technical, or managerial occupation. By 1970, that proportion had doubled, and today those types of jobs account for about one-third of our workforce. Despite the improving feasibility of work at older ages, Americans have been retiring at younger and younger ages. Some analysts believe this trend has slowed, although few anticipate a rapid turnaround. But rising pressures on retirement incomes and a growing scarcity of experienced labor could induce greater labor-force participation. Immigration, if we choose to expand it, could prove an even more potent antidote for slowing growth in the working-age population. As the influx of foreign workers in response to the tight labor markets of the 1990s showed, immigration does respond to labor shortages. An expansion of labor-force participation by immigrants and the healthy elderly offers some offset to an aging population. However, it is heightened growth of output per worker that presents the greatest potential to boost the growth of gross domestic product. A significant rise in the growth of labor productivity will be necessary if the standard of living of retirees is to be maintained and that of workers is to continue advancing. One of the more direct ways to raise growth in output per hour is to increase saving and investment, which augment the capital stock available to workers. Another is to increase the incentives for innovation; efficiency gains, broadly defined, currently account for roughly half the growth in labor productivity. Though augmenting saving and investment should raise future labor productivity and thereby help provide for an aging population, the incremental benefit of additional investment may itself be affected by aging. Without a growing labor force, the amount of new equipment that can be used productively will be more limited, and the return to capital investment could decline as a consequence. What actually happens to the saving rate in the next three decades will depend importantly on the behavior of the baby-boom cohort during their retirement years. Over the post-World War II period, the elderly in the United States, contrary to conventional wisdom, seem to have drawn down their savings only modestly. The reasons are not entirely clear. Often people bequeath a significant proportion of their savings to their children or others rather than spending it during retirement. If the baby-boom generation continues this pattern, then the U.S. household saving rate may not decline significantly, if at all. The faster rates of aging in Europe and Japan may also directly affect investment and, hence, the growth of labor productivity here in the United States. If saving rates in these countries decline, global capital flows to the United States that have contributed significantly in recent years to financing domestic investment are likely to decline. As in the United States, much will depend on the extent to which retirees in these countries draw down their savings. For example, the saving rate in Japan, even with the rapidly aging population, has not declined to the extent that some had predicted. However, if households in Japan were to start consuming more and saving less, Japan's trade surplus would likely shrink as consumption of imported goods rose. Some of the elevated level of their imports would be exports from the United States, and our trade balance would improve, all else being equal. Jobs requiring unskilled labor are likely to continue moving to developing countries, and this transfer may increase foreign direct investment by U.S. firms. Most other developed countries are unlikely to be able to offer higher rates of return because they are already aging faster than the United States. Many developing countries have the potential to offer higher rates of return because of their younger and more rapidly growing populations and currently low stocks of capital, but the realization of this potential is far from guaranteed. Historically, returns to investment in many developing countries have been held down by several inhibiting factors: low levels of education, poor infrastructure, and, perhaps most important of all, capricious legal protections. Clearly, if net capital inflows into the United States decline, so must our current account and trade deficits. Any such declines must be offset by higher domestic saving--including government saving--if domestic investment in plant and equipment and in housing are to be maintained. Future labor productivity, however, is determined by more than just saving, investment, and capital intensity. One of the remarkable features of the economy over the past seven years or so has been the acceleration in the pace of innovative use of capital by workers, rather than increases in the amount of capital per worker. Indeed, as I pointed out earlier, such innovation accounted for about one-half of the rapid increase in labor productivity that we observed in the late 1990s. Therefore, it is important to address the possibility that aging will affect the rate of innovation, either through a rearrangement of existing capital resources or through technological advance. Economists understand very little about how technological progress occurs, and research about the effects of aging populations on technological innovation has been sparse. On the one hand, some commentators have worried that an aging population will lead to a less dynamic economy and a lower rate of technological progress; they cite, for example, the fact that the majority of Nobel prizes in the "hard" sciences were awarded for discoveries made by the winners early in their careers. Such issues may have less import going forward, however, as most of the aging of the workforce has already occurred. On the other hand, a slowed rate of growth or a decline in the working-age population may raise technological growth. Although discovery of new technologies is to some degree a matter of luck, we know that human activities do respond to economic incentives. A relative shortage of workers should increase the incentives for developing labor-saving technologies and may actually spur technological development. Economic historians have argued that one reason that the United States surpassed Great Britain in the early nineteenth century as the leader in technological innovation was the relative scarcity of labor in the United States. Patent records of this period show that innovation did respond to economic incentives and that the scarcity of labor clearly provided incentives to develop new methods of production. * * * * * The aging of the population means that the government will inevitably need to make a number of changes to its retirement programs. These changes in themselves can have profound economic effects. For example, aside from suppressing economic growth, large increases in payroll taxes can exacerbate the problem of reductions in labor supply, whereas policies to promote longer working life can ameliorate it. Reductions in benefits--through changes to the age for receiving full retirement benefits or through reforms to slow the growth of Medicare spending or through other means--can affect retirement, the labor force, and saving behavior. In addition, policies that link increases in longevity over time to the eligibility age for social security, and perhaps Medicare, may need to be considered. Such linkages would help protect the financial and, hence, the economic viability of these programs. The aging of the population is bound to bring with it many changes to our economy--some foreseeable, many probably not. Though the challenges here seem great, the necessary adjustments will likely be smaller than those required in most other developed countries. But how we adjust will also matter. Early initiatives to address the economic effects of baby-boom retirements could smooth the transition to a new balance between workers and retirees. If we delay, the adjustments could be abrupt and painful. Fortunately, the U.S. economy is uniquely well suited to make those adjustments. Our open labor markets can adapt to the differing needs and abilities of our older population. Our capital markets can allow for the creation and rapid adoption of new labor-saving technologies, and our open society has been receptive to immigrants. All these factors put us in a good position to adjust to the inexorabilities of an aging population. Footnotes 1. The fertility rate used here is the total fertility rate. It is measured as the average number of children who would be born to a woman in her lifetime if she were to experience the birth rates by age observed in any given year. 2. Because social security benefits are tied to productivity growth with a lag, only a rate of productivity growth well above historical experience could completely resolve social securitys long-term financing problem. 3. Constraining these outlays by any mechanism other than prices will involve some form of rationing--an approach that in the past has not been popular in the United States.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board announced today the approval of the application of The Daiwa Bank, Limited, Osaka, Japan, to establish a representative office in New York, New York. Attached is the Order relating to this action.
Remarks by Governor Donald L. Kohn At the Conference on Finance and Macroeconomics sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco and Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, San Francisco, California February 28, 2003 The Strength in Consumer Durables and Housing: Policy Stabilization or Problem in the Making? We have spent the day examining the intersection of finance and macroeconomics from a theoretical and longer-run empirical perspective. I thought it might be interesting as after-dinner entertainment to bring the topic to the here and now--to the current economic and monetary policy situation. In particular, a number of commentators have raised the specter that imbalances are being created in the markets for consumer durable goods and houses--unsustainably high prices or activity--that will produce macroeconomic strains when, inevitably, they correct. These concerns obviously echo those expressed by some observers that monetary policy allowed run-ups in equity prices and capital spending in the 1990s that ultimately proved to be destabilizing. In that context, I thought it might be useful to consider the choices and information available to the central bank on this related question now--in real time--without the aid of 20-20 hindsight. I want to emphasize that what follows is focused on the question of imbalances in houses and durables and is not intended to be a comprehensive discussion of the outlook for the U.S. economy, which will depend on a wide array of influences I am not addressing. I should note the views on this question are my own and do not necessarily represent those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. Monetary Policy Backdrop The basic story is straightforward: In response to a series of developments that curtailed aggregate demand in the United States, the Federal Reserve has eased policy aggressively, cutting the federal funds rate 5-1/4 percentage points in two years, bringing the real federal funds rate to below zero. The most important contributors to economic weakness have been sharp contractions in investment spending and equity prices as businesses and investors re-evaluated the profitability of capital spending and the productive capacity built up in the late 1990s. The lower interest rates boosted investment in housing and consumer durables, helping to offset the drag of the decline in business investment and the damping effects of the drop in household wealth on consumer spending. These policy actions have kept the economy from softening even further and inflation from dropping by more from already low levels. To a considerable extent, monetary policy easing is working no differently today than in the past: It stimulates interest-sensitive spending. But there are many forces at work in this cycle that have required interest rates working through their effects on household spending to shoulder an unusually heavy burden to support growth. Unlike most other cycles in recent U.S. economic experience, the weakness was initiated by a cutback in investment spending. This contrast is illustrated in , which shows spending relative to GDP for a number of components of investment. While business fixed investment, shown in the upper panel, typically drops more than GDP when the economy weakens, the recent episode is remarkable in a couple of ways. First, the drop in the high-tech share, the red line, is unprecedented. Second, the drop in the share for non-high-tech equipment, the black line, has been unusually steep, exceeded only in the 1979-82 episode, when the contraction in output was far deeper. Another unusual aspect of the current cycle is that equity prices and wealth continued to move lower long after interest rates started falling and kept declining well after the economy seemed to have bottomed out. This pattern appears to have occurred because the re-evaluation of corporate profitability has persisted for some time; because of last summer's revelations of corporate misdeeds; and because the recent increase in perceptions of geopolitical risk. These same concerns have continued to raise risk spreads in credit markets, damping the passthrough of lower policy interest rates to the cost of business credit. With uncertainty high and financial markets skittish, firms have remained hesitant to commit their cash and investment has been very slow to turn around. In addition, economic weakness and sharp declines in equity prices have been widespread globally, and, until recently, these developments have helped keep the dollar strong despite the reduction in interest rates. Sluggish growth in the economies of our trading partners and the relatively high dollar have held down net exports, blunting another potential channel for monetary policy easing to bolster spending. In the late 1990s, the rise in the dollar reflected global perceptions of expanding investment opportunities in the United States and the resulting current account deficit provided a safety valve through which strong domestic demand was met in part by higher foreign production. But even though we do not need that safety valve anymore, the current account deficit has continued to increase of late, requiring easier monetary policy to keep domestic demand elevated relative to domestic income. In the lower panel, chart 1 also gives some sense of the extent to which household investment has been carrying the economy. Economic contractions have frequently been led by weakness in the household sector, which often has responded to higher interest rates as the Federal Reserve acts to reverse inflation pressures. This pattern can be seen in the chart, where the spending shares of housing and consumer durables typically drop sharply before and during recessions. In this episode, however, these shares have continued to move slightly higher, despite a pronounced drop in wealth and a weak economy. Thus, household investment has stayed unusually strong throughout the recession and early in the recovery, buoyed, no doubt, by low interest rates. Going Forward: The Benign Scenario As a consequence, it is to be expected that stocks of interest-sensitive investment goods--in the present circumstances, especially cars and houses--are greater than they would otherwise be. And with demand for housing strong, it is perhaps not surprising that house prices are probably higher than they otherwise would be. But judging from the steep upward slope of the yield curve, few see interest rates as holding at current levels indefinitely. When, at some point, interest rates rise to more typical levels, desired stocks of these goods likely would fall, holding other factors equal, restraining this interest-sensitive spending. But it is important to remember that such an increase in interest rates would not occur in a vacuum; it would occur because the economy looked to be growing more vigorously. Most economists expect that a more pronounced step-up in the pace of activity will be brought about by a recovery in business investment from its current subdued levels. In that case, the need for high levels of spending on housing will be reduced. And higher interest rates will be instrumental in bringing about the adjustment in housing expenditures required to keep economic activity from overshooting its potential. In principle, a housing or durables boom induced by monetary policy need not entail a bust that would be painful to the economy. Of course, it is not likely to occur as smoothly as that. Among other things, markets could get it wrong--for example, they could anticipate greater strength in underlying demand than is actually occurring. Then, higher interest rates would tend to damp spending unduly. But there is an "automatic stabilizer" aspect to the interaction of financial markets and the economy. As investors realized their error, rates would fall back. And markets would likely get a nudge from the Federal Reserve: We would set rates lower than the markets have built in, and in our various statements we would attempt to make clear our assessment of economic prospects. Interest rates could then stay low for an extended period, the desired stock of housing would remain elevated, and housing investment would remain high as well. But that would be just what is required. Alternatively, business investment could snap back faster than expected. In that case, interest rates would rise more rapidly as the extent of the strength of demand became clear--with, undoubtedly, some help from the Federal Reserve--weakening household investment more sharply as would be required. With production currently well below potential and inflation and inflation expectations low, it is doubtful that the temporary misalignment of rates would result in the development of any perceptible inflation pressures before the Federal Reserve would have time to take countervailing steps. Costs and Risks to the Benign Scenario So far I have painted a rather sanguine picture of the longer-term consequences of a monetary-policy-induced boom in household investment. While this story has the virtues of plausibility and internal consistency, it does involve some features that bear further thought. First, the benign scenario relies on the transfer of productive resources across sectors--in particular, it involves primarily the inflow of resources into the residential construction sector. Presumably, the transfer of these resources entails some costs--retraining and perhaps relocation of workers, a different mix of capital, and so forth. If residential construction were eventually to shrink as interest rates rose, further costs would be incurred as those resources shifted yet again to different uses. Another possibility is that the reality of the housing and consumer durables booms may not work out as neatly as the benign scenario would suggest. Indeed, some have drawn the comparison with the high-tech investment boom that peaked in 2000. As events have unfolded, it appears that firms concluded that the investment they undertook in those years was not justified; the subsequent drop in investment suggests that, in hindsight, firms concluded that they had "overinvested" in high-tech equipment; and that sharp cutback in investment created a recession. Is it possible, these commentators have asked, that the current boom in housing and durables will leave us with similar regrets in a few years? Furthermore, prices of houses have been rising faster than inflation in recent years, reminiscent of the surge in equity prices through 2000. Some analysts argue that loose monetary policy is feeding a bubble in housing prices that will eventually burst. In short, the question is whether the stimulus to household investment, while cushioning the economic cycle in the near-term, is setting the stage for greater instability in the longer run. Taking these concerns in turn: Reallocation costs. There is little doubt that it is costly to build up a commercial enterprise. Workers must be hired, office space rented, equipment purchased, management expertise redirected. All of these actions entail costs. At the same time, as I already noted, if the yield curve is any indication, interest rates will one day go back up, giving rise to the possibility that some of the current expansion of construction firms will eventually need to be unwound. So relying on the housing sector to offset weakness elsewhere in the economy clearly entails costs. But these costs need to be put against the costs of underutilized resources. Facilitating an increase in residential construction puts resources to use that would otherwise lie idle. Implicit in the conventional story is the assumption that the costs of unemployment are significantly greater than the costs of shifting resources across sectors; if so, the presence of adjustment costs should not seriously impede the desire to offset weakness in spending elsewhere with greater spending on household investment. Alternatively, a judgment that the adjustment costs were large, or the shock to demand temporary, might argue in the direction of a more measured policy response. While it is hard to know for sure how important these adjustment costs may be, it is worth noting that, historically, there has been considerable variation in employment and production in the residential construction sector. Seasonal fluctuations in residential construction are quite large, and in business cycles from the early 1970s to the early 1990s, it was not uncommon for housing starts to drop by more than half. So it appears that this sector of the economy has evolved in such a way that it can expand and contract rapidly. Moreover, in the current episode, the falloff in commercial construction has freed many resources that can readily be put to work building houses for now, then shifted back when business spending picks up. Similarly, even with the strong sales of light motor vehicles and other consumer durables last year, capacity utilization in these industries for the most part has remained at moderate levels, which suggests that the additional production induced by the monetary stimulus has occurred without important and costly new investment in production capacity. In sum, it does not seem that the costs of shifting resources across sectors should be a concern now. This is especially true when you consider that these resources would quite possibly otherwise be idle. That is not to say that such costs might not loom larger in other circumstances--say when resources are being temporarily shifted between the tradeable goods and nontradeable service sectors--though policymakers and their critics would still also need to be mindful of the costs of keeping more people unemployed. Excesses. Perhaps the more challenging question is whether excesses and imbalances have built up that could create economic instability in the future when they are unwound. It is not hard to see why the issue arises. shows that real house prices have risen rapidly in the last few years. On a constant quality basis, new house prices still have not breached the peak of the late 1970s, but the prices of existing homes have sky-rocketed. Moreover, as can be seen in , the stock of consumer durables has risen at an elevated rate in the last few years; while the stock of houses has been growing more moderately, that pace has been maintained for some years. The difficulties of real-time identification of imbalances are hard to overstate. One can never be sure until well after the event whether prices or quantities have indeed deviated from sustainable levels, because the sustainable level is never observable but must be estimated, and those estimates are quite sensitive to the assumptions being made. This point is especially true of asset prices: For example, the literature on both equity prices and exchange rates indicates that it is hard to beat a random walk. A similar point can be made about investment and the capital stock--including the stock of houses and durables. As the recent experience with business capital so graphically illustrates, excesses are only clearly evident after the fact--and the size of the over-investment may be disputable even then. All that said, we can identify a number of factors that should affect what I will call the "sustainable" stock of housing and consumer durable goods--the level that would be desired over time at particular levels of interest rates and other key determinants of demand. Among these determinants are wealth, permanent income, and the user cost of owning the good--in effect its "price." That price, in turn, depends importantly on the rate of interest. The demand for housing as an asset may also reflect some specific institutional changes. In particular, in recent decades, the rise of home equity lines of credit and the lower costs of mortgage refinancing has meant that housing wealth has become increasingly "liquid," and as a consequence, may have become more attractive. compares the actual levels of the stocks of housing and consumer durables with their desired levels derived from the Board staff's "FRB/US" model of the U.S. economy, using both current interest rates and their historical averages. Somewhat surprisingly, estimates from this conventional approach suggest that, at current interest rates, the existing stocks of houses and consumer durables are appreciably below the sustainable levels. In this model, low interest rates have a powerful effect on the desired stocks of housing and durables. Even when we estimate sustainable levels based on historical average interest rates, we conclude by this method that current housing and durables stocks are about in line with long-run demand. We need to keep in mind that these are only very rough estimates of unobservable variables. But such as they are, they do not suggest that as interest rates rise we will find that we are left with a vast oversupply of houses and durables. What about house prices? Unfortunately, as I already noted, asset prices are even harder to model than investment. Just as equity prices can be thought of as being the present discounted value of future benefits of equity ownership--in principle, dividends and share repurchases--so house prices can be thought of as being the present discounted value of the future benefits of home-ownership, which, in theory, should be the potential market value of the rent from the house. And, just as the rate of return on equity should fall along with interest rates, so should the rental rate of return on houses. With rents changing very slowly over time, we ought to expect that, other things being equal, lower interest rates would raise house prices. In addition, households may be weighing houses against alternative investments other than bonds. In that regard, the collapse of expectations for gains from holding equity have undoubtedly made real estate relatively more attractive, contributing to price increases and higher activity. On the supply side of the market, the scarcity of desirable land relative to population growth naturally puts upward pressures on prices. In addition, productivity in construction has lagged gains in the overall productivity of nonfarm businesses. Consequently, it should not be surprising to see the price of housing rise relative to the prices of other goods and services. The combination of demand and supply factors has caused house price gains to outstrip per capita income gains in recent years. The top of shows that the ratio of house prices to per capita disposable income has increased substantially since 1998. But owing to the decline in mortgage rates, this has not made housing less affordable. The bottom of chart 5 shows an index of housing "affordability," which compares the mortgage payment on a typical home to median household income; high levels of the index mean greater affordability. Although house prices outpaced income through much of the late 1990s, housing remained quite affordable by historical standards. It does not appear that the rise in prices has meant that the market is being supported on an increasingly narrow base, given increases in incomes and declines in interest rates. If interest rates were to rise so that real mortgage rates were equal to their long-term average, the affordability index would drop back, but only to a level that would still leave houses more affordable than they were in the second half of the 1980s. Conclusion: Implications and Policy Choices In sum, the rise in housing prices and the increase in household investment in houses and consumer durables do not appear out of line with what might be expected in the current environment of low interest rates and continuing growth in real disposable incomes. Judging from this analysis, and bearing in mind its inherently tentative--if not speculative--character, it seems likely that as the economy strengthens and interest rates rise in response, household investment and prices are likely to soften some relative to recent trends, but not to break precipitously. Houses and cars would not be providing the impetus to economic activity they often have in past recoveries, but they do not appear set to replicate the experience of fiber-optic cable. We are making inferences from very inexact proxies for desired stocks and sustainable prices. No one could definitively rule out the possibility that home construction and prices could drop sharply. Undoubtedly this will occur in some local markets, and it could become widespread. But the odds would seem to favor a more measured response to the inevitable tightening of policy as the recovery in business investment picks up steam, consistent with keeping the economy on a sustainable growth track rather than becoming another source of macroeconomic instability. And weighing those odds is what policy is all about: Making choices in real time, using incomplete knowledge of future asset market behavior, and weighing potential costs and benefits for economic performance over time from alternative policy strategies. By lowering interest rates aggressively, the Federal Reserve undoubtedly has shifted some forms of economic activity from the future to the present. In effect, we are trying to cushion the effects of decisions by the private sector to postpone business capital spending for now. Adjustment costs aside, and these appear to be minor, it is not clear why we would not want to bring construction spending in from the future, when it is likely that other parts of the economy would not be so weak. It makes sense to build the houses and cars now, when the cost of doing so is relatively low, rather than waiting. And building them now has kept more people employed and reduced the risk of deflation. All in all, from my perspective, with the knowledge and analysis available to me, the policy choices we have made seem consistent with fostering our legislated goals of maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-run interest rates, not only in the near term, but most likely over the longer run as well. Footnotes * John Roberts of the Board's staff contributed to the preparation of these remarks. 1. Another possibility is that the buildup of debt associated with the strength in household investment will feedback adversely on financial conditions, especially as the boom unwinds. Such consequences could occur even in the absence of a "bubble" in housing prices if households were overextended and lenders had not taken adequate precautions against even a measured drop in collateral values. However, the link between debt burdens and consumer spending are tenuous at best, and when measured on a consistent basis, burdens do not look especially large. Moreover, loan-to-value ratios on mortgages have been about flat, leaving ample cushion for moderate housing price declines, should they occur. These observations suggest that widespread credit difficulties with important macroeconomic effects are unlikely when interest rates rise. For this reason, and to keep the subject manageable, I will not deal with the debt associated with acquiring the houses and durables. 2. The exception was for light trucks, when capacity utilization reached 97 percent in the third quarter of 2002. 3. This conclusion proved relatively robust to alternative models using varying definitions of permanent income and wealth. In all models, the elasticity of the demand for housing relative to user cost was 0.5 and that of consumer durables was 0.9.