Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan Financial education At the JumpStart Coalition's Annual Meeting, Washington, D.C. April 3, 2003 I am pleased to be here today to share with you my perspective on the importance of financial education. I commend the leadership of the JumpStart Coalition and the activities it has undertaken to support teachers working on the front-line of financial education. Trends in Consumer Finances As you are aware, today's financial world is highly complex when compared with that of a generation ago. An understanding of how to maintain a checking and savings account at a local financial institution may have been sufficient twenty-five years ago. Today's consumers, however, must be able to differentiate between a wide range of products, services, and providers of financial products to successfully manage their personal finances. Certainly, young adults have access to credit at a much earlier age than their parents did. Accordingly, they need a more comprehensive understanding of credit than was afforded to the previous generation--including the impact of compounding interest on debt balances and the implications of mismanaging credit accounts. In addition, as technological advances have contributed significantly to the dramatic changes within the financial services market, consumers more generally must be familiar with the role that computers play in the conduct of every traditional financial transaction, from withdrawing funds to gaining access to credit. While the focus of your efforts is to provide youth with a solid foundation for understanding personal financial management, the benefits of that objective extend to a much broader audience. Data, both empirical and anecdotal, point to trends in consumer financial conditions that have caused concern among some consumer groups. For example, Federal Reserve statistics indicate that household debt outstanding increased more than 9 percent last year-- the largest rate of increase since 1989. And while analyses suggest that, overall, this level of debt is being serviced adequately, reports of nonbusiness bankruptcy filings reaching record highs in 2002 reveal that many consumers are experiencing significant financial crises. Regulators, lenders, community leaders, and consumer advocates continue to be concerned about abusive home mortgage lending practices. More recently, the emergence of certain deposit-linked products has also sparked debate among these parties. For example, one product marketed as protection against bounced checks has generated concerns among consumer groups ranging from the appropriateness of assessed fees to the possible unintended effect of reinforcing poor account-management practices on the part of consumers who do not properly monitor their accounts. Trends in the Financial Services Industry Perhaps, some may judge such information as an indication that the combination of market forces and industry trends has had negative effects on consumers. On the contrary, many benefits have accrued to consumers of household and business credit as the result of the remarkable growth and technological developments that have occurred in financial services. Computer and telecommunications technologies have lowered the cost and broadened the scope of financial services. As a consequence, specialized lenders and new financial products tailored to meet very specific market needs have proliferated. At the same time, the development of credit-scoring tools and the securitization of loan pools hold the potential for opening doors to national credit markets for both consumers and businesses. Deregulation has created important structural changes in the financial services industry and has contributed significantly to creating a marketplace that is increasingly competitive and highly innovative as a result of the entry of new players or expansion of existing players. Throughout our banking history, we have seen significant adjustments to existing policies to enable markets to respond to the demand for services. These structural changes have heightened competition, resulting in market efficiencies that continue to help drive down costs and foster the emergence of increasingly diverse and highly specialized organizations. These entities range from banks and brokerage firms that offer their services exclusively through electronically based delivery mechanisms to locally based public-private partnerships that provide counseling and financing arrangements to low- and moderate-income families. Corporations, for example, often allow employees to self-direct their investments in pension and other benefit plans, whereas employers dictated such decisions twenty years ago. The advent of on-line brokerage firms has enabled individual investors to directly conduct stock transactions. The Role of Financial Education However beneficial, constant change, of course, can be unsettling, and one challenge we face is overcoming such anxieties. But just as the rapid adoption of new information technologies has expanded the scope and utility of our financial products, so, too, has it increased our means for addressing some of the challenges these changes pose. For example, just as universities provide remote learning options to allow students to pursue continuing education via the Internet, consumers can use software to create customized budgets to develop long-term savings strategies for retirement or for their children's college education. In both scenarios, technological advances represent the opportunity for achieving efficiencies and exercising preferences, but only when the end users possess the knowledge necessary to access pertinent information and to capitalize on it. Fostering education that will enable individuals to overcome their reluctance or inability to take full advantage of technological advances and product innovation in the financial sector can increase economic opportunity. As market forces continue to expand the range of providers of financial services, consumers will have more choice and flexibility in how they manage their personal finances. They will also need to learn ways to use new technologies and to make wise financial decisions. In considering means to improve the financial status of families, education can play a critical role by equipping consumers with the knowledge required to choose from among the myriad of financial products and providers. Financial education is especially critical for populations that have traditionally been underserved by our financial system. In particular, financial education may help to prevent vulnerable consumers from becoming entangled in financially devastating credit arrangements. Regulators, consumer advocates, and policymakers all agree that consumer education is essential in the quest to stem the occurrence of abusive, and at times illegal, lending practices. An informed borrower is simply less vulnerable to fraud and abuse. Financial education can empower consumers to be better shoppers, allowing them to obtain goods and services at lower cost. This process effectively increases consumers' real purchasing power, and provides more opportunity for them to consume, save, or invest. In addition, financial education can help provide individuals with the knowledge necessary to create household budgets, initiate savings plans, manage debt, and make strategic investment decisions for their retirement or for their children's education. Having these basic financial planning skills can help families to meet their near-term obligations and to maximize their longer-term financial well-being. The importance of basic financial skills underscores the need to begin the learning process as early as possible. Indeed, improving basic financial education at the elementary and secondary school level will provide a foundation of financial literacy that can help prevent younger people from making poor decisions that can take years to overcome. In particular, it has been my experience that competency in mathematics--both in numerical manipulation and in understanding the conceptual foundations--enhances a person's ability to handle the more ambiguous and qualitative relationships that dominate our day-to-day financial decisionmaking. For example, through an understanding of compounding interest, one can appreciate the cumulative benefit of routine saving. Similarly, learning how to conduct research in a library or on the Internet helps one find information to enhance decision-making. Focusing on improving fundamental mathematical and problem-solving skills can develop knowledgeable consumers who can take full advantage of the sophisticated financial services offered in an ever-changing marketplace. * * * * * * In the long run, better basic education at home and at the elementary and secondary school level will provide the foundation for a lifetime of learning. We must also be alert to the need to improve the skills and earning power of those who appear to be falling behind. Strategies must be developed to overcome the education deficiencies that all too many of our young people have. Just as the marketplace has responded to an increased demand for conceptual job skills by increasing the range of education options available to individuals, efforts to provide consumers with information and training about financial matters throughout their lives must also be expanded. The Federal Reserve has a keen interest in measuring the effectiveness of financial education programs. For example, we hosted a forum on best practices in credit education, which focused on effective educational tools and techniques and identified programmatic challenges and issues. In response to a call for papers, studies evaluating the impact of such training initiatives were presented at our Community Affairs Research Conference held last week. In addition, we have recently engaged in collaborative efforts with the Department of Defense and with several Native American tribal education councils to develop programs to assess their individual financial education efforts. Quantitative study of the quality and long-term success of education and training will be of particular interest to the Federal Reserve System as we develop and distribute a wide variety of financial and economic literacy products. Building bridges between community organizations, our educational institutions, and private businesses will be an essential aspect of our efforts to increase familiarity with new technological and financial tools that are fundamental to improving individual economic well-being. And the success of such efforts will bear significantly on how well prepared our society is to meet the challenges of an increasingly knowledge-based economy. The advent of new technologies and other market innovations will certainly bring new challenges and new possibilities for our businesses, our workers, and our educational system. These changes are affecting both financial and nonfinancial institutions around the world. Although we cannot know the precise directions in which these changes will take us, we can reasonably expect that the pace of technological developments and competitive pressures will increase. As in the past, our economic institutions and our workforce will strive to adjust. We must recognize, however, that adjustment is not automatic, and expanded linkages between business and education should be encouraged at all levels of our education system. In closing, let us remember that all shifts in the structure of the economy naturally create frictions and human stress, at least temporarily. However, if we are able to boost our investment in people, ideas, and processes, as well as in machines, the economy can readily adapt to change and support ever-rising standards of living for all Americans.
Testimony of Vice Chairman Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. Check Truncation Act Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate April 3, 2003 I would like to thank the committee for inviting me to discuss the proposed Check Truncation Act (CTA) that the Board sent to Congress for its consideration in December 2001. The proposed CTA removes existing legal barriers to the use of new technology in check processing and holds the promise of a more efficient check collection system. The Board commends the Committee for holding hearings on this very important legislative initiative. Technological Advances in Check Processing Check processing is far more efficient than it once was. Less than fifty years ago, clerks hand-sorted millions of checks each day. In the 1960s, the banking industry began to use mechanical high-speed check-processing equipment to read and sort checks, which had been redesigned for automated processing. Today, banks, thrifts, and credit unions, which I will collectively refer to as banks, process about 40 billion checks that consumers, businesses, and the government write each year. Typically, after a check has been deposited at a bank's branch or ATM, the bank transports the check to a central operations center. The check is then usually sent to one or more intermediaries--such as a Federal Reserve Bank or a correspondent bank--or a clearinghouse for collection before it is ultimately delivered for payment to the bank on which it is drawn. At each step, the check must be physically processed and then shipped to its destination by air or ground transportation. Some checks, however, are removed from the collection or return process, and the payment information on the checks is captured and delivered electronically. This process, which is commonly referred to as check truncation, reduces the number of times that the checks must be physically processed and shipped. As a result, check truncation is generally more efficient, more cost effective, and less prone to processing errors. Today, however, check truncation can only occur by agreement of the banks involved because existing law requires that, in the absence of an agreement, the original paper checks be presented or returned. Further, given the thousands of banks in the United States, it is infeasible for any one bank to obtain check truncation agreements from all other banks or even a large proportion of them. As a result, the check system's legal framework, which has not kept up with technological advances, has constrained the efforts of many banks to use new electronic technologies, such as digital check imaging, to improve check-processing efficiency and to provide improved services to customers. Therefore, legal changes are needed to facilitate the use of technologies that could improve check-processing efficiency and lead to substantial reductions in transportation and other check-processing costs. The proposed CTA makes such changes. Proposed Check Truncation Act The proposed CTA solves a long-standing dilemma--how to foster check truncation early in the check collection or return process without mandating that banks accept checks in electronic form. Currently, under typical check truncation arrangements, electronic information about a truncated check, rather than the original paper check, is presented to the bank on which the check is drawn. The proposed legislation facilitates check truncation by creating a new negotiable instrument called a "substitute check," which would permit banks to truncate the original checks, to process the check information electronically, and to print and deliver substitute checks to banks and bank customers that want to continue receiving paper checks. A substitute check, which would be the legal equivalent of the original check, would include all the information contained on the original check--that is, an image of the front and back of the original check as well as the machine-readable numbers that appear on the bottom of the check. Under this proposed legislation, while a bank could no longer demand to receive the original check, it could still demand to receive a paper check. Banks would likely receive a mix of original checks and substitute checks. Because substitute checks could be processed just like original checks, a bank would not need to invest in any new technology or otherwise change its current check-processing operations. Banks could use the new authority provided in this legislation in a number of different ways. For example, a bank would no longer need to send couriers every afternoon to each of its branches and ATMs to pick up checks that customers have deposited. Instead, digital images of checks could be transmitted electronically from those locations to the bank's operations center, where substitute checks could be created and forwarded for collection. Not only would this be quicker and more efficient, but it could also permit banks to establish branches or ATMs in remote locations more cost effectively and to provide their customers with later deposit cut-off hours. Moreover, the proposed legislation would give a bank the flexibility to transmit checks electronically over long distances, and create substitute checks at locations near their ultimate destination, for example, near to the bank on which the checks are drawn, substantially reducing the time and cost associated with physical transportation. By enabling the banking industry to reduce its reliance on physical transportation, the proposed legislation would also reduce the risk that checks may be lost or delayed in transit. Today, bad weather routinely delays check shipments and check shipments have been destroyed in plane crashes. The banking industry's extensive reliance on air transportation was underscored in the aftermath of the September 11 tragedy, when air transportation came to a standstill and the flow of checks slowed dramatically. During the week of the attacks, the Federal Reserve Banks' daily check float, which is normally a few hundred million dollars, ballooned to over $47 billion, or more than a hundred times its normal level. Had the proposed legislation been in effect at that time and had banks been using a robust electronic infrastructure for check collection, banks would have been able to collect many more checks by transmitting electronic check information across the country and presenting substitute checks to paying banks. Finally, many banks hope to use the authority provided by this legislation to streamline the processing of checks that they must return unpaid. Today, after a bank processes its incoming checks and determines which checks to return, it has to reprocess all of the incoming checks to pull out the less than one percent of checks that are to be returned unpaid. Many banks have indicated to us that they would find it more cost effective to use their image systems to generate substitute checks for return rather than having to reprocess all of their physical checks. Both individual and corporate bank customers would also benefit from the proposed legislation. As I noted earlier, as banks restructure their branch and ATM networks, they could offer customers broader deposit options or extended deposit cutoff hours. Such changes could result in some checks being credited one day earlier and interest accruing one day earlier for some checks deposited in interest-bearing accounts. In addition, banks might allow some corporate customers to transmit their deposits electronically. Because the proposed legislation will likely encourage greater investments in image technology, banks might also be able offer their customers new and improved services. For example, banks might be able to provide customers with access to on-line images of deposits and payments before the delivery of paper statements or provide printed copies of checks deposited at ATMs on ATM receipts. The same investment in image technology might also enable banks to provide better customer service by using check images to resolve customer inquiries more easily and quickly than today. Further, as banks reduce their operating costs, the savings will be passed on through a combination of lower fees to their customers and higher returns to their shareholders. Banks have indicated that they expect cost savings to be substantial. The proposed legislation is designed to provide banks with additional flexibility in processing checks by requiring banks to accept substitute checks in place of original checks. The proposed legislation does not, however, require banks to accept checks in electronic form nor does it require banks to use the new authority granted by the proposed legislation to create substitute checks. This market-based approach permits each bank to decide whether to make use of this new authority based on its business judgment about the costs and benefits of doing so. We believe the market changes arising from these revisions to check law will result in substantial cost savings. Clearly, because substitute checks can be processed in the same manner as original checks, recipients of substitute checks should incur little or no additional processing costs. It is difficult, however, to estimate the overall cost savings. Different banks will take different approaches toward using the new authority granted by the proposed legislation. Each bank's use of the new authority will depend on its technology infrastructure and strategy, its physical infrastructure, and its customer and business profiles. Thus, the magnitude of the cost savings, which will depend on the rate at which banks begin using the new authority, is difficult to determine. Customer Protection Provisions While there is a fairly broad consensus on the desirability of the underlying concepts of the proposed legislation to permit the use of substitute checks, the issue of customer protections has been the subject of much debate. We recognize that this issue is the most challenging policy issue in the proposed law, and Congress will have a number of alternative approaches to consider as it contemplates the need for additional customer protections. We would not object to any approach that does not go beyond the protections included in our original proposal. Modified Position on Customer Protections The Board's proposed legislation extended the protections of existing check law to substitute checks and included new warranty and indemnity provisions that were designed to address losses resulting from the receipt of a substitute check instead of the original check. In addition, the proposed legislation included consumer and interbank expedited recredit provisions. Since we forwarded the proposed legislation to Congress in late 2001, the Board has had an opportunity to further reflect on the views that have been expressed by both consumer advocates and the banking industry and has concluded that the expedited recredit provisions originally suggested by the Board are not necessary for the successful implementation of the proposed legislation. I would like to discuss briefly why we believe that expedited recredit provisions are not necessary. Existing Customer Protections Long-established check law protects bank customers if checks are improperly charged to their accounts. The proposed legislation would apply existing check law, including the Uniform Commercial Code (UCC) and the Federal Reserve Board's Regulation CC, to substitute checks as though they were the original checks, to the extent such law is not inconsistent with the proposed legislation. Specifically, a bank may only charge a check that is properly payable to a customer's account. A check is properly payable if it has been authorized by the bank's customer and complies with any agreement between the customer and the bank. Thus, if a bank charges a customer's account for a check that is not properly payable, such as when a check has been forged, altered, or duplicated, the customer has a claim against the bank for an unauthorized charge to the customer's account. For example, if a bank pays a counterfeit check, the bank could be liable to its customer for the amount of the unauthorized charge, interest on that amount, and consequential damages for the wrongful dishonor of any subsequently presented checks. This potentially large liability provides a strong incentive for the bank to resolve a claim for an unauthorized charge as expeditiously as possible. Over the years, no pattern of problems has emerged to suggest that existing check law is inadequate in protecting bank customers against unauthorized charges. As part of its analysis, Board staff has reviewed the consumer complaint databases of the five agencies of the Federal Financial Institution Examination Council and found no pattern of problems associated with the timely resolution of check problems, including problems related to accounts where the checks are not returned with the monthly statements. Additional Customer Protections under the Proposed Legislation In addition to the protections provided in current check law, the proposed legislation requires banks to provide new warranties for substitute checks and to indemnify customers for losses resulting from the receipt of a substitute check instead of the original check. Specifically, banks must warrant that substitute checks they provide to their customers are legally equivalent to the original checks and that a check will not be paid more than once from a customer's account. Banks must also indemnify their customers for losses they incur due to the receipt of substitute checks rather than the original checks. Taken together, these warranty and indemnity provisions provide customers with additional protections against losses related to the use of substitute checks. Are Expedited Recredit Provisions Needed? The Board's original proposal to Congress also included expedited recredit provisions for consumers. (A companion section of the proposal included interbank expedited recredit rules.) The expedited recredit provisions required a bank to recredit a consumer's account, within a specified time frame, if a substitute check was not properly charged to the consumer's account. Upon further reflection, the Board has now concluded that the significant compliance burdens imposed by these provisions on banks that receive substitute checks outweigh the small incremental benefits that the provisions would provide to consumers. These compliance burdens would run counter to one of the Board's guiding principles when drafting the proposed legislation: minimization of the operational and administrative costs that would be borne by banks receiving substitute checks, because these banks would have no choice but to accept the substitute checks. Further, the Board believes the expedited recredit provisions are unnecessary given the protections provided by existing check law and by the proposed legislation's new warranties and indemnity, which provide additional customer protections. As discussed above, existing check law provides substantive protections against unauthorized charges to customer accounts. Further, while it is true that the UCC does not provide a specified time frame within which a bank must act, its provisions give the bank a significant financial incentive to resolve problems on a timely basis. Specifically, the longer a bank takes to research and resolve a customer's claim, the longer the bank is exposed to liability for consequential damages arising from the wrongful dishonor of subsequently presented checks. These protections, in existing check law, appear to have worked well for many decades. In summary, substitute checks are not expected to result in problems different from those that are routinely addressed in today's environment. Therefore, we believe that the costs associated with the expedited recredit provisions will substantially outweigh the small incremental benefit of these requirements to consumers. To address the possibility that additional consumer protections may become necessary in the future, the proposed legislation grants the Board authority to adopt such protections by regulation, if needed. Nonetheless, Congress may conclude that expedited recredit provisions for consumers should be included in the legislation. In that case, we believe any expedited recredit provisions should be consistent with the proposed legislation's basic purposes and should not go beyond the provisions proposed by the Board. Conclusion In conclusion, although an increasing number of payments are being made electronically, it is clear that checks will continue to play an important role in the nation's payments system for the foreseeable future. The Board believes that, over the long run, the concepts embodied in the proposed Check Truncation Act will spur the use of new technologies to improve the efficiency and reduce the cost of the nation's check collection system and provide better services to bank customers. The proposed legislation accomplishes this by simply permitting banks to replace one piece of paper, the original check, with another piece of paper, the substitute check, both of which contain the same payment information. Because the proposed legislation should result in substantial cost savings, it would also be desirable to begin obtaining these savings as quickly as possible. We look forward to working with the committee as it further considers this legislation. Thank you for your time and I would be happy to answer your questions. Footnotes 1. The extent to which banks that receive substitute checks incur additional administrative and compliance costs will depend largely on whether the legislation, as enacted, includes expedited recredit and disclosure requirements and, if so, the form of these requirements. 2. U.C.C. ï¿½4-401(a) 3. In contrast, there was no established body of law governing the rights and liability of consumers regarding unauthorized electronic funds transfers when Congress was considering the Electronic Fund Transfer Act in 1978. Therefore, Congress decided to address consumer rights and liability in that act.
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan Market Economies and Rule of Law At the 2003 Financial Markets Conference of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Sea Island, Georgia (via satellite) April 4, 2003 Market economies require a rule of law. A society without state protection of individual rights, especially the right to own property, would not build private long term assets, a key ingredient of a growing modern economy. Yet an excess of rules--in the extreme case, central planning--has also been shown to stifle initiative and produce economic stagnation. Since its early stirrings in eighteenth century Britain, modern economic development has been characterized by an ebb and flow in the intensity of state involvement in shaping the economic environment. According to the legends of the early American West, the only law west of the Pecos River was administered by Judge Bean. I am not sure how much law that was, but I do know that much protection of property in sparsely settled western communities just after the Civil War had to be privately provided. Understandably, trade was limited in such an environment. Economic growth was greatly facilitated by the emergence of civil government, which provided consistent and predictable enforcement of property rights, among other things. More recently, the states of the former Soviet Union suffered for a while many of the alleged characteristics of the American Wild West--legal chaos, rampant criminality, and widespread corruption. This difficult period of transition in the Soviet satellite countries followed four decades of central planning in which excessive government control of the economy resulted in massive economic failure. Of course, the chief economic affliction of the Soviet bloc was not an excessive rule of law but rather the arbitrary enforcement of an inefficient set of rules. With few exceptions, the new leaders of these countries recognize that future economic success will depend on an efficient and predictable rule of law. * * * A tension has always existed between a desired continuity in the laws and regulations governing trade and business practices, and the necessary updating that is required to keep pace with a growing and, hence, changing economy. Uncertainties that stem from the arbitrary enforcement of the body of prevailing rules are reflected in higher risk and cost of capital which, in turn, inhibit economic growth. Implementing an effective rule of law, however, has its own difficulties. One key component, a law of contracts, governs the resolution of certain disputes between parties. Yet if adjudication were requested for more than a very small fraction of contracts, our court system would be swamped into immobility and the performance of our economy would suffer. Thus, if our market system is to function smoothly, the vast majority of trades must rest on mutual trust and only indirectly on the law. A more general concern is that laws can never be fixed in perpetuity. As societies and economies evolve, the details of the law, though generally not its fundamental principles, need to change. But any uncertainty about the clarity and fixity of the law adds to the risk of trade, which as I noted, is reflected in a higher real cost of capital. We in the United States endeavored to lessen legal uncertainty by embedding our most fundamental principles in a constitution, which we made difficult to amend. The commercially and economically salient specifics are typically expressed in federal or state statutes. In general, this arrangement seems to have provided us with a healthy balance of continuity and predictability and, yet, also the requisite flexibility to respond to evolving economic and societal circumstances. * * * Reflecting that flexibility, the direction and the emphasis of legislative revision over the generations have mirrored the changing structure of our economy. In recent decades, for example, the fraction of the total output of our economy that is essentially conceptual rather than physical has been rising. This trend has, of necessity, shifted the emphasis in asset valuation from physical property to intellectual property and to the legal rights that inhere in the latter. Though the shift may appear glacial, its impact on legal and economic risk is only beginning to be felt. Over the past half century, the increase in the value of raw materials has accounted for only a fraction of the overall growth of U.S. gross domestic product. The rest of that growth reflects the embodiment of ideas in products and services that consumers value. This shift of emphasis from physical materials to ideas as the core of value creation appears to have accelerated in recent decades. Technological advance is continually altering the shape and nature of our economic processes and, in particular, is promoting the trend toward increasing conceptualization of U.S. GDP. The size of our radios, for example, has been dramatically reduced by the substitution of transistors for vacuum tubes. Thin fiber optic cable has replaced huge tonnages of copper wire. New architectural, engineering, and materials technologies have enabled the construction of buildings enclosing the same space with far less physical material than was required, say, 50 or 100 years ago. More recently, mobile phones have markedly downsized as they have improved. The movement over the decades toward production of services requiring little physical input has also been a major contributor to the dramatic rise in the ratio of constant dollars of GDP per ton of input. This dramatic shift toward product downsizing during the past half century stems from several causes. The challenge of accumulating physical goods and moving them in an ever more crowded geographical environment has clearly resulted in cost pressures to economize on size and space. Similarly, the prospect of increasing costs of discovering, developing, and processing ever larger quantities of physical resources has shifted producers toward downsized alternatives. Remember that dire concerns about the prospects of running out of the physical resources that allegedly were necessary to support our standards of living were reflected in a report from the Club of Rome three decades ago. Another cause of product downsizing is that, as we moved the technological frontier forward and pressed for information processing to speed up, the laws of physics required the relevant microchips to become ever more compact. More generally, in the physical world, the usual situation is that each additional unit of output is more costly to produce than the previous one; that is, production, at least eventually, is characterized by increasing marginal cost. By contrast, in the conceptual world, much of production is characterized by constant, and perhaps even zero, marginal cost. For example, though the set up cost of creating an on-line encyclopedia may be enormous, the cost of reproduction and distribution may be near zero if the means of distribution is the Internet. The emergence of an electronic platform for the transmission of ideas at negligible marginal cost may therefore be an important factor explaining the recent increased conceptualization of the GDP. The demand for conceptual products is clearly impeded to a much smaller degree by rising marginal cost than is the demand for physical products. But regardless of its causes, conceptualization is irreversibly increasing the emphasis on the protection of intellectual, relative to physical, property rights. Before World War I, markets in this country were essentially uninhibited by government regulations, but they were supported by rights to property, which in those years meant largely physical property. Intellectual property--patents, copyrights, and trademarks--represented a far less important component of the economy, which was mainly agricultural. One of the most significant inventions of the nineteenth century was the cotton gin. Perhaps it was a harbinger of things to come that the intellectual property content of the cotton gin was never effectively protected from copiers. Only in recent decades, as the economic product of the United States has become so predominantly conceptual, have issues related to the protection of intellectual property rights come to be seen as significant sources of legal and business uncertainty. Intellectual property is clearly more difficult to define and, hence, to protect. The physical property of one owner cannot occupy the same space as that of another. Ownership of physical property is capable of being defended by police, the militia, or private mercenaries. Ownership of ideas is far less easily protected. Indeed, the nature of intellectual property is importantly different from physical property. In particular, one individual's use of an idea does not make that idea unavailable to others for their own, simultaneous use. Furthermore, new ideas almost invariably build on old ideas in ways that are difficult or impossible to delineate. From an economic perspective, this provides a rationale for making the calculus, developed initially by Leibnitz and Newton, freely available, despite the fact that those insights have immeasurably increased wealth over the generations. Should we have protected their claim in the same way that we do for owners of land? Or should the law make their insights more freely available to those who would build on them, with the aim of maximizing the wealth of the society as a whole? Are all property rights inalienable, or must they conform to a reality that conditions them? These questions bedevil economists and jurists, for they touch on some fundamental principles governing the organization of a modern economy and, hence, its society. Whether we protect intellectual property as an inalienable right or as a privilege vouchsafed by the sovereign, such protection inevitably entails making some choices that have crucial implications for the balance we strike between the interests of those who innovate and those who would benefit from innovation. In the case of physical property, we take it for granted that the ownership right should have the potential of persisting as long as the physical object itself. In the case of an idea, however, we have chosen to strike a different balance in recognition of the chaos that could follow from having to trace back all the thoughts implicit in one's current undertaking and pay a royalty to the originator of each one. So rather than adopting that obviously principled but unworkable approach, we have chosen instead to follow the lead of British common law and place time limits on intellectual property rights. It is, thus, no surprise that, as a result of the increasing conceptualization of our GDP over the decades, the protection of intellectual property has become an important element in the ongoing deliberations of both economists and jurists. Of particular current relevance to our economy overall is the application of property right protection to information technology. A noticeable component of the surge in the trend growth of the economy in recent years arguably reflects the synergy of laser and fiber optic technologies in the 1960s and 1970s. This synergy has produced very little that is tangible in information technology. Yet the information flow that it facilitates has allowed the creation of vast amounts of wealth. The dramatic gains in information technology have markedly improved the ability of businesses to identify and address incipient economic imbalances before they inflict significant damage. These gains reflect new advances in both the physical and the conceptual realms. It is imperative to find the appropriate intellectual property regime for each. * * * If our objective is to maximize economic growth, are we striking the right balance in our protection of intellectual property rights? Are the protections sufficiently broad to encourage innovation but not so broad as to shut down follow-on innovation? Are such protections so vague that they produce uncertainties that raise risk premiums and the cost of capital? How appropriate is our current system--developed for a world in which physical assets predominated--for an economy in which value increasingly is embodied in ideas rather than tangible capital? If the form of protection afforded to intellectual property rights affects economic growth, it must do so by increasing the underlying pace of productivity growth. The bulk of this increase should show up as multifactor productivity, that is, the segment of labor productivity that reflects the impact of conceptualization--ideas generally--on economic growth and standards of living. Finding a way to isolate the effect of, say, the length of patents on overall economic growth poses a formidable challenge. The more general challenge is to develop a framework that fosters the growth of an economy increasingly dominated by conceptual products. The focus of this conference therefore is timely and apt.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced its approval of the application by the Charles Schwab Corporation, San Francisco, California, to acquire 100 percent of the voting shares of Charles Schwab Bank, National Association, Reno, Nevada, a de novo bank. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
Remarks by Vice Chairman Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. At the 2003 Financial Markets Conference of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Sea Island, Georgia April 5, 2003 Patent Policy in a Broader Context Good morning. I want to thank Bob Eisenbeis for inviting me to participate in this year's Financial Markets Conference. The organizers at the Atlanta Fed, as well as the Center for Banking and Finance at the UNC School of Law, have put together an amazing event. It has been a pleasure to be here. I am confident that everyone is still going strong and is ready to engage in a lively discussion during this final session. Earlier in the conference, we heard about the domestic and international legal frameworks surrounding business method patenting. We discussed business strategy and the potential for individual firms to use components of the intellectual property regime in both offensive and defensive ways. And just this morning, we examined some of the evidence on patenting and its effects on innovation. With Bronwyn Hall's paper as a starting point, this final session will focus on the public policy issues related to business method patents. To introduce this session, I would like to step back and place the public policy debate in a broader context. In particular, I want to briefly discuss the importance of information technology and intellectual property in the "new" economy. Throughout history, economic growth and an increasing standard of living have been driven by an economy's capacity for invention and innovation. The economies of the United States and other countries have seen huge productivity gains from the development and rapid adoption of new information and communication technologies. The mechanisms for protecting intellectual property, and the degree to which they are used, vary from industry to industry and over time, but the incentives created by intellectual property protections have likely been important in fostering economic growth. Over the past several years, and particularly since the State Street decision, those protections have been extended and now encompass the processes and methods of doing business that use these technologies. In many regards, such business method patents may be no different from traditional product and process patents; however, the fact that we are all here to discuss this topic suggests that business method patents may be distinctive in some important ways. Are the risks of a too-lenient, or too-stringent, patent system the same for these innovations? Are the current institutions capable of assessing the novelty and non-obviousness of such inventions? Is a second level of review really necessary for these patents? Our goal here is consider these and related questions. How should we structure our intellectual property institutions? What roles should each of these institutions play to ensure an overall public policy geared toward the continued innovation and adoption that is central to strong economic growth. The State Street case was decided during a period of intense innovation and creativity in the U.S. economy that led to gains in productivity. As we are coming to understand, the sources of these productivity gains go way beyond the increased technological ability to gather, store, process, and disseminate information. Rather, much of the increase in productivity we have seen stems from the simultaneous invention of new forms of economic organization and of innovations in business practices, both within and across economic entities. For example, just-in-time inventory systems allow more efficient sharing of risk between suppliers and retailers. The ability of on-board computers to monitor driver behavior has altered contracting between vehicle owners and operators, fostering a more efficient use of trucks. The decreased search and transaction costs in new electronic marketplaces allow transactions to occur that were prohibitively expensive before. As many of you in the audience are aware, economists have argued that information technology is best thought of as general purpose technology (GPT). A key characteristic of GPT is that technical progress depends not only on invention but also on so-called co-invention, that is innovation in complementary technologies that increases the productivity of the GPT. New processes and new procedures that best use the technology. These processes and procedures are precisely the focal point of business method patenting. Following State Street, inventors can now gain protection for their innovations in this area: Not only the hardware and software but also the embedded business method is patentable. Inventors of new ways of using these technologies can now gain protection for their work. For example, a patent was issued for "reverse auctions," in which the buyer names a price and the first willing seller gets the sale. Netcentives was granted the patent for online incentive and reward programs. In the financial arena, the original State Street patent was granted on the software, hardware, and algorithms that computed share prices for a hub and spoke system of mutual funds. Various computer methods that allow the securitization of financial instruments have now been patented. In all these cases, the transformation of electronic data to create a new product or new method of transacting has won patent protection. However, innovations in the new economy are in some sense broader than these examples suggest. Economic gains are likely to be found not just in the invention of new products but also in reorganizing the firms and markets themselves. Here, too, business method patents are likely to be important. In recent years, huge improvements have occurred in supply-chain management linking manufacturers directly with their distributors. Several dot.com companies were founded on the notion of bringing industry participants together in new ways, using new technologies and business practices. Although some of these firms are no longer with us, the electronic sharing and processing of information that they introduced is unlikely to stop. The widespread adoption of technologies in these latter cases rests fundamentally on the adoption of standards, on the idea that all industry participants use compatible technologies. In the parlance of economics, such technologies exhibit network effects: The value of the innovation to a given user increases with the number of other users. In this case, the efficiency gains arise when a large number of users sign on to the standard. The key issue, therefore, is who owns this standard, that is, whether any market participant may have open access to a public standard or whether the property rights to that technology are owned by a given firm. Further, with business method patents, these property rights may attach not to a specific technological standard but more generally to a method of transacting or some other business process. In such cases, how should the market determine the outcome, and what effect could the patenting system have? An example in the financial services arena highlights the issues involved. A patent was recently issued for a "system and method for conducting web-based financial transactions in capital markets." The patent holders claim that "the system enables institutional investors and financial institutions to seamlessly create, price, negotiate, execute, settle and analyze complex, capital market transactions, including interest and currency derivatives, foreign exchange, loans and deposits, and fixed income instruments, using a standard vocabulary and messaging system that enables seamless integration with the proprietary, existing systems of the users." In essence, this technology connects market participants and allows easy and standardized trading of a host of financial instruments. Efficiency gains are likely to be realized as transaction costs are lowered and as markets become thicker. However, as the owners of the patent admit, this is a highly competitive market in which many firms endeavored to build such a system. Given the large network effects inherent in any such centralized technology, how should we view the patent? How should we think about the race that led up to it? What is likely to happen with legal challenges? The task for public policy in the post State Street world is to strike the right balance--to encourage innovation and rapid adoption of new products and processes while limiting the damage from granting monopoly power. The United States has been in the forefront of the financial services industry, a position we want to maintain. But how do we structure the institutions of public policy to attain these goals? To make matters more complex, how do we achieve this balance when not only is the technology rapidly advancing but the realm of patentable material is expanding as well? State Street opened the door to a new world, a world that innovators have only just begun to explore. To date, most patent filings are still modeled on traditional "machine-plus-method" patents, emphasizing the technology as much as the process. However, the model may change. As the Patent and Trademark Office remarked in its recent white paper, the subject of patents is slowly moving away from "the implementing or enabling engineering" toward "the end result the inventor is trying to achieve with that technology." When inventors start approaching the patent office with patents for true business methods, how should they be handled? What should be the role of the courts? What processes need to be in place? To discuss just these issues, we have a great panel, with some interesting ideas and some very strong opinions. Moderating a conference call among session participants a few weeks ago proved to be quite the challenge, so I am a little nervous about what happens next. To begin, I would like to ask Bronwyn Hall, Professor of Economics at the University of California at Berkeley, to present her paper. We will then hear comments from a distinguished panel composed of Todd Dickinson, Alec French, and William Young. At that point, I will let the panel members pester each other a bit before I open the floor to your questions and comments.
Joint Press Release Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Office of the Comptroller of the Currency Securities and Exchange Commission For Immediate Release April 8, 2003 Regulators Issue Interagency Paper on Sound Practices to Strengthen the Resilience of the U.S. Financial System Three federal regulatory agencies today issued an "Interagency Paper on Sound Practices to Strengthen the Resilience of the U.S. Financial System." Among other things, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Securities and Exchange Commission identified sound practices to strengthen the resilience of critical U.S. financial markets and minimize the immediate systemic effects of a wide-scale disruption. On September 5, 2002, the agencies published for comment a draft of the paper in the Federal Register. The agencies have incorporated many of the suggestions that were made. The final paper, which applies most directly to the clearing and settlement activities of a limited number of financial institutions, provides more flexibility to firms in managing geographic dispersion of backup facilities and staffing arrangements, and takes into account other considerations relevant to cost-effective implementation of sound practices. Federal Reserve Dave Skidmore 202-452-2955 OCC Bob Garsson 202-874-5770 SEC John Heine 202-942-0020
Testimony of Vice Chairman Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. Check Clearing for the Twenty-first Century Act Before the Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit of the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives April 8, 2003 I would like to thank the subcommittee for inviting me to discuss H.R. 1474, the Check Clearing for the 21st Century Act. This bill, which is similar to a proposal that the Board sent to Congress in late 2001, removes existing legal barriers to the use of new technology in check processing and holds the promise of a more efficient check collection system. The Board commends the subcommittee for holding hearings on this very important legislative initiative. Technological Advances in Check Processing Check processing is far more efficient than it once was. Less than fifty years ago, clerks hand-sorted millions of checks each day. In the 1960s, the banking industry began to use mechanical high-speed check-processing equipment to read and sort checks, which had been redesigned for automated processing. Today, banks, thrifts, and credit unions, which I will collectively refer to as banks, process about 40 billion checks that consumers, businesses, and the government write each year. Typically, after a check has been deposited at a bank's branch or ATM, the bank transports the check to a central operations center. The check is then usually sent to one or more intermediaries--such as a Federal Reserve Bank or a correspondent bank--or a clearinghouse for collection before it is ultimately delivered for payment to the bank on which it is drawn. At each step, the check must be physically processed and then shipped to its destination by air or ground transportation. Some checks, however, are removed from the collection or return process, and the payment information on the checks is captured and delivered electronically. This process, which is commonly referred to as check truncation, reduces the number of times that the checks must be physically processed and shipped. As a result, check truncation is generally more efficient, more cost effective, and less prone to processing errors. Today, however, check truncation can only occur by agreement of the banks involved because existing law requires that, in the absence of an agreement, the original paper checks be presented or returned. Further, given the thousands of banks in the United States, it is infeasible for any one bank to obtain check truncation agreements from all other banks or even a large proportion of them. As a result, the check system's legal framework, which has not kept up with technological advances, has constrained the efforts of many banks to use new electronic technologies, such as digital check imaging, to improve check-processing efficiency and to provide improved services to customers. Therefore, legal changes are needed to facilitate the use of technologies that could improve check-processing efficiency and lead to substantial reductions in transportation and other check-processing costs. H.R. 1474 makes such changes. Check Clearing for the 21st Century Act The Check Clearing for the 21st Century Act solves a long-standing dilemma--how to foster check truncation early in the check collection or return process without mandating that banks accept checks in electronic form. Currently, under typical check truncation arrangements, electronic information about a truncated check, rather than the original paper check, is presented to the bank on which the check is drawn. The act facilitates check truncation by creating a new negotiable instrument called a "substitute check," which would permit banks to truncate the original checks, to process the check information electronically, and to print and deliver substitute checks to banks and bank customers that want to continue receiving paper checks. A substitute check, which would be the legal equivalent of the original check, would include all the information contained on the original check--that is, an image of the front and back of the original check as well as the machine-readable numbers that appear on the bottom of the check. Under this act, while a bank could no longer demand to receive the original check, it could still demand to receive a paper check. Banks would likely receive a mix of original checks and substitute checks. Because substitute checks could be processed just like original checks, a bank would not need to invest in any new technology or otherwise change its current check-processing operations. Banks could use the new authority provided in this legislation in a number of different ways. For example, a bank would no longer need to send couriers every afternoon to each of its branches and ATMs to pick up checks that customers have deposited. Instead, digital images of checks could be transmitted electronically from those locations to the bank's operations center, where substitute checks could be created and forwarded for collection. Not only would this be quicker and more efficient, but it could also permit banks to establish branches or ATMs in remote locations more cost effectively and to provide their customers with later deposit cut-off hours. Moreover, the act would give a bank the flexibility to transmit checks electronically over long distances, and create substitute checks at locations near their ultimate destination, for example, near the bank on which the checks are drawn, substantially reducing the time and cost associated with physical transportation. The banking industry's extensive reliance on air transportation was underscored in the aftermath of the September 11 tragedy, when air transportation came to a standstill and the flow of checks slowed dramatically. During the week of the attacks, the Federal Reserve Banks' daily check float, which is normally a few hundred million dollars, ballooned to over $47 billion, or more than a hundred times its normal level. Had the legislation been in effect at that time and had banks been using a robust electronic infrastructure for check collection, banks would have been able to collect many more checks by transmitting electronic check information across the country and presenting substitute checks to paying banks. In addition, today bad weather routinely delays check shipments, and check shipments have been destroyed in plane crashes. By enabling the banking industry to reduce its reliance on physical transportation, the act would reduce the risk that checks may be lost or delayed in transit, thereby reducing check float in the banking system. Finally, many banks hope to use the authority provided by this legislation to streamline the processing of checks that they must return unpaid. Today, after a bank processes its incoming checks and determines which checks to return, it has to reprocess all of the incoming checks to pull out the less than one percent of checks that are to be returned unpaid. Many banks have indicated to us that they would find it more cost effective to use their image systems to generate substitute checks for return rather than having to reprocess all of their physical checks. Both individual and corporate bank customers would also benefit from the legislation. As I noted earlier, as banks restructure their branch and ATM networks, they could offer customers broader deposit options or extended deposit cutoff hours. Such changes could result in some checks being credited one day earlier and interest accruing one day earlier for some checks deposited in interest-bearing accounts. In addition, banks might allow some corporate customers to transmit their deposits electronically. Because the legislation would likely encourage greater investments in image technology, banks might also be able offer their customers new and improved services. For example, banks might be able to provide customers with access to on-line images of deposits and payments before the delivery of paper statements or provide printed copies of checks deposited at ATMs on ATM receipts. The same investment in image technology might also enable banks to provide better customer service by using check images to resolve customer inquiries more easily and quickly than today. Further, as banks reduce their operating costs, the savings will be passed on through a combination of lower fees to their customers and higher returns to their shareholders. Banks have indicated that they expect cost savings to be substantial. The act is designed to provide banks with additional flexibility in processing checks by requiring banks to accept substitute checks in place of original checks. The act does not, however, require banks to accept checks in electronic form nor does it require banks to use the new authority granted by the act to create substitute checks. This market-based approach permits each bank to decide whether to make use of this new authority based on its business judgment about the costs and benefits of doing so. We believe the market changes arising from these revisions to check law will result in substantial cost savings. Clearly, because substitute checks can be processed in the same manner as original checks, recipients of substitute checks should incur little or no additional processing costs. It is difficult, however, to estimate the overall cost savings. Different banks will take different approaches toward using the new authority granted by the act. Each bank's use of the new authority will depend on its technology infrastructure and strategy, its physical infrastructure, and its customer and business profiles. Thus, the magnitude of the cost savings, which will depend on the rate at which banks begin using the new authority, is difficult to determine. Customer Protection Provisions While there is a fairly broad consensus on the desirability of the act's underlying concepts that permit the use of substitute checks, the issue of customer protections has been the subject of much debate. The Board has had an opportunity to further reflect on the views that have been expressed by both consumer advocates and the banking industry and has concluded that expedited recredit provisions are not necessary for the successful implementation of the act. We recognize that the issue of customer protections is the most challenging policy issue in the act and that Congress might arrive at a different conclusion as it considers whether to include expedited recredit provisions in this act. I would like to discuss briefly consumers' rights under existing check law, additional rights granted under the act's new warranty and indemnity provisions, and why we believe the expedited recredit provisions are not needed. Existing Customer Protections Long-established check law protects bank customers if checks are improperly charged to their accounts. The act would apply existing check law, including the Uniform Commercial Code (UCC) and the Federal Reserve Board's Regulation CC, to substitute checks as though they were the original checks, to the extent such law is not inconsistent with the proposed legislation. Specifically, a bank may only charge a check that is properly payable to a customer's account. A check is properly payable if it has been authorized by the bank's customer and complies with any agreement between the customer and the bank. Thus, if a bank charges a customer's account for a check that is not properly payable, such as when a check has been forged, altered, or duplicated, the customer has a claim against the bank for an unauthorized charge to the customer's account. For example, if a bank pays a counterfeit check, the bank could be liable to its customer for the amount of the unauthorized charge, interest on that amount, and consequential damages for the wrongful dishonor of any subsequently presented checks. This potentially large liability provides a strong incentive for the bank to resolve a claim for an unauthorized charge as expeditiously as possible. Over the years, no pattern of problems has emerged to suggest that existing check law is inadequate in protecting bank customers against unauthorized charges. Moreover, as part of its analysis, Board staff reviewed the consumer complaint databases of the five agencies of the Federal Financial Institution Examination Council. That review found no pattern of problems associated with the timely resolution of check processing errors, including problems related to accounts where the checks are not returned with the monthly statements. Additional Customer Protections under the Act In addition to the protections provided in current check law, the act requires banks to provide new warranties for substitute checks and to indemnify customers for losses resulting from the receipt of a substitute check instead of the original check. Specifically, customers whose checks have been converted to substitute checks receive a warranty that the substitute checks are legally equivalent to the original checks and that a check will not be paid more than once from a customer's account. Banks must also indemnify customers for losses they incur due to the receipt of substitute checks rather than the original checks. Taken together, these warranty and indemnity provisions provide customers with additional protections against losses related to the use of substitute checks. Are Expedited Recredit Provisions Needed? The act also includes expedited recredit provisions for consumers. (A companion section of the act includes interbank expedited recredit rules.) The expedited recredit provisions require a bank to recredit a consumer's account, within a specified time frame, if a substitute check was not properly charged to the consumer's account. The Board believes expedited recredit provisions are unnecessary given the protections provided by existing check law and by the act's new warranty and indemnity provisions, which provide additional customer protections. While it is true that the Uniform Commercial Code (UCC) does not provide a specified time frame within which a bank must act to resolve a claim, its provisions give the bank a significant financial incentive to resolve problems on a timely basis. The longer a bank takes to research and resolve a customer's claim, the longer the bank is exposed to liability for consequential damages arising from the wrongful dishonor of subsequently presented checks. These protections appear to have worked well for many decades. Further, the Board believes that the significant compliance burdens imposed by expedited recredit provisions on banks that receive substitute checks would outweigh the small incremental benefits that the provisions would provide to consumers. Also, in the unlikely event that additional consumer protections are needed for substitute checks, the act grants the Board authority to adopt such protections by regulation. Therefore, the Board does not believe that expedited recredit provisions are necessary to successfully implement the act. Nonetheless, Congress may conclude that expedited recredit provisions for consumers are desirable. In that case, the Board believes that any expedited recredit provisions should be consistent with the act's basic purposes and should not go beyond the provisions originally proposed by the Board in 2001. Conclusion In conclusion, although an increasing number of payments are being made electronically, it is clear that checks will continue to play an important role in the nation's payments system for the foreseeable future. The Board believes that, over the long run, the concepts embodied in the Check Clearing for the 21st Century Act will spur the use of new technologies to improve the efficiency and reduce the cost of the nation's check collection system and provide better services to bank customers. The legislation accomplishes this by simply permitting banks to replace one piece of paper, the original check, with another piece of paper, the substitute check, both of which contain the same payment information. Because the act should result in substantial cost savings, it would also be desirable to begin obtaining these savings as quickly as possible. We look forward to working with you as you further consider this legislation. Thank you for your time and I would be happy to answer your questions. Footnotes 1. The extent to which banks that receive substitute checks incur additional administrative and compliance costs will depend largely on whether the legislation, as enacted, includes expedited recredit and disclosure requirements and, if so, the form of these requirements. 2. U.C.C. ï¿½4-401(a) 3. In contrast, there was no established body of law governing the rights and liability of consumers regarding unauthorized electronic funds transfers when Congress was considering the Electronic Fund Transfer Act in 1978. Therefore, Congress decided to address consumer rights and liability in that act.
Remarks by Vice Chairman Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. At the Risk Management Association's Conference on Capital Management, Washington, D.C. April 9, 2003 Basel II: A Realist's Perspective I am grateful to the Risk Management Association (RMA) for inviting me to speak with you today. In recent years, the RMA has been at the forefront of efforts to strengthen risk management within the banking sector and has done excellent work fostering discussions of emerging best practices. The RMA has also provided valuable input to another effort that is intimately connected with improvements in bank risk management--Basel II. Today, I intend to provide you with my candid perspective on the Basel II effort, its current status, and where it is headed. It is important that each of us with a stake in the outcome of Basel II consider it seriously and realistically; I intend to contribute today to such a discussion. I want to first present some of the premises on which I have based my own involvement in the Basel II effort and then turn to the process that we see unfolding in the United States. I will also address some of the concerns that have been raised regarding whether the U.S. approach to Basel II is overly limited in scope. Starting Points Let me begin with a now-familiar argument: The need for Basel II arises because our current capital framework, Basel I, is deficient for our larger banks, particularly for our largest, most complex banks. The familiarity of this argument does not lessen its force. As you know, the purpose of a risk-based regulatory regime for capital adequacy is to define a minimum cushion for banks to ensure their safety and soundness and to provide a benchmark by which the financial condition of banks can be measured. The risk-based ratios seek to compare available capital to a measure of the risks taken on. We see today that the largest, most complex banks operate their businesses and conduct risk management in a manner that is substantially different from the method by which they calculate regulatory capital. This difference reduces the usefulness and meaningfulness of regulatory capital ratios and places a burden on banks that must reconcile their risk-management and regulatory capital approaches. In addition, we must consider that material weakness, let alone failure, among the larger, more-complex banks in the United States could pose a significant challenge for our economy and could generate substantial costs. Effective supervision and regulation and other policies that promote a strong banking sector are in the best interests of us all. For these reasons, policymakers and others with a similar perspective should care deeply that our risk-based capital rules provide a meaningful and comprehensive measure of the risks to which the largest banks in our society are exposed. The significant gap between current capital ratios and the banks' own measures of risk is widening, and in my view, that justifies the need for modifying the capital regime used by our largest, most complex banks. I believe the U.S. regulatory community is in agreement that Basel I as currently applied in the United States is no longer an appropriate system for these banks. Therefore, we have realized that we need to provide our largest banks with a substantially different system for regulatory capital going forward. Frankly, there appears to be no significant disagreement with this premise. But, of course, the realization that Basel I needs to be overhauled to better address our largest, most complex banks does not itself dictate the form of that restructuring. This is the subject of the second premise, which is that the most promising and, one could argue, only realistic possibility for construction of a Basel II is to use a framework that builds on the modern techniques of corporate finance and risk management and applies them across banks in a broadly similar fashion. There is not much disagreement with the assertion that Basel II should be built on modern techniques of risk management. Clearly, the incorporation of such techniques at some level seems to be a necessary condition if the goal is a risk-based capital framework that produces a meaningful, comprehensive measure of risk relative to capital. However, not all would agree with the approaches that the Basel Committee has chosen in particular areas or, perhaps more fundamentally, with the nature of the balance between flexibility and comparability that is incorporated into Basel II. For the moment, let me focus on the latter point, the balance between flexibility and comparability. Some would argue that Basel II should permit banks the flexibility to measure risks precisely as they do internally or that it should allow banks to assess their own minimum capital requirement, subject to various tests and penalties for mis-estimation. While one can perfectly well understand the motivation behind these sentiments, most do not view them as realistic. In a moment, I will talk about the need for us to take seriously the competitive equity issues associated with Basel II. But those competitive equity issues are also relevant here because, given the current and prospective state of technology in banking, a regime that would give the largest banks the flexibility to set their own capital requirements could not satisfy the need for competitive equity. Similarly, a balanced assessment of the state of credit risk modeling and internal ratings approaches leads me to think that a full models regime could not in the near future produce measures of risk sufficiently comparable for a regulatory capital standard. The tradeoff that is at the heart of Basel II is the tradeoff between flexibility and comparability. Allowing banks to calculate regulatory capital in any manner that they see fit would certainly maximize the flexibility of such calculations, but the results would not be comparable across banks and thus the value of the capital standard would be compromised. On the other hand, to focus too rigidly on comparability would require an approach that made no use whatsoever of internal measures of risk or allowed no differences of technique across banks. Such an approach would not be sufficiently flexible and would prevent us from measuring risk as sensitively as necessary. It would inevitably not be much different than the Basel I standard we have today. The current Basel II proposals are a balancing act. That is their strength and their vulnerability. In seeking to produce a balance between the virtues of flexibility and comparability, the proposals introduce more complexity than some would prefer to see. Yet, although we could debate at length the optimal proportions of flexibility and comparability in the different areas of the proposals, there is not a realistic alternative to the need to strike some balance between these two extremes. The proposed framework builds on modern corporate finance and risk-management techniques; it gives banks some flexibility to develop their own internal assessments of risk but also constrains their assessments in various ways to ensure a greater degree of comparability. We have not so far been presented with any realistic alternative to this proposed framework that would not in conceptual terms look a great deal like Basel II. Having elaborated on these two premises--that Basel I is no longer adequate for our largest banks and that the structural concept of Basel II is the only realistic alternative to Basel I--let me now turn to a discussion of the path forward. Process Going Forward The Basel Committee is planning to release by early May a third version of its proposals for comment. This third consultative paper--CP3 for short--will contain some modifications resulting from the committee's recent quantitative impact survey, but it will be broadly similar to the proposals that banks in this country and around the world tested in that survey last fall. The U.S. federal banking agencies are working hard to develop an advance notice of proposed rulemaking, or ANPR, that will explain concretely their vision of how Basel II would be implemented in the United States. The ANPR will be tailored to the U.S. context in a way that particular banks will be able to see whether the proposal applies to them and what it will mean for them if it does. The ANPR will also seek to pose questions in several areas in which the U.S. agencies need specific feedback. We hope to issue the ANPR by the end of June. The next stage in the process will be the feedback that we receive from you and other interested parties, both on the CP3 and especially on the ANPR in the United States. The federal banking agencies will consider these comments very carefully. I should be very clear about this. Some believe that with the issuance of CP3, the shape of Basel II is essentially set in stone. This is wrong. If the CP3 or ANPR comments show that elements of the proposal need to be modified, the U.S. agencies will seek such modifications. These views do not conflict at all with those that I elaborated a few minutes ago. As I indicated, there is a well-understood need for a Basel II and any realistic version of it will need to balance flexibility and comparability in the use of modern risk-management techniques. But the members of the Basel Committee need to remain open to the possibility of specific improvements to the proposals. Let me describe some of the conceptual issues that have been raised regarding the proposals and provide some perspective on them. First and foremost has been the issue of complexity. Concern over this issue appears to have several aspects. The first is a concern over the sheer volume of the proposals. This aspect of the complexity concern is, I think, somewhat misguided because it has typically equated the Basel proposals with the sum total of those background papers that have been released in an effort to explain more transparently not only what the proposals are but why they look the way they do. Nevertheless, there is no doubt that the Basel II proposals themselves are several times longer than Basel I. One reason for this is that Basel II contains several different versions--it is no longer a one-size-fits-all approach. But in the United States, we are not proposing to implement every flavor of Basel II. The ANPR should therefore present a reasonably streamlined package for U.S. banks to consider. Needless to say, it will also be imperative that the U.S. agencies explain the proposals as clearly as possible in the ANPR itself. Another aspect of the complexity concern surrounding Basel II is its use of modern risk-management techniques. These techniques inevitably involve complex statistical, and thus mathematical, assessments of risk. To reject such techniques solely because they involve mathematical complexity would be inconsistent with the broader direction that banking and its best-practice risk management have been taking over the past decade. One could not reasonably hope to develop a meaningful or comprehensive assessment of risk at a large, complex bank today without making use of such methods; and, I might add, this view seems to be supported by most of the documents issued on the matter by the RMA. But some of the concern over complexity is driven by the fact that Basel II makes a number of distinctions between exposures and transactions in an effort to improve the risk sensitivity of the resulting capital ratios. Reasonable people might disagree about these particular tradeoffs between complexity and risk-sensitivity that have been chosen by the Basel Committee. Comments and feedback on these tradeoffs will be particularly important. But such comments will be most effective if they address both sides of the question--not only point out areas in which the proposal may be overly complex but also show how the objective of risk sensitivity could be met in less complex ways or state why it may not be necessary to achieve either flexibility or greater risk sensitivity in this particular instance. Competitive equity is a second fundamental area that I hope the comment process will address. The question of competitive equity has domestic aspects, international aspects, and bank-nonbank aspects. Let me start with this last aspect, namely whether the Basel II proposals will impose restraints on banks that are not being imposed on their nonbank competitors. It is important that we receive information on the competitive impact of the Basel II proposals relative to nonbank competitors, particularly if it appears that the marketplace allows nonbanks to operate with less capital--or conversely with more leverage--than similarly situated banks would be required to hold. Clearly, we should not hinder the competitive position of any U.S. banking organization relative to nonbanks and will work to avoid such an outcome. However, bank supervisors also have an obligation to develop the regulations that they feel are appropriate to banks even if similar regulations will not be applied to nonbank competitors. All of you are thoroughly familiar with the elements of the federal safety net--including deposit insurance and access to the discount window and the payment system--that differentiate banks from nonbanks in the United States. The safety net, which is provided at taxpayer expense, obligates supervisors to develop approaches that they believe are prudent for the banks that benefit from that safety net. A second aspect of the competitive equity issue involves domestic competition among banks--what would be the competitive effect of altering the regulatory capital rules for the largest and most complex banks while keeping the existing framework for most other banks? My perception is that pricing, and thus competition, between large and smaller banks today is relatively little influenced by regulatory capital constraints because banks are operating far above regulatory minimum levels, or because economic capital and not regulatory capital is the binding constraint, or because banks are capable of easily selling or securitizing the exposure, as is the case with the majority of residential mortgage loans. Moreover, the ultimate check on the possibility of competitive distortion is that any bank that makes the investment in risk management technology necessary to meet the Basel II standards will be able to adopt the advanced IRB approach. I hope that it goes without saying that in proposing to implement Basel II as we have outlined, we are not seeking or expecting to induce material shifts in the competitive banking landscape in the United States. Nevertheless, if some institutions believe that these proposals will have such an effect, we want them to use the ANPR comment process to enable us to understand and evaluate the rationale for those views and whether modifications to the Basel II proposals, or the way we intend to implement them, are appropriate in response. Another important aspect of the competitive equity issue is competition among the subset of banks covered by the Basel II approaches, particularly the more advanced approaches. As a result of relying on inputs generated by systems at individual banks, there will inherently be variations across these banks in how such systems treat the same transactions and exposures. A certain amount of such variation is clearly a necessary byproduct of the need to provide the flexibility to make use of internally generated data. But there is also a strong policy interest in ensuring comparability across banks, as I have already discussed. This policy interest is one reason why it is desirable to establish minimum qualifying criteria for the use of approaches that rely on internally generated data, whether they might be the Advanced IRB approach for credit risk or the Advanced Measurement Approach (AMA) for operational risk. On the other hand, we do not want these qualifying criteria to so constrict the development of internal methodologies that we end up stifling their creative evolution. As I noted, the balance between flexibility and comparability is clearly a central issue in the design of a framework such as Basel II. In considering the issues of competitive equity among banks operating on Basel II, the manner in which U.S. supervisors will evaluate compliance with the minimum qualifying criteria will not place banks in the United States at a disadvantage. We have a track record of listening to banks and applying regulations and supervisory guidance in a manner that is sensible and focuses on priorities. In the coming months, U.S. supervisors will be releasing draft supervisory guidance describing the approach that we envision taking toward the assessment of internal ratings systems for key parts of the loan portfolio. We will of course be greatly interested in industry feedback on this draft guidance. By including specific qualifying criteria in the Basel II proposals, we help ensure that banks operating in other jurisdictions will develop their internal ratings systems in a broadly similar fashion and thereby advance the achievement of a level international playing field. This seems particularly important if some countries have regimes that rely more on rules and less on on-site supervision. That is, to achieve a level playing field with such rules-oriented regimes, we need to include in the rules for Basel II the elements that we in the United States would be looking for anyway as part of our supervisory oversight process. In the comment process, it will be particularly helpful if banks and others can be explicit in focusing on where concerns about competitive equity across banks are sufficient to warrant a change in the minimum qualifying criteria or in other aspects of the proposals. Basel II as an International Standard While on the subject of international competitive equity, let me now digress a bit to discuss some of the concerns that have been raised regarding whether the envisioned U.S. approach to Basel II truly reflects a commitment to an international capital standard. This concern arose after the announcement that the U.S. agencies proposed to formally implement only the most advanced versions of the Basel II proposals and that these will only be mandatory for approximately ten internationally active banks. We anticipate that another ten or so large banks will voluntarily choose to adopt Basel II because of its greater risk sensitivity. Needless to say, the goal of developing compatible systems of bank capital regulation in different jurisdictions has great merit. The global nature of many banking organizations requires them to consider the rules and regulations of a wide variety of jurisdictions, and so these organizations have a strong interest in common approaches. More importantly, the United States fully supports the role of the Basel Committee in developing capital standards that are appropriate for countries around the world to apply to their banking systems. But as the Basel II process has signaled, one framework can no longer address the needs of all types of banking organizations. To meet this challenge, the Basel II proposals contained in CP3 will include three approaches to the measurement of credit risk as well as three approaches to the measurement of operational risk. So why is the United States not proposing to implement the full range of these options and apply them to all U.S. banks? In addressing this question, I will first explain why we propose to implement the advanced methods and how we see this working. Then I will address why, for reasons perhaps unique to the United States, we do not believe introducing the other options is necessary here. In the United States, we concluded that the greatest potential benefit of Basel II was found in the most advanced versions--the Advanced IRB for credit risk and the AMA for operational risk. We concluded that if we as supervisors were going to make the effort required for Basel II, we would like to focus that effort on the most advanced versions. Obviously, concentrating attention on the most advanced approaches could help reduce the complexity of Basel II as it is implemented in the United States. Clearly, not all banks in the United States can or should use these approaches for the purpose of calculating their capital requirement. So the question naturally arises: Which banks should meet the new requirement? The size, complexity, and international activity of one particular set of U.S. banks makes it imperative that they move to the Basel II advanced approaches as quickly as possible. It is also clear that there will be a significant number of voluntary adopters of Basel II in the United States. Indeed, I believe that the majority of internationally active U.S. banks will be operating under Basel II soon after the initial implementation date, whether or not they are part of the mandatory set. If, as we expect, about twenty U.S. banks adopt the Basel II approaches at the outset, they will account for approximately two-thirds of all U.S. banking assets. In addition, those U.S. banks account for about 99 percent of all foreign assets held by the top fifty domestic U.S. banking organizations, with the ten mandatory banks themselves accounting for about 95 percent. This approach to Basel II implementation is a commonsense, step-by-step approach that makes appropriate distinctions between banks on the basis of their size and the scope of their international activities. It will not compromise the international level playing field. But on the other hand, it will allow U.S. supervisors to retain stronger control over the process by which they approve banks for use of the new advanced standards, and will reduce the incentives for banks to "rush" the necessary implementation efforts. Another aspect of the concerns that have been raised about the focus on advanced approaches relates to the desire for the "mutual recognition" of approaches used in different jurisdictions, so that the differences between home- and host-country capital regimes should be kept to a low level. These home/host issues have already been the focus of discussions within the Basel Committee's Accord Implementation Group, and the discussions will no doubt continue throughout the Basel II implementation period. The United States shares the interests of other countries in trying to ensure that domestic subsidiaries of foreign parents--either U.S. subsidiaries operating abroad or foreign ones operating in the United States--are not required to develop onerous additional procedures to comply with domestic rules. Of course, in the United States and in many other countries, domestic subsidiaries of foreign banks cannot be treated substantially differently from domestic banks. U.S. and foreign supervisors working together can develop approaches, some of them transitional, that will avoid undue burdens on either U.S. bank subsidiaries of foreign bank parents that are using alternative versions of Basel II in their home countries, in particular other flavors of the operational risk or IRB proposals, or on foreign subsidiaries of U.S. banks. In this regard, we believe it will be necessary for U.S. supervisors to allow, in some cases, for the use of transitional measures where banks--either U.S. or foreign--will not have reliable data for some interval. The second part of the question is why U.S. supervisors are not proposing to implement other options in the Basel II package such as the standardized approach to credit risk. This does not mean that U.S. supervisors believe these approaches are flawed or inferior to the Basel I approach. Indeed, they contain innovations that should lead to meaningful improvements in other countries where they will be implemented. For the United States, however, a key factor is that our capital regulations not only embody the Basel I standard but also include various "prompt corrective action" features such as the leverage ratio and the use of well-capitalized thresholds for both the risk-based and the leverage standards. In applying a leverage ratio and a well-capitalized standard, the United States is probably unique. Moreover, virtually all of the U.S. banking system currently meets the well-capitalized standard. This is presumably because of the fact that both market and supervisory attention increases as a U.S. bank falls below the well-capitalized thresholds, which is the essence of prompt corrective action. We are therefore confident that even for those banks not adopting the advanced approaches of Basel II, we will have a capital regime that achieves a standard of prudence as great as Basel II. In light of these specific U.S. circumstances, the cost-benefit tradeoff associated with implementing the other Basel II options here differs from the tradeoff in other countries. Given the costs involved in adopting new approaches, and given that with our current regime the benefits are lower for our smaller banks, it seems best at this time to retain the current regulatory capital framework for most U.S. banks other than the large, complex internationally-active set I described. In addition, for many of the same reasons, we believed that it would be inevitable that even if we proposed to implement the Basel II standardized approach, that we would need to retain the current standards for some set of banks. Thus, implementation of the Basel II standardized approach would not involve the replacement of an existing option but would create an entirely new, third approach in the United States. The U.S. supervisors were of the view that this could result in cherry-picking and, thus, that the added complexity would not be worth the additional benefits. More to the point, given the high capital position these banks continue to retain as well as their virtual lack of direct competition with banks in other countries that will be adopting Basel II, it does not seem reasonable to impose the cost of changing systems on most of these banks. Conclusions Now I would like to return to the main thread of my remarks and to provide some concluding thoughts on the way forward. I have already stressed the importance of the Basel II ANPR and the associated comment process in the United States. Complexity and competitive equity are two important themes for this comment process. Undoubtedly other issues will also be the subject of significant feedback. The issue of operational risk is by now surely familiar to most of you, so I will not belabor these points here. The calibration of the overall framework as well as of particular subsections of the framework will also inevitably attract a great deal of comment and attention. Such attention can likely improve the Basel II proposals. My remarks today have tried to lay out what I see as the central policy choices and issues confronting U.S. supervisors as we evaluate the comments we receive on the ANPR. I have tried to be open and candid about the tradeoffs that I believe are involved, some of which are clearly inherent in the nature of the Basel II effort itself. We will surely not be able to please everybody in our attempt to strike the right balance between flexibility and comparability or between complexity and risk sensitivity. Of course, as supervisors we are not expecting that the banking industry is going to stand up and applaud what remains, after all, a "regulatory requirement." As a sage adviser opined to me recently, if we ever get to the point where all of the banks are too enthusiastic about Basel II, then clearly something must have gone awry from a prudential point of view. But your feedback and comments on the Basel II ANPR will significantly shape the views of U.S. supervisors on how we go forward with these proposals. In closing, I would like to return to the points I made at the outset. Our most fundamental choice as policymakers is whether we are going to replace the Basel I framework for our largest, most complex banks with a framework that relies significantly on internally generated inputs in an effort to achieve significantly greater risk sensitivity. Against the backdrop of the dynamic changes occurring in banking and risk management, we have little if any choice but to find something that improves substantially on Basel I for the largest and most-complex banks. Yet the choices involved in developing a viable and realistic alternative to Basel I are manifold, and each one of them gives rise to arguments and counterarguments. We are not going to make the perfect policy choice initially in every one of these detailed instances. In many cases, moreover, the best choice may evolve over time. If we are going to move to a capital standard built substantially around internally generated assessments of risk, we need to focus on the practical realities of that decision and leave behind some of the wishful thinking about what each of us believes a perfect capital framework would look like. An initiative as important as Basel II is bound to change significantly over time. Basel II contains the promise of a capital framework that will evolve with improvements and advancements in risk-management techniques. As new methods and techniques become more common and well tested, the Basel II framework can and should embrace such advances. The sooner we can gain practical hands-on experience with such a framework, the sooner we can begin to realize its full potential. The Basel II proposals represent a truly significant step in the evolution of bank regulation. They are important and deserve your most thoughtful consideration as the U.S. bank supervisors evaluate exactly how to proceed with them. I hope that my remarks today will be helpful to you in considering your responses. Thank you for your attention.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the approval of the application of Union Bank of Israel Ltd., Tel Aviv, Israel, to establish a representative office in New York, New York. Attached is the Order relating to this action.
Remarks by Governor Mark W. Olson At the 2003 Banking Institute, Center for Banking and Finance, University of North Carolina, Charlotte, North Carolina April 10, 2003 Basel II: Its Implications for Second-Tier and Community-Size Banks As important as the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act has been to American banking--codifying the new realities of the marketplace--I would argue that the 1988 Basel Capital Accord brought about an even more dramatic change in banking rules of the game. In the late 1980s, as the Congress struggled unsuccessfully to reach agreement on a plan for managing interstate banking, the banking regulators of the Group of Ten (G-10) countries were able to develop a common set of rules for bank capital. What is referred to now as Basel I established a competitive balance among the banking systems of the major industrialized countries. It made the international competitive climate considerably more fair, and it greatly improved bank safety and soundness worldwide. Let me elaborate briefly on the advances embodied in Basel I before I discuss the limitations that have become more evident in the years since it was implemented. In the mid-1980s, it was a major step forward to acknowledge, for example, that residential mortgage lending carried substantially less credit risk than did automobile lending and that certain state and municipal bond issues carried less of a credit risk than home mortgage loans. As a result, when Basel I allowed for loans and investments to be grouped into four "buckets" with risk weightings of 0 percent, 20 percent, 50 percent, and 100 percent, respectively, banks were allowed for the first time to allocate and maintain capital in a manner somewhat consistent with the risk profile of the asset side of their balance sheets. Also, overwhelmingly, banks of all sizes in the United States now had risk capital ratios significantly in excess of their leverage capital ratios. Though the risk buckets were limited and did not fully reflect the range of risk sensitivities in the 100 percent bucket, their implementation represented a significant improvement. The banking industry has changed in many ways, however, since Basel I was implemented in 1988. Two specific areas of change--the expanded use of securitization and derivatives in secondary markets and vastly improved risk-management systems--have significant implications for Basel I. The use of secondary markets and the sophistication of risk-management systems correlate significantly with bank size. While second tier banks and community size banks have also increased their access to secondary markets and have made great strides in managing their risk exposures, the changes implemented by these banks have not threatened the relevance of Basel I. However, the same cannot be said about the nation's largest international banks. The largest institutions use the secondary markets for securitizing loans of all types and for a variety of other liquidity and investment needs. The largest institutions also use enhanced technology resources and risk-management tools to more carefully and specifically measure risks of all types. For banks that operate on a global scale in virtually all financial markets, Basel I has become outdated. The current capital regime has not kept pace with either the complex nature of the operations of the largest banks or the substantial changes in both the concepts and technology of risk management. The current capital rules at these banks have been further undermined by arbitrage between regulatory and market measures of risk mainly through the use of derivatives and securitizations in the secondary markets. Given these developments, the G-10 bank supervisors have been designing a much more risk-sensitive regulatory framework that takes into account the evolution of the art of risk management. The latest version of the proposal (Basel II) will be published by the Basel supervisors committee in a few weeks and an advance notice of proposed rulemaking by the U.S. supervisors is due by midsummer at the latest. An effective date of 2007 is now contemplated. The details of Basel II were described by my colleague, Roger Ferguson, Vice Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, in a presentation to a congressional committee in February. I have some copies with me today and can make others available. Today, I thought it might be useful to provide a U.S. supervisors' view of how Basel II should be applied in this country and to address some of the concerns we have heard about the scope of application. Given the needs of countries with a far different banking and regulatory structure than ours, Basel II contains three alternative approaches, which are described in the Vice Chairman's testimony. Supervisors in this country have for some time contemplated that only the most risk-sensitive approaches, the Advanced Internal Ratings Based (A-IRB) option for credit risk and the Advanced Measurement approach (AMA) for operational risk, would be applied in the United States. These advanced approaches would be required for only our largest and most complex, internationally active banking organizations--about ten U. S. banks. However, any other bank that meets the qualifying internal infrastructure standards for risk measurement and management could choose to apply these versions of Basel II. We anticipate another ten or so large banks may opt to do so voluntarily because of the greater risk sensitivity it affords. These banks may also make this choice for prestige or competitive reasons, as counterparties look for indications of technical risk measurement skills at the large banking entities with which they deal. U.S. authorities have agreed to implement only the most advanced Basel II options and to limit the number of required participants. First and foremost, the decision reflects a balancing of costs and benefits. Any change is expensive, and the advanced approaches are very costly to implement. The overwhelming majority of banks in this country are well capitalized and well managed under the current modified Basel I, and smaller banks are forced by markets to hold capital considerably above the well-capitalized level, so the cost-benefit ratio of requiring more of our banks to adopt some version of Basel II is tilted, for most banks, very strongly against the desirability of change. When we then add to the equation the fact that it is primarily the megabanks whose operations seem inconsistent with the current capital regime, the decision to limit the scope of application appeared even more clear-cut. Moreover, with our concern about shortfalls of the current regime focused on the complex, large, internationally active banks--and the desirability, on grounds of safety and soundness and macroeconomic stability, to see the best practice risk-management techniques applied to these entities--the decision to deploy only the most sophisticated version of Basel II also seemed obvious to us. You may also recall that an important objective of both Basel I and Basel II is to create cross-border competitive equality, reducing in our minds the necessity of requiring Basel rules to be applied to smaller banks that do not compete in international markets. Although U.S. regulators have for some time signaled that Basel II would apply only to the largest banks, questions have been raised about the implication for those banks that are not A-IRB candidates. Let me share with you our evaluation of what the implications may be for banks that will not be required to adopt Basel II and that opt to remain under Basel I. No bright line marks the separation between the groups of institutions that we refer to as large, complex, internationally active banks (those that would be required to follow the advanced Basel II), other large, complex banks (some of which we think are likely to be opt-in banks), large regional banks, and community banks. Some of the banks in the large regional group--let's say those between the 25th and 100th largest--have voiced the concern that even though they are well capitalized and well managed, they will be forced by market pressures, and especially by the rating agencies, to bear the high costs of moving to Basel II. The risk-management practices embedded in Basel II did not, of course, originate with the Basel committee or with any of the G-10 bank regulators. Rather, to a significant extent, they represent the best practices of risk-management approaches developed in the marketplace. These practices are now being used by some banks in the tier just below the largest organizations. Improved risk-management technology, supplemented by the adoption of Basel II advanced approaches at the largest banks, will accelerate the advance in risk-management sophistication that counterparties will increasingly expect to see at their banks. This market-driven change would have occurred without Basel II--in fact, it is already in progress--but Basel II will surely speed things up. In the near term, however, the cost-benefit ratio I referred to must be considered, and we believe that the benefits for most regional banks do not yet exceed the costs. It is our understanding that this is also the view of the rating agencies. The cost-benefit calculus may well change in the future, but, in the years immediately ahead, I do not believe that regional banks will be required by the market to adopt the more advanced approaches. We are also aware of concerns that the current competitive balance between Basel I banks and Basel II banks might be upset in certain loan markets. The specific worry of the Basel I banks is that the advanced approaches will yield lower capital charges for residential mortgage, retail, and small business loans. These arguments, it seems to me, require some careful thought. My own experience as a banker is that loan pricing and profitability--and that must be what the issue is about--are influenced little by regulatory capital levels. Rather, rate setting on credits is determined by a complex web of factors, including local market competition from banks and other lenders, the cost of funds, the specifics of the bank-customer relationship, and internal capital allocation practices. For many types of retail loans, but particularly residential real estate loans, secondary market pricing has the strongest influence on rate setting. When capital is considered, it is the internal allocation decisions--what the Basel proposal refers to as economic capital--that is relevant, particularly because, as I noted earlier, U.S. banks operate so far above regulatory minimums and can easily change their own regulatory requirements by loan sales and securitizations. On the subject of Basel II, let me, in conclusion, make a few summary observations. First, if you accept the fact that Basel I had a significant effect on international competitiveness and economic stability, then it stands to reason that an update is necessary to make that accord reflect changes in markets and risk-management techniques. Second, the U.S. banking industry represents banks of varying size and complexity; it would be as inappropriate to require our smallest banks to adopt techniques designed for megabanks as it would to limit the largest banks on the basis of the capacity and capability of the smallest. Third, certain basic fundamentals regarding capital measurement and capital adequacy will not change. The provisions of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act (FDICIA) requiring prompt corrective action still mandate regulatory responses based on levels of capital adequacy. Finally, just as Basel I has been modified on numerous occasions to accommodate new financial instruments or a new recognition of risk weighting, we anticipate that the current and prospective Basel rules will accommodate future changes in risk measurement and risk taking.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between the Premier Bank, Denver, Colorado and the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the issuance of a consent Order of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty against the First Farmers Bank and Trust, Converse, Indiana, a state member bank. First Farmers Bank and Trust, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order in connection with its alleged violations of the Board’s regulations implementing the National Flood Insurance Act. The Order requires First Farmers Bank and Trust to pay a civil money penalty of $3,850, which will be remitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency for deposit into the National Flood Mitigation Fund. A copy of the Order is attached.
For immediate release Statement by Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan in response to the President's comments on his term in office:
Remarks by Governor Edward M. Gramlich Before the National Economists Club, Washington, D.C. April 24, 2003 Loan Guarantee Programs In recent years the Congress has responded to industrial difficulties by enacting loan guarantee programs, first for steel and oil and gas, later for airlines and rural television services. Unlike programs passed two or three decades ago on behalf of the Lockheed and Chrysler corporations, these new programs are open to all qualifying companies within the specified industries. Companies can apply for a loan guarantee that covers most of the loan amount, usually in the range of 80 percent to 90 percent. In each of these four new programs, the Congress has created a board to judge the applications, and the boards have in turn hired a staff and outside consultants to analyze these applications and make recommendations on whether the specific applications should be approved. Because the programs involve credit markets, a Federal Reserve Board delegate has been appointed to the loan guarantee boards, and I have been that delegate for each of the four boards. Though political motives undoubtedly are involved in the creation of loan guarantee programs, an economic rationale could be involved as well. Some social value, which private credit markets may undervalue, may exist in keeping alive particular firms or in financing particular services of ongoing firms. For example, a loan applicant might provide essential consumer services, add to competition in certain markets, or employ resources that would otherwise be unemployed in the short run. The supply of credit to an entire industry could at times be temporarily interrupted, through no fault of the industry, as is perceived to have happened for airlines after September 11, 2001. To the extent that keeping alive such services, firms, or firms in such industries has social value--a matter that many economists would view with pronounced skepticism--there could be a rationale for a loan guarantee program to facilitate the supply of the missing credit. Merely stating these possible rationales suggests how difficult it might be to tailor a loan guarantee program to deal with them. Affirmative loan guarantee decisions should be justified either by nonmarket benefits for consumers or producers or by credit market disruptions. Ideally these benefits should outweigh taxpayers' opportunity cost of supplying the funds, called the net credit subsidy cost of the guarantee. Although the temptation will be there, decisions should not be made on the basis of political influence. Given these considerations, it makes sense to empower a board with the ability to sponsor the required analyses and with some insulation from the normal political lobbying process to judge the applications. The Congress in fact did set up these programs and create these boards. We at the Fed did participate in their administration. This talk reports on these four boards, from a personal perspective. I stress that I am speaking for myself and not for congressional decisionmakers, other members of the loan guarantee boards, or the Federal Reserve Board. Rationale Economists have a long-standing aversion to intervening in private markets. Politicians sometimes evince just as long-standing a tendency to intervene. The two urges have been in conflict since the early days of government, in areas such as tax subsidies, tariffs, regulatory preferences, and public works spending. Industrial loan guarantees represent a new battleground for such tensions. Economists on their own would rarely see value in such loan guarantee programs, or in industrial subsidies more generally. Politicians might prefer other forms of subsidy, but when industrial difficulties loom in their districts, loan guarantees represent a convenient device for giving aid while still limiting budgetary expenditures. This political reasoning may explain why the Congress has passed so many loan guarantee programs recently, though it cannot explain why loan guarantee programs were rare until recently. A loan guarantee program has potential value if nonmarket benefits are generated by the firms or services kept alive by the guarantee-induced credit extensions. It is important to stress the nonmarket benefits because, presumably, private lenders and investors are already receiving the normal market benefits of credit transactions. These nonmarket benefits will result mainly from, or reside within, the firms or services kept alive by the loan guarantees. Other firms in the industry that do not get guarantees could only be affected indirectly, perhaps through a potential increase in competition. Taxpayers could incur costs for those firms that receive guarantees but later fail. All gains and losses should of course be tallied in a full accounting, but the focus on nonmarket benefits would involve mainly the firms kept alive by the credit subsidy. A board set up to administer a guarantee program might be viewed as trying to find those applications with relatively high nonmarket benefits and relatively low credit-subsidy costs to taxpayers. The methodological approach for doing this is benefit-cost analysis. The board should try to approve applications with positive net social benefits--that is, where the nonmarket benefits of keeping a firm alive outweigh the required credit subsidy costs to taxpayers, along with any other administrative or other costs of the program. As for the nonmarket benefits themselves, the following types of benefits have at least been invoked in congressional discussions of the recent loan guarantee programs: Essential consumer services. One example could involve essential air service, or added airline competition, to remote destinations, presumably what the Congress meant by asking the airlines board to consider a "safe, efficient, and viable" air transportation network. Another could involve selected consumer services provided by ongoing firms and financed by loan guarantees, a requirement of the rural television board. Geographical immobility of labor. Workers may find relocating away from depressed areas to be costly; and in some situations letting loan guarantee programs preserve some industrial jobs in these struggling areas could be cheaper in social terms. These requirements were not written into any of the loan guarantee programs, but substantial pressure is often put on loan guarantee boards to weigh such considerations. Temporary credit dislocations. When an industry suffers a serious unanticipated shock, such as the airline industry did after September 11, 2001, there could be temporary financial distortions. There may be cash losses from airline routes temporarily put out of service. Lenders and investors may temporarily find providing credit too risky, even to firms that later prove viable. To implement this rationale, the Congress required the airlines board to find evidence of damage due to September 11 events before granting loan guarantees. Mere mention of these possible benefits does not, of course, prove their existence. They will typically be very subjective, with some board members seeing nonmarket benefits for particular applicants and others not seeing them. But if board members agree that nonmarket benefits are not present, the board should have no economic reason to interfere with the normal functioning of private credit markets by approving a loan guarantee. On the cost side, the board should try to measure the present-value cost to taxpayers, or net credit subsidy, of the loan guarantee applications. This net credit subsidy is the present-value cost of all expected credit losses less the present value of all collateral, loan fees, stock warrants, and other terms of the loan guarantee deal. In contrast to the subjective nonmarket benefits, the net credit subsidy is usually more easily estimated. Loan guarantee applications usually involve significant risk--after all, the riskiness of the prospective loans is an important rationale for the loan guarantee program in the first place. Hence the analysis must be especially sensitive to risk. The applicants must submit valid business plans for the period of the guarantee, usually five to ten years. These business plans must be analyzed under a full range of alternative scenarios for input prices, output prices, currency exchange rates, interest rates, and output demands. Any collateral offered to creditors and to the board should be similarly valued, under a similar range of assumptions. Any stock warrants, or other equity participations, should be valued according to options-pricing formulas. The legislation for each of the four boards has been written to make the guarantees partial, so that private creditors take on at least some nonguaranteed risk. Making the guarantees partial ensures that these private creditors will subject the application to their own credit analysis. In effect, the partial guarantee ensures that applications are examined with a second pair of eyes, giving the board an independent assessment of the economic viability of the loan application. Exactly how high the net credit subsidy should be is, of course, debatable. Different board members have different tolerances for net credit subsidies. Since an application for loan guarantee has some transactions costs, and could carry some reputational damage, the boards I have served on have seen few loan applications with expected net credit subsidies near zero. Borrowers with no required credit subsidies should be able to draw private credit without any need for a federal guarantee. At the other extreme, as the net credit subsidy rises to, say, 30 percent of the loan amount or more, the implicit probability that the borrower will default gets very high. In this range, claiming a reasonable probability that the loan will be repaid, as is required by the loan guarantee regulations, is difficult. The boards I have served on have been reluctant to approve applications with a high default risk, even in cases with some potential nonmarket benefits. The difficult cases have fallen between these two extremes--that is, applications involving low to moderate net credit subsidies and at least some potential nonmarket benefits. In these cases, the borrower would typically not qualify for private credit, but the net social benefits of the application may outweigh the net credit subsidy. These are the cases in which benefit-cost analysis becomes critical and on which the boards have focused their energies. Results Membership on the four loan guarantee boards has varied (see ). At this point, the board for rural television services is just getting started, and no applications have been submitted. The oil and gas board operated in 2000 and 2001 and is now closed down. The steel board operated for these same two years and was extended for another two by the Congress. The airline board officially stopped accepting applications at the end of June 2002, but some applications are still being revised and voted on, and other loans are still in the process of closing. In aggregate, the four boards were authorized to guarantee up to nearly $13 billion in loans--$500 million for oil and gas, $1 billion for steel and $1.25 billion for rural television. The airlines guarantee law was written differently, with the amount of federal guarantees, not loans, limited to $10 billion. While the three fully-operating loan guarantee boards--oil and gas, steel, and airlines--have approved nearly half the applications they received, for various reasons the dollar amount of guaranteed loans approved has been significantly less than was authorized. At this point, only about 15 percent of the amounts authorized in the three programs has actually been disbursed in the form of loan guarantees, to ten successful applicants. Counting repayment probabilities, anticipated fees, collateral value, and the option value of stock warrants, the ex ante present value of the implicit federal subsidy for the loans that have closed is less than $400 million, though a few more loans and applications are still in the pipeline. Reasons for the low participation differ by industry. With oil and gas, the statute limited the program to small borrowers, below the interest level of many banks. Moreover, lenders were required to make the application, on behalf of their borrowers. Then oil prices spiked in 2000, the year when applications were submitted, improving conditions in the industry and making credit more easily available. When this happened many lenders, and their borrowers, withdrew their applications. It made little sense for oil and gas lenders and borrowers to go through the federal procedures, not particularly onerous but not trivial either, to get an unnecessary guarantee. Hence only fifteen completed applications were received, six were approved, and only three small applications closed and were eventually funded. Less than 1 percent of the federal authorization was ultimately used. The steel board also accepted applications in 2000, also from the lenders. In this case, eleven completed applications were received; these had the potential for using up most of the federal authorization. Of this total, seven were approved. But shortly after the bulk of the proposals were submitted, the U.S. economy entered a period in which overall output growth slackened and both energy prices and the exchange value of the dollar rose sharply. These factors made for very difficult circumstances for the steel industry. Many lenders, even those sponsoring applications that had been approved by the board, decided that they could not follow through and never closed on their loan applications--testimony to the importance of the second pair of eyes. In the end, only one application closed, covering 11 percent of the federal authorization. Unfortunately, this one successful applicant, Geneva Steel, later failed and was forced to liquidate its operations. At this point the federal government has paid the lender the guaranteed portion of the $110 million Geneva Steel loan, but the government is still trying to sell Geneva's collateral assets to recover some of these funds. The estimated ex post loss on this loan is not included in the ex ante federal subsidy cost of $400 million mentioned earlier, though the relevant ex ante amount was included. At the close of 2001 the Congress extended the steel program for another two years, with the application period being extended another eighteen months. So far in this extension period, activity has been very slow, with just two new applications, both of which were approved, and one new closing. The new closing raises the total to 15 percent of the federal authorization, and this tally could go as high as 40 percent if the last approved application closes. More than thirty other steel companies have gone into bankruptcy proceedings over the last five years. If there are further steel applications--increasingly unlikely as the deadline approaches--they will probably be in connection with chapter 11 bankruptcy restructurings designed to make the steel firms viable. The loan guarantee program for airlines is far and away the largest, and it has generated far and away the most publicity and controversy. The program was passed in response to the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, and the board was open for applications through the end of June 2002. With this program the applications were to be made by the airlines, not the lenders. Despite the enormous publicity surrounding the program, only sixteen domestic air carriers decided to apply; only three of the largest eight. There were rumors that the nonapplicants were dissuaded by the terms demanded by the loan guarantee board--high fees and stock warrants. The applications had the potential for using up 36 percent of the federal authorization. At this point, seven applications have been approved with two more pending. Five loans have closed, using up 15 percent of the guarantee authorization. Of the large airlines, applications from America West and US Airways have been approved and have closed, but the application from United Airlines was not approved. United filed for chapter 11 shortly after its application was not approved, and it could revise its application as it emerges from bankruptcy. The low participation rates have different rationales, but they probably all suggest a common message. When all is said and done, it turns out to be difficult to produce an application that appeals simultaneously to the borrower and to the lender and yet still satisfies the rigorous legislative requirements and the board's interpretation of these requirements. In the case of oil and gas, the borrowers generally decided that they were not interested--they could get credit on reasonable terms without any federal guarantee. For steel, generally the lenders lost interest, in many cases after the board had approved the application. For airlines, few of the large ones even applied. Overall, slightly less than half of the completed applications received by the boards were approved, and 40 percent of those eventually closed. Hence there was proportionately more attrition after the board approval decision than before. Lessons This brief experience with loan guarantee boards suggests several important lessons: Loan guarantee programs cannot save failing industries. Enthusiastic proponents of loan guarantee programs seem to believe that improved access to credit markets is the cure for entrenched industrial problems. But often the lack of access to credit markets is itself caused by serious industrial difficulties. If the business plan of an applicant just cannot be made to show a profit under reasonable economic assumptions, private lenders are unlikely to be interested in making new loans. If the application involves a high net credit subsidy and a low prospect of repayment, the loan guarantee board is unlikely to be interested in extending a guarantee. Hence, sensibly administered loan guarantee programs may not result in much lending activity, may not forestall many bankruptcies, and are unlikely to save sick firms or industries. Loan guarantee boards are not good vehicles for dealing with immediate emergencies. Loan guarantee boards have been given fiduciary constraints and must analyze proposals carefully. The thoroughness of the evaluations that loan guarantee boards and private lenders must undertake means that decisions cannot be made quickly. If an immediate emergency looms for an industry, loan guarantees are unlikely to be dispensed rapidly enough to deal with the emergency. Lower rhetoric about loan guarantee boards is in order. When the loan guarantees were first passed, many supporters viewed them as salvations for the industry, and many in the opposition felt that the future of market capitalism was gravely threatened. Neither stance is realistic. On the one side, as just mentioned, loan guarantees cannot be salvations if the underlying industry economics are not favorable. Credit access alone cannot cure many industrial difficulties, the second pair of eyes limits private lender participation, and the fiduciary requirements of the government are rigorous. On the other side, fiduciary standards and other requirements of the loan guarantee boards do not seem to threaten market capitalism either. Some new lending activity has occurred, and some firms have been kept alive by the guarantees; but in general the number of firms kept alive is small compared with the number that have gone into bankruptcy proceedings without a guarantee. The normal market adjustment processes in the steel and airlines industries do not seem to have been impeded by loan guarantees, though these market adjustments may have been cushioned. Having independent boards is a sensible approach. The boards I have served on were insulated from the normal lobbying processes. This separation has kept the approval process on an analytical level. The boards have imposed reasonably arduous standards, but certainly not overly arduous standards, and have approved nearly half the total number of applications. More attrition occurred after the board approval process than before. Of course the board can misuse benefit-cost analysis and mis-estimate critical values. But every decision I have participated in has been based on analytical considerations, and none has later been overturned politically. Conclusion How this overall experience should be assessed is still debatable. The loan guarantee approach might be described as middle-of-the-road--more intrusive than just relying on private lenders to allocate credit but less intrusive than giving industrial handouts or bailouts. The boards have been set up to contain political considerations, and they seem to have been reasonably successful in doing that. They have limited taxpayer costs. They have tried to make decisions on the basis of underlying economics, keeping nonmarket benefits firmly in mind. The steel and airline boards have operated at a time of serious difficulties for their respective industries. The boards have not prevented a number of bankruptcy filings in these industries. They do not seem to have impeded normal market adjustment processes, but they may have cushioned these processes. Ten firms have been approved for loan guarantees, and nine of them are still operating. Whether these nine ultimately generate sufficient nonmarket benefits to compensate for their taxpayer costs remains to be seen. Membership on Loan Guarantee Boards Agency Oil and Gas Steel Airlines Rural Television Federal Reserve Chair Chair Chair Member Treasury -- -- Member Chair Commerce Member Member -- Member Transportation -- -- Member -- Agriculture -- -- -- Member Securities & Exchange Member Member -- -- Agency Oil and Gas Steel Airlines Rural Television Federal Reserve Chair Chair Chair Member Treasury -- -- Member Chair Commerce Member Member -- Member Transportation -- -- Member -- Agriculture -- -- -- Member Securities & Exchange Member Member -- --
Remarks by Vice Chairman Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. At the Risk Management Workshop for Regulators, The World Bank, Washington, D.C. April 28, 2003 Basel II: A Case Study in Risk Management I am pleased to join you this morning as you begin your conference on risk management in banking. As many of you may know, I have been spending time on the initiative to increase the risk sensitivity of the Basel capital accord--the subject of your first panel discussion. In the last analysis, our Basel II efforts are geared to improving risk management--measuring risk more accurately; communicating those measurements to management, to supervisors, and to the public; and, of course, relating risk both to capital requirements and to the supervisory focus. This morning I will not discuss the details of the Basel proposals. Tomorrow, the Basel Supervisor's Committee will publish its third consultative document describing the proposal in its near-final form, and I urge you to review it and provide your comments and suggestions to the Committee. It is not too late to shape the details. This morning, however, in keeping with the theme of the conference, I will spend my time talking about the objectives of the proposed Basel II, particularly as they relate to risk management. Risk in Banking Any discussion of risk management in banking must start with the understanding that banks exist for the purpose of taking risk, and the objective of supervision is certainly not to eliminate, and perhaps not even to lower, risk-taking. Rather, the objective of supervision is to assist in the management of risk. We cannot lose sight of the fact that banks' willingness and ability to take risk, in turn, has allowed them to contribute significantly to economic growth by funding households and businesses. Nonetheless, this economic function, especially when conducted with a relatively small capital base and using mainly funds that have been borrowed short-term, has historically led to periodic rounds of bank failures and changes in credit availability that have exacerbated macroeconomic cyclical patterns and inflicted losses on households and businesses alike. Such a history has often led to proposals to change dramatically the business of banking; it clearly has been a major reason for central banks and for the regulation and supervision of banking. These developments, however, did not change the risk-taking function of banking nor the need for risk management. Banks, from the very beginning, have, to be sure, managed risk--even before there were supervisors or regulators to insist that they do so. Banks managed risk because they were in the business of banking and did not want to fail and lose what, at least initially, was their own capital. Even in modern banking, with professional management largely divorced from the owners, the desire of management to have the institution survive is still a major impetus to risk management. But, until quite recently, systematically and formally managing many of the key risks taken by banks, in particular their credit risk, was difficult. The techniques for quantifying and measuring risk, and the technology and instruments to manage and distribute it, simply did not exist. Individual credit-risk decisions tended to be made by lending and credit officers who used their judgment to decide who was given credit and who was not. A characteristic of lending officers is that they are paid to make loans, and in competitive lending markets they want to make sure they maintain, if not increase, market share. This is to say not that lending officers are uninterested in risk management but rather that their focus is on finding a way to make the loan. In a world of judgment, the risk manager had considerable difficulty in persuading lending officers, indeed management, about excessive risk when quantitative procedures and systems did not exist. Differences in judgments are difficult to resolve. I want to emphasize that historically bank credit availability has demonstrated a clear cyclical pattern that is both consistent with the credit-making decision process I have just described and that, in turn, has exacerbated real economic cycles. During economic recoveries, bank credit officers would become more optimistic and willing to lend, an attitude that only strengthened during booms; in such times the voice of risk managers, even supervisors, calling for caution was likely to carry less weight. During recessions, with losses clear and write-offs rising, caution would come to the forefront, attitudes toward lending would become much more restrictive, reinforced by the arguments of risk managers and supervisors who could point to the losses. One can, I think, begin to notice a change in recent years in this typical pro-cyclical behavior in bank credit availability. It first became apparent in the minimal credit losses at the large U.S. banks during the Asian debt crisis and Russian debt default in the late 1990s. It was also noticeable when these same entities began to tighten lending standards during the later years of the last expansion, in contrast to typical patterns where tightening occurred near or after the peak. It is also apparent in the continued strength in the portfolios of these entities during the recession. To be sure, part of the explanation is new techniques for shifting and sharing risks through various new instruments. But at bottom, I would argue that we are beginning to see the payoff from more formal and rigorous quantitative risk-management techniques for credit decisionmaking, techniques that have also been central to the development of new instruments for hedging, mitigating, and managing credit risk. Encouraging Risk-Management Techniques The proposed Basel II attempts to do two things: to apply the concepts of these new risk-management techniques in banking to the supervision of banks and to encourage the widening and deepening of the application of these concepts to the largest and most complex internationally active banking organizations. It is true that the ideas embodied in Basel II began inside banks themselves; but not all banks are using all the concepts, and the advance across banks has been uneven. Increasingly investors and counterparties are asking whether they are being used, and Basel II adds to such pressure. Running through all three pillars of the Basel II proposal is encouragement for banking organizations to invest in and improve their risk-management capabilities. The advanced approaches to credit risk will require large banks to analyze their credit exposures in a formal and systematic way, assigning both default and loss probabilities to such exposures. Basel II is rooted in modern finance and seeks to develop in the larger banking organizations a comprehensive, systematic approach to assessing the various risks to which they are exposed. It inevitably raises both the supervisors' and the market's expectations for banks' risk-management systems. It clearly will increase the resources and management attention devoted to the details of risk management, focusing attention on the kinds of risks being taken and the potential losses that may accompany them. It is exactly that kind of attention, that kind of support for the risk managers, that will minimize the pro-cyclical swings that have historically marked the bank credit cycle: unintended risk-taking from an overly optimistic view followed by intervals of limited credit availability for even low-risk borrowers as pessimistic views came to the fore. Unintended risks are neither priced correctly nor adequately reserved or capitalized. Reductions in credit availability limit economic growth. As the scale and scope of banking has increased and as banking systems have become more concentrated, the effects of mistakes from excessive risk-taking and reductions in credit availability on national and world financial markets and economies has simply become too large to tolerate. The alternatives to strengthening risk management are limited and not very attractive: prohibitions on activities or very intrusive supervision and regulation. Bank managers and stakeholders, as well as those who believe in the market process, have an important stake in making Basel II work because the alternatives to it are so unappetizing. Pro-cyclicality Some observers grant the desirability of better risk management but have voiced concern that a set of rules for risk-sensitive capital requirements still will be excessively pro-cyclical. They argue that as banks re-evaluate the probabilities of default and loss over a business cycle, regulatory capital requirements will fall in booms, as risks are perceived to be low, and increase in recessions, when pessimism replaces optimism, aggravating the underlying real economic cyclical pattern. Better risk management, these critics seem to be saying, will make the world less stable. Let me stipulate that a regulatory structure based on formal risk-management techniques will imply, to some degree, a cyclical pattern of minimum regulatory capital requirements, exactly like the internal pattern of economic capital needs at a bank using modern risk-management techniques on its own. The question is: Is that a bad or good thing? To begin to address that question we first have to recognize that risk itself is not constant over time but, in fact, varies cyclically and in other ways. Regardless of how we construct our capital requirements, at times the same portfolio of loans will face more or less risk over the relevant planning period than at other times. We have a choice: We can decide to ignore that reality or recognize it. The current capital regime chooses the former option by default--risk categories are insufficient to recognize changing risk; less information about reality is conveyed by the capital requirements, facilitating both the banks' and the supervisor's failure to respond to the underlying changes. The proposed Basel II, in contrast, conveys to managers, to supervisors, and importantly, to the public how risk changes as capital requirements respond to changes in the real underlying risk. A sufficiently risk sensitive capital regime will impart timely information regarding risk. That, in turn, will allow adjustments in lending policies sufficiently early to limit excessive swings in lending behavior. Risk sensitivity in capital requirements can damp swings in credit availability, reducing both credit sprees and credit crunches. From a supervisory perspective, it seems clear that we prefer--or at least, ought to prefer--the regulatory capital ratios that convey more information. Supervisors, banks, and the public should want to understand when bank portfolios are facing higher risks or when an updated estimate of risk relative to capital reveals a warning sign that requires attention. No such early warning system is provided by a system of capital requirements that does not signal that a bank has a problem until the problem is sufficiently severe to have already eroded the underlying capital. That is, a capital system with little risk sensitivity creates the potential for problems to escape undetected for longer periods of time. Such delays increase the likelihood that the underlying problems will not be addressed soon enough and will likely grow larger over time. To be sure, it may well be desirable to avoid an excessively conservative calibration of the risk sensitivity of a regulatory capital regime to minimize the potential for over-response in the capital ratio, relative to some regulatory threshold, when risk evaluations change. Overreaction can be as much of a problem as underreaction. The Basel Committee has attempted to avoid such difficulties by selecting, whenever possible, parameters that recognize factors that reduce risk exposures and by adjusting capital charges accordingly. If the Committee has the calibration about right overall, then supervisors, banks, and markets should be able to handle effectively more information embodied in the form of more risk-sensitive capital ratios. Of course, as I noted, the upcoming comment period on the third consultative document will afford an opportunity to express additional views on the issue. An often-heard complaint is that markets and banks will overreact to changing capital ratios, the bank will be overpenalized, or the bank will overrespond in its lending policies. However, the evidence is sufficient to take a more positive view of markets and their ability to evolve in the presence of new and better information. Perhaps more important, these concerns tend to ignore the behavioral effects that more-risk-sensitive regulatory capital ratios will induce. Earlier I noted the cyclical pattern that historically has characterized bank credit availability, a pattern exacerbated by the lack of formal and systematic credit-risk management. A regime of more formal attention to risk exposures, as under Basel II, offers the hope of a more stable pattern of credit availability. Quantitative risk management should reduce the buildup of excessive unintended credit risks that have been assumed in expansions, which in turn will minimize the losses and associated tighter lending standards during recessions. Such lending behavior, in turn, might well reduce the cyclical pattern in minimum capital requirements that would otherwise occur without the better risk-management techniques required under the proposed Basel II. The response to more formal risk management thus creates the reasonable prospect of reducing concerns about the pro-cyclicality of capital ratios under Basel II. In the past, problems have arisen when banks have been too complacent in their judgments of risks during good times, too slow to react when the situation turns, and too risk-adverse once their losses have turned out larger than anticipated. A process that encourages banks to think more carefully and more pro-actively about all of these possibilities offers the hope of a significant improvement in the way that they manage themselves over the course of the business cycle. Along these lines, Basel II emphasizes the importance of stress testing credit-risk measurements. Stress testing as a means for considering how risk assessments and capital requirements can change as the economic environment weakens is a necessary part of the broader shift toward a more pro-active approach to risk management. Bank managers should consider the results of their stress testing when determining how much capital they need to hold above the regulatory minimum requirement, which is after all only a portion of the total capital held. Indeed, to facilitate flexibility and to enhance their competitive positions with counterparties, banks will continue, even after the Basel II proposal becomes effective, to carry a buffer stock of capital--an amount above their regulatory minimum. However, under the proposal, the supervisor will incorporate stress testing as a factor in the assessment of how much buffer capital should be held. As part of the second pillar of Basel II, supervisors will discuss the results of the stress test with bank management to ensure that the banks take seriously their need to consider the dynamic management of their capital over the economic cycle. Operational Risks My comments have focused on risk management and the cyclicality of a risk-sensitive capital regime. But thus far I have emphasized the major risk that most banks face--credit risk. At times, however, other risks have proven to be quite costly--sometimes fatal--to banks. In my view, therefore, a discussion of risk management is incomplete without a consideration of operational risk. From a bank's and a supervisor's viewpoint, no matter how real and serious operational risk may be, it is, with the current state of the art, not easy to measure. Thus, the Basel Committee's proposal to apply an explicit capital requirement under pillar I to operational risk has been controversial. Against that background, reviewing the Committee's thinking that led to the proposed treatment of operational risk might be useful. Under the current, Basel I capital regime, capital requirements on credit exposures are set high enough to cover implicitly operational risk, an approach that has helped to undermine Basel I by adding to the wedge between regulatory and market evaluations of lower-risk exposures. If operational risk were subject not to an explicit pillar I capital charge under Basel II but rather to supervisory review under pillar II, capital requirements for credit risk in pillar I would have to be either (1) kept unchanged or (2) treated as they are under Basel I with a safety margin built on top of the credit-risk requirement to cover operational-risk exposures. The conservative calibration of the latter approach, as I earlier noted, would mean that capital requirements, by exceeding the "real" underlying credit risk, would make required capital ratios overly sensitive to cyclical reclassifications of credit-risk exposures. It would also erroneously assume that operational risk and credit risk move in tandem. Including only credit risk within the ambit of explicitly required capital, calibrated as it now is to empirical measures, would lower required capital levels more than is probably warranted because operational risk is a real risk that causes real losses. Even if there were a way to adjust required capital for the absence of an explicit charge for operational risk, the pillar II approach, let us be frank, opens up too real a possibility that operational risk will be relegated to an inferior status, with a slowing down of the current impetus to measure and manage it. Indeed, I think it is fair to say that the proposed pillar I treatment of operational risk has been a major driver behind the substantial management attention and scarce firm resources that have been devoted to operational risk management in the past few years. A robust pillar II approach would require significant and sustained supervisory pressure to ensure that banks continue to invest in improving their operational-risk assessments. Even then, comparability across banks would be difficult to achieve, undermining our efforts to attain a level playing field. And the capital held under pillar II would, to the public, look like any other buffer capital--nonrequired under pillar I--eliminating a high degree of transparency. Moreover, one must be aware that a number of firms are successfully spending time and resources to improve their operational-risk measurement and management approaches. Many are doing so not solely because of Basel II proposals but rather because they believe that their financial interest lies in better measuring and managing this risk. These firms believe that the objective of a reasonable, flexible, comparable approach to operational risk is achievable, and what is more, they believe they already have reduced such risks by applying formal techniques to their measurement and management. Quantifying operational risk is admittedly not simple. But the inability to make precise estimates does not mean that an explicit capital requirement for this real risk is impossible. Indeed, the Basel Committee developed the Advanced Measurement Approaches (AMA) to provide a flexible way to measure operational risk for pillar I purposes. The AMA allows banks to utilize their own internal models, subject to supervisory approval, to determine the capital to be held for operational risk. Banks are expected to use their own internal loss data, external loss data, scenario analysis, and qualitative indicators of operational risk when developing these models. Thus, though the AMA is flexible, it also provides a structure for making a quantitative assessment of the capital needed for operational risk. The AMA provides a road map, with the understanding that no specific approach has been universally adopted within the industry or endorsed by supervisors. It is a practical guide, intended to offer a constructive way to proceed toward assessing an operational-risk capital charge that is reasonable and meaningful. Though the AMA will require banks to use analytic tools to quantify their operational risks, it also allows for the exercise of considerable management judgment. And, as I want to underline, the purpose of developing improved measurement techniques is to use them as a means to the end of better overall operational-risk management. The AMA thus provides banks with the flexibility to parse out the operational risk capital charge in a manner that is reasonable and comprehensive. To be sure, there remains the question of how certain components of an AMA, such as external data and scenario analysis, are expected to be used in arriving at an appropriate level of operational risk capital. It may be necessary to provide banks with a more concrete sense of what supervisors are looking for in this regard, and regulators in the United States are currently working to do so. A frequent objection to the AMA from banks is that without this clear guidance, the scale of the expected AMA charge will be set largely at the discretion of the supervisor and it could turn out to be excessive. This will not be the case, and banks interpreting the AMA in this way have an erroneous perception of how aggressive supervisors will be in this regard. In addition, supervisors have been engaged, through the supervisory process, in gaining understanding of the emerging internal operational risk methodologies that institutions have pursued. Our findings to date are consistent with the expectation that the AMA typically results in a lower capital level than would be the case under the blunter measurement tools. With their new bottom-up, data-driven methodologies, banks are finding that the level of overall economic capital allocated to operational risk is not dramatically different from their old top-down methodologies, although the allocation across business lines often changes significantly. We believe that these methodologies and the resulting capital allocations for operational risk may be indicative of what we are likely to see once the new rules come into effect. Supervisors must be willing to say that the size of the capital charge for operational risk under AMA to some extent will depend on the development of industry practice and the experience and associated consensus that will evolve over time. In the interim, supervisors will need to engage banks in discussions about the likely size of their operational risk capital requirements. Summary In closing, I will review the major points of my presentation. The proposed revision of the international capital accord is, at bottom, about improving risk management in banking, extending and building upon what most large banks have already begun to develop and what the market increasingly demands of large, complex banking organizations. It is a regulatory framework that seeks to develop a comprehensive and systematic approach to risk taking in banking. Some have argued, however, that changing perceptions of risk will make Basel II risk-sensitive capital requirements pro-cyclical, exacerbating the real economic cycle. It is true that the required capital ratio will likely have a cycle; but such a pattern will reflect genuine risk developments, and the more accurate measurement should be helpful to bank managers, supervisors, and the public. Moreover, the behavioral response to more-sensitive capital requirements is likely to reduce the cyclical pattern in bank credit availability. In any event, the buffer capital held will absorb the cyclical movement in required capital. Operational risk is not easy to measure, but it is a real risk that cannot be ignored. Its proposed treatment in pillar I would likely result in more serious, and less uneven, attention. Those banks that have conscientiously tried to measure and manage operational risk have been successful, and Basel II offers flexible techniques for trying different approaches. However, supervisors may well need to provide more guidance that will allow banks to estimate the size of the capital charge for this risk.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among BANKFIRST Corporation, Sioux Falls, South Dakota, a registered bank holding company, and its subsidiary bank, BANKFIRST, also of Sioux Falls, South Dakota, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
Joint Press Release Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Office of the Comptroller of the Currency For Immediate Release April 30, 2003 Banking Agencies Announce Publication of Basel Accord Consultative Paper The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, based in Basel, Switzerland, released its third consultative paper on the new Basel Capital Accord for comment on April 29, 2003. The paper seeks to continue the consultation process on revising the 1988 Capital Accord. Comments are invited by July 31, 2003. The Basel Committee released the previous consultative paper on the new Accord in January 2001. The proposals have been substantially revised since that time to reflect the comments received on the 2001 document, as well as comments on several other documents released by the Basel Committee. Particular focus has been given to the Internal Ratings Based Approaches for commercial and retail credits, securitization, and the quantitative methodologies for operational risk. These changes reflect the continuing development of the new Accord and do not reflect a fundamental change to the overall framework, which establishes minimum capital for credit, market and operational risks. The framework also encompasses supervisory review of capital adequacy and market discipline through enhanced disclosure. The U.S. agencies plan to follow the release of this consultative paper with an Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (ANPR) in the next few months. This ANPR will be based on the Committeeï¿½s third consultative paper and will focus on how the U.S. agencies intend to implement domestic changes that reflect the specific nature of U.S. banks and banking. The ANPR will also provide a proposal on the scope of application of the new Accord (i.e., the criteria in the U.S. rule governing the population of U.S. banks that will be required to comply with Basel II). Banks and other interested parties will be given the opportunity to comment on the ANPR proposals, as well as on the Notice of Proposed Rulemaking that will follow the ANPR. The paper is available on the committeeï¿½s website at , the Office of the Comptroller of the Currencyï¿½s (OCC) website at , the Federal Reserve Boardï¿½s website at , and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporationï¿½s website at . Comments on the Committeeï¿½s third consultative paper on the new Basel Capital Accord may be sent to both the Basel Committee and the regulatory agencies. Comments for the Basel Committee can be sent electronically to: or to: Basel Committee on Banking Supervision Bank for International Settlements CH ï¿½ 4002, Basel Switzerland Comments can be sent to the Federal Reserve electronically to: or to: Basel 2003 Capital Proposal Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Mail stop 155 20th Street and Constitution Avenue, N.W. Washington, DC 20551 Comments can be sent to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation electronically to or to: Robert E. Feldman Executive Secretary Attention: Comments Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation 550 17th Street, NW Washington, DC 20429 Comments can be sent to the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency electronically to or to: Basel 2003 Capital Proposal Office of the Comptroller of the Currency Mail Stop 3-6 250 E Street SW Washington, DC 20219 Federal Reserve Dave Skidmore 202-452-2955 FDIC Phil Battey 202-898-6993 OCC Bob Garsson 202-874-5770