For immediate release
No content found
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the issuance of a consent Order against Dale and Betty Skrobot, both former institution-affiliated parties of the First Western Bank, Cooper City, Florida, a state member bank. The individuals, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order to resolve allegations that they violated the Change in Bank Control Act and an order issued under the Change in Bank Control Act by the Board of Governors in connection with their acquisition of beneficial ownership of shares of the bank. A copy of the Order is attached.
Testimony of Governor Donald L. Kohn Business Checking Freedom Act of 2003, H.R. 758 and H.R. 859 Before the Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit of the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives March 5, 2003 The Federal Reserve Board appreciates this opportunity to comment on issues related to H.R. 859 and H.R. 758. The Board strongly supports the provisions in these bills that would eliminate the prohibition of interest on demand deposits, authorize the Federal Reserve to pay interest on balances held by depository institutions at Reserve Banks, and provide the Board with increased flexibility in setting reserve requirements. As we have previously testified, unnecessary restrictions on the payment of interest on demand deposits at depository institutions and on balances held at Reserve Banks distort market prices and lead to economically wasteful efforts to circumvent these restrictions. And those efforts are more readily undertaken by larger banks, especially for their larger business customers. Moreover, these bills would enhance the toolkit available for the continued efficient conduct of monetary policy. In addition, the provision of increased flexibility in setting reserve requirements would allow the Federal Reserve to reduce a regulatory burden on depository institutions to the extent that is consistent with the effective implementation of monetary policy. As background for considering paying interest on balances held at Reserve Banks, let me begin by discussing the role of such balances in the implementation of monetary policy. The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) formulates monetary policy by setting a target for the overnight federal funds rate--the interest rate on loans between depository institutions of balances held in their accounts at Reserve Banks. While the federal funds rate is a market interest rate, the Federal Reserve can strongly influence its level by adjusting the aggregate supply of deposit balances held at Reserve Banks through open market operations--the purchase or sale of securities that causes increases or decreases in such balances. However, in deciding on the appropriate level of balances to supply in order to achieve the targeted funds rate, the Open Market Desk must estimate the aggregate demand for such balances. Depository institutions hold three types of balances at the Federal Reserve--required reserve balances, contractual clearing balances, and excess reserve balances. Required reserve balances are the balances that a depository institution must hold to meet reserve requirements. At present, the Federal Reserve requires depository institutions to maintain reserves equal to 10 percent of their transaction deposits above certain minimum levels. Reserve requirements may be satisfied either with vault cash or with required reserve balances, neither of which earn interest. Depository institutions may also commit themselves in advance to holding additional balances called contractual clearing balances. They are called clearing balances because institutions tend to hold them when they need a higher level of balances than their required reserve balances in order to pay checks or make wire transfers without running into overdrafts. Currently, clearing balances do not earn explicit interest, but they do earn implicit interest for depository institutions in the form of credits that may be used to pay for Federal Reserve services, such as check clearing. Finally, excess reserve balances, which earn no interest, are funds held by depository institutions in their accounts at Reserve Banks in excess of their required reserve and contractual clearing balances. To conduct policy effectively, it is important that the combined demand for these balances be predictable, so that the Open Market Desk knows the volume of reserves to supply to achieve the FOMC's target funds rate. It is also helpful if, when the level of balances unexpectedly deviates from the Desk's intention, banks themselves engage in arbitrage activities that help to keep the rate near its target. Depository institutions must maintain their specified levels of both required reserve and contractual clearing balances, not day-by-day, but on an average basis over a two-week maintenance period. The required amounts of both types of balances are known prior to the beginning of the maintenance period, so the Open Market Desk knows the balances it needs to supply on average over the period to satisfy these needs. Moreover, the two-week averaging creates incentives for depository institutions to arbitrage the funds rate from one day to the next in a manner that helps keep that rate close to the FOMC's target. For instance, if the funds rate were higher than usual on a particular day, some depository institutions could choose to hold lower balances on that day, and their reduced demand would help to damp the upward pressure on the funds rate. Later in the two week period, when the funds rate might be lower, those institutions could choose to hold extra balances to make up the shortfall in their average holdings of reserve balances. The averaging feature is only effective in stabilizing markets, however, if the sum of required reserve and contractual clearing balances is sufficiently high that banks hold balances, on the margin, as a means of hitting their two-week average requirements. If their sum dropped to a very low level, depository institutions would be at increased risk of overdrafting their accounts at Reserve Banks because of unpredictable payments out of their accounts late in the day. Depositories would then need to hold higher levels of excess reserves as a precaution against such overdrafts, and demand for these excesses would vary from day to day and be difficult to predict. For example, on days when payment flows are particularly heavy and uncertain, or when the distribution of reserves around the banking system is substantially different from normal, depositories need a higher than usual level of these excess balances as a precaution against the risk of overdrafts. The uncertainties about the level of balances that depositories wish to hold on a given day would make it harder for the Federal Reserve to determine the appropriate daily quantity of balances to supply to the market to keep the federal funds rate near the target level set by the FOMC. Moreover, if the demand for balances were determined largely by daily precautionary demands for excess reserves, there would be less scope for arbitrage of the funds rate by depositories across the days of a maintenance period. As a result, the funds rate could become more volatile and could diverge markedly at times from its targeted level. Moderate levels of volatility are not a concern for monetary policy, in part because the Federal Reserve now announces the target federal funds rate, eliminating the possibility that fluctuations in the actual funds rate in the market would give misleading signals about monetary policy. A significant increase in volatility in the federal funds rate, however, would be of concern to the extent that it affects other overnight interest rates, raising funding risks for most large banks, securities dealers, and other money market participants. Suppliers of funds to the overnight markets, including many small banks and thrifts, would face greater uncertainty about the returns they would earn and market participants would incur additional costs in managing their funding to limit their exposure to the heightened risks. As we have previously testified, the issue of potential volatility in the funds rate has arisen in recent years because of substantial declines in required reserve balances owing to the reserve-avoidance activities of depository institutions. Depositories have always attempted to reduce required reserve balances to a minimum, in large part because those balances earn no interest. Since the mid-1970s, some commercial banks have done so by sweeping the reservable transaction deposits of larger businesses into instruments that are not subject to reserve requirements. These wholesale business "sweeps" not only have avoided reserve requirements, but also have allowed some businesses to earn interest on instruments that are effectively equivalent to demand deposits. In recent years, developments in information systems have allowed depository institutions to sweep transaction deposits of retail customers into nonreservable accounts. These retail sweep programs use computerized systems to transfer consumer and some small business transaction deposits, which are subject to reserve requirements, into savings accounts, which are not. Largely because of such programs, required reserve balances have dropped from about $28 billion in late 1993 to around $7 billion or $8 billion today. Despite the reductions in required reserve balances, the federal funds rate has not become more volatile to date. To an extent, this stability reflects the increasingly important role of contractual clearing balances, which have risen over the last decade in part as banks have sought to reduce risks of overdrafts after they implement retail sweep programs. As I noted previously, clearing balances earn implicit interest; reserve balances do not. Moreover, the declines in short-term interest rates since early 2001 have reduced the opportunity costs of holding transaction deposits and reserves, thereby slowing the further spread of sweep programs. Lower interest rates have also boosted the amount of contractual clearing balances needed to be held to pay for any given level of Federal Reserve services. In addition, improvements in information technology have evidently allowed depository institutions to become much more adept at managing their reserve positions, and as a result, their needs for day-to-day precautionary balances have fallen considerably. A number of measures taken by the Federal Reserve also have helped to foster stability in the funds market. These include improvements in the timeliness of account information provided to depository institutions; more frequent open market operations geared increasingly to daily payment needs rather than two-week-average requirements; a shift to lagged reserve requirements, which gives depositories and the Federal Reserve advance information on the demand for reserves; and improved procedures for estimating reserve demand. However, if interest rates were to return to higher levels, sweep activity could intensify again and potentially become a concern. To prevent the sum of required reserve and contractual clearing balances from dropping even lower and to diminish the incentives for depositories to engage in wasteful reserve-avoidance activities, the Federal Reserve has long sought authorization to pay interest on required reserve balances and to pay explicit interest on contractual clearing balances. H.R. 758 would provide such authorization. With interest paid on required reserve balances, some sweep programs would likely be unwound, and new programs would be less likely to be implemented, thereby helping to boost the level of such balances. Eliminating such wasteful reserve-avoidance activities would also tend to improve the efficiency of the financial sector. Payment of explicit interest on contractual clearing balances could result in an increase in the level of these balances; some depositories are currently constrained in the amount of such balances that can earn usable credits because of their limited use of Federal Reserve services. Moreover, payment of explicit interest would help to maintain the level of clearing balances at a time of rising interest rates. At present, some depositories pay for all their Federal Reserve services with credits earned on clearing balances; these institutions would not be able to use their additional credits if interest rates were to rise. If enough institutions were in this position, contractual clearing balances might drop below levels needed to be helpful for the implementation of monetary policy. With explicit interest, the level of balances on which interest could be effectively earned would not be limited to the level of charges incurred for the use of Federal Reserve services. Therefore, these depositories would not be impelled to reduce their balances when interest rates rise. The authorization to pay interest on excess reserve balances, contained in H.R. 758, would be a potentially useful addition to the monetary toolkit of the Federal Reserve, although such interest payments are not needed for monetary policy purposes at the current time. An interest rate on excess reserves would tend to act as a floor on overnight interbank lending rates; a depository would not likely lend balances to another depository at a lower interest rate than it could earn by keeping the excess funds in its account at the Federal Reserve. Some other central banks pay interest on non-reserve deposits to provide such a floor for interest rates and also use a penalty interest rate on their lending to provide a ceiling for overnight rates. In January of this year, the Federal Reserve instituted a lending facility that should similarly help to mitigate upward spikes in overnight interest rates. It is unclear how well a ceiling and floor arrangement, as used by other central banks, would work in the United States, but the ability to pay interest on excess reserves might prove useful in the future as policy implementation evolves. At present, the Federal Reserve is constrained in its flexibility to adjust reserve requirements. By law, the ratio of required reserves on transaction deposits above a certain level must be set between 8 and 14 percent. The authorization of increased flexibility in setting reserve requirements, included in H.R. 758, would allow the Federal Reserve to consider the possibility of reducing reserve requirements below the minimum levels currently allowed by law, and even, conceivably, to zero at some point in the future, provided we are also granted the authority to pay interest on contractual clearing balances to ensure a stable and predictable demand for the remaining deposit balances at the Federal Reserve, an essential pillar for the effective implementation of monetary policy. If explicit interest could be paid on contractual clearing balances, the level of such balances could potentially be high and stable enough for monetary policy to be implemented with existing procedures for open market operations, even with lower or zero required reserve balances. If the Federal Reserve were granted the additional authorities included in H.R. 758, we would carefully study the new range of possible strategies for implementing monetary policy in the most efficient possible way for banks, the markets, and the Federal Reserve. H.R. 758 also includes a technical provision related to pass-through reserves. This provision would extend to banks that are members of the Federal Reserve System a privilege that was granted to nonmember institutions at the time of the Depository Institutions Deregulation and Monetary Control Act of 1980. It would allow member banks to count as reserves their deposits in affiliated or correspondent banks that are in turn "passed through" by those banks to Federal Reserve Banks as required reserve balances. The provision would remove a constraint on some banks' reserve management and would cause no difficulties for the Federal Reserve in implementing monetary policy. The Board supports it. The efficiency of our financial sector also would be improved by eliminating the prohibition of interest on demand deposits, as provided for in H.R. 859. This prohibition was enacted during the Great Depression, a time when Congress was concerned that large money center banks might have earlier bid deposits away from country banks to make loans to stock market speculators, depriving rural areas of financing. It is doubtful that the rationale for this prohibition was ever valid, and it is certainly no longer applicable today. Funds flow freely around the country, and among banks of all sizes, to find the most profitable lending opportunities, using a wide variety of market mechanisms, including the federal funds market. Moreover, Congress authorized interest payments on household checking accounts with the approval of nationwide NOW accounts in the early 1980s. The absence of interest on demand deposits, which are held predominantly by businesses, is no bar to the movement of funds from depositories with surplus funds--whatever their size or location--to the markets where the funding can be profitably employed. In addition, small firms in rural areas are able to bypass their local banks and invest in money market mutual funds with transaction capabilities. Indeed, smaller banks have complained that they are unable to compete for the deposits of businesses precisely because of their inability to offer interest on demand deposits. The prohibition of interest on demand deposits distorts the pricing of transaction deposits and associated bank services. In order to compete for the liquid assets of businesses, banks set up complicated procedures to pay implicit interest on compensating balance accounts. Banks also spend resources--and charge fees--for sweeping the excess demand deposits of businesses into money market investments on a nightly basis. To be sure, the progress of computer technology has reduced the cost of such systems over time. However, the expenses are not trivial, particularly when substantial efforts are needed to upgrade such automation systems or to integrate the diverse systems of merging banks. Such expenses waste resources and would be unnecessary if interest were allowed to be paid on both demand deposits and the reserve balances that must be held against them. The prohibition of interest on demand deposits also distorts the pricing of other bank products. Many demand deposits are not compensating balances, and because banks cannot pay explicit interest, they often try to attract these deposits through the provision of services below their actual cost. When services are offered below cost, they tend to be overused to the extent that the benefits of consuming them are less than the costs to society of producing them. H.R. 859 would delay the effectiveness of the authorization of interest on demand deposits for one year. The Federal Reserve Board believes that a short implementation delay of one year, or even less, would be in the best interest of the public and the efficiency of our financial sector. A provision of H.R. 758 would in effect allow implicit interest to be paid on demand deposits without any delay through a new type of sweep arrangement, but this provision would not promote efficiency. It would allow banks to offer a reservable money market deposit account (MMDA) on which twenty-four transfers a month could be undertaken to other accounts of the same depositor. Banks would be able to sweep balances from demand deposits into these MMDAs each night, pay interest on them, and then sweep them back into demand deposits the next day. This type of account would likely permit banks to pay interest on demand deposits more selectively than with direct interest payments. The twenty-four-transfer MMDA, which would be useful only during the transition period before direct interest payments were allowed, could be implemented at lower cost by banks already having sweep programs. However, other banks would face a competitive disadvantage and pressures to incur the cost of setting up this new program for the one-year interim period. Moreover, some businesses would not benefit from this MMDA. Hence, the Board does not advocate this twenty-four-transfer account. Small businesses that currently earn no interest on their checking accounts would see important benefits from interest on demand deposits. Larger firms, too, would benefit as direct interest payments replaced more costly sweep and compensating balance arrangements. For banks, interest on demand deposits would increase costs, at least in the short run. However, interest on required reserve balances and possibly a lower burden associated with reduced reserve requirements would help to offset the rise in costs for some banks. And to the extent that banks were underpricing some services to attract these "free" deposits, those prices would adjust to reflect costs. Over time, these measures should help the banking sector attract liquid funds in competition with nonbank institutions and direct market investments by businesses. Small banks in particular should be able to bid for business demand deposits on a more level playing field vis-ï¿½-vis both nonbank competition and large banks using sweep programs for such deposits. Moreover, large and small banks will benefit from the elimination of unnecessary costs associated with sweep programs and other reserve-avoidance procedures. The payment of interest on demand deposits would have no direct effect on federal revenues, as interest payments would be deductible for banks but taxable for the firms that received them. However, the payment of interest on required reserve balances would reduce the revenues received by the Treasury from the Federal Reserve. The extent of the revenue loss, however, has fallen over the last decade as banks have increasingly implemented reserve-avoidance techniques. Paying interest on contractual clearing balances would primarily involve a switch to explicit interest from the implicit interest currently paid in the form of credits, and therefore would have essentially no net cost to the Treasury. The payment of interest on excess reserves could also be authorized without immediate effect on the budget because the Federal Reserve does not expect to use that authority in the years immediately ahead. H.R. 758 includes a provision to transfer some of the capital surplus of the Federal Reserve Banks to the Treasury in order to cover the budgetary costs of paying interest on required reserve balances. The Board has consistently pointed out that such transfers are not true offsets to higher budgetary costs. Let me take a moment to explain why. The Federal Reserve System derives the bulk of its revenues from interest earnings on Treasury securities that it has obtained through open market operations. The System returns a very high proportion of its earnings every year to the Treasury. In 2002, it turned over $24.5 billion, or about 94 percent of its earnings. In most years, the System retains a small percentage of those earnings in its surplus account. The surplus account is a capital account on the Federal Reserve Banks' balance sheets. Since 1964, the Federal Reserve has followed the general practice of allowing the surplus to match the paid-in capital of member banks. Each member bank is required by law to subscribe to the capital stock of its Reserve Bank in an amount equal to 6 percent of its own capital and surplus. The Board requires that half of that subscribed capital be paid in. The Federal Reserve's surplus account is currently about $8-1/2 billion, while its total capital amounts to about $17-1/2 billion. Total assets of the Federal Reserve are around $720 billion. Traditionally, the Federal Reserve and virtually all other central banks have maintained an appreciable level of capital. Maintaining a surplus account may help support the perception of the central bank as a stable and independent institution by ensuring that its assets remain comfortably in excess of its liabilities. However, the need for capital is limited by the modest variability of the Federal Reserve's profits, the safety of its primary asset, Treasury securities, and the substantial regular flow of earnings from its portfolio of securities. Moreover, a central bank can avoid defaulting on financial obligations by issuing additional currency to discharge them. As a consequence, it is difficult to defend a particular level of surplus as clearly necessary and appropriate. Whatever the benefits of the surplus account, it should be emphasized that its maintenance is costless to the Treasury and to taxpayers. Indeed, a transfer of Federal Reserve surplus to the Treasury would provide no true budgetary savings or offset to expenses. The transfer would allow the Treasury to issue fewer securities, but the Federal Reserve would need to lower its holdings of Treasury securities by the same amount to make the transfer. Thus, the level of Treasury debt held by the private sector would be unchanged, and the Treasury's interest payments, net of receipts from the Federal Reserve, would also be unaffected. Over the years, Congress generally has concurred with this view, with a few exceptions. Indeed, congressional budget resolutions passed in 1996, 1997, 2000, and 2001, as well as a report last year by the General Accounting Office, noted that transfers of surplus have no real budgetary or economic effects. In summary, the Federal Reserve Board strongly supports the proposals in H.R. 859 and H.R. 758 that would authorize the payment of interest on demand deposits and on balances held by depository institutions at Reserve Banks, as well as increased flexibility in the setting of reserve requirements. We believe these steps would improve the efficiency of our financial sector, make a wider variety of interest-bearing accounts available to more bank customers, and better ensure the efficient conduct of monetary policy in the future.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the termination of the enforcement actions listed below. Terminations of enforcement actions are listed on the Federal Reserve's public web site, , as they occur. Banco Popular de Puerto Rico, Hato Rey, Puerto Rico Written Agreement dated March 9, 2000 Terminated January 16, 2003 Belmont Bancorp, St. Clairsville, Ohio Written Agreement dated August 3, 1999 Terminated January 10, 2003 Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentario, S.A., and its New York branch and Miami Agency Written Agreement dated June 12, 2000 Terminated February 21, 2003 Bank of Rogers, Rogers, Arkansas Cease and Desist Order dated July 12, 2001 Terminated December 12, 2002 Grimes Capital Corporation, Houston, Texas Written Agreement dated July 14, 1999 Terminated November 4, 2002 Valley Independent Bank, El Centro, California Written Agreement dated January 8, 2001 Terminated October 31, 2002 Guaranty Financial Corporation and Guaranty Bank, Charlottesville, Virginia Written Agreement dated October 26, 2000 Terminated October 23, 2002 The Daiwa Bank, Limited, Osaka, Japan, and Daiwa Bank and Trust Company, New York, New York Enforcement Actions dated February 2, 1996 Terminated September 25, 2002 First Security Bancshares, Inc., Lake Park, Iowa, Security State Bank, Milford, Iowa Written Agreement dated August 6, 1999 Terminated September 25, 2002 Cerritos Valley Bancorp and Cerritos Valley Bank, Artesia California Written Agreement dated October 15, 2001 Terminated August 15, 2002 CSB Bancorp, Inc., Millersburg, Ohio Written Agreement dated November 22, 2000 Terminated June 17, 2002
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan At the Banque de France International Symposium on Monetary Policy, Economic Cycle, and Financial Dynamics, Paris, France (via satellite) March 7, 2003 Global Finance: Is It Slowing? For at least the past twenty years, the process of financial globalization has been rapidly advancing. The development of new financial products, notably a wide variety of over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives, and the removal of many barriers to international capital mobility have tightened linkages among global financial markets. As a result, capital has flowed more freely across national borders in search of the highest risk-adjusted rates of return. At some point, globalization undoubtedly will reach maturity. Financial innovation will slow as we approach a world in which financial markets are complete in the sense that all financial risks can be efficiently transferred to those most willing to bear them. Equivalently, as institutional and legal impediments to cross-border flows are eliminated, the bias in the allocation of savings toward local investments will be reduced to its minimum, and the opportunity for arbitrage across national markets will disappear. In my lecture today, I will consider whether there are signs that globalization is nearing maturity. In particular, has the pace of financial innovation begun to slow? Do the patterns of capital flows suggest that global financial markets are approaching full integration? And, most important, what do the answers to these questions imply regarding the potential for future contributions of globalization to economic growth and financial stability? Has the Pace of Financial Innovation Begun to Slow? Although the pace of innovation cannot be measured with precision, important new instruments continue to emerge. Credit derivatives arose only in the early to mid-1990s. Still more recent has been the marriage of derivatives and securitization techniques in the form of synthetic collateralized debt obligations (CDOs). These instruments have broadened the range of investors willing to provide credit protection by pooling and unbundling credit risk through the creation of securities that best fit their preferences for risk and return. The combination of derivatives and securitization techniques is being applied to a growing range of underlying assets. Additionally, the way that OTC derivatives are traded and settled clearly could be significantly improved. Despite, or perhaps because of, the rapid pace of product development, the derivatives industry still executes trades predominantly by telephone and confirms them by fax. Systems for the electronic execution and confirmation of trades require a degree of standardization and a large measure of cooperation that are not required for developing new instruments. Still, the derivatives industry has a long history of cooperating to standardize documentation, and it is disappointing that so little progress has been made in adopting efficient and reliable means of executing and confirming trades. We must also consider how broadly the recent innovations have been adopted. Of course, the growth of OTC derivatives over the past twenty years has been spectacular and shows no obvious signs of abating. The latest estimate by the Bank for International Settlements of the worldwide notional amount of OTC derivatives outstanding reached $128 trillion in June 2002, a figure more than 25 percent larger than that recorded a year earlier. Such derivatives have become indispensable risk-management tools for many of the largest corporations. Yet a recent study drawing on U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission filings indicated that, as of year-end 1997, only a little more than half of the 1,000 largest U.S. non-financial corporations used OTC or exchange-traded derivatives. More detailed, comprehensive and timely data are available for American banking organizations. Those data show that although the fifty largest U.S. banking organizations all used derivatives as of September 2002, only 5 percent of all U.S. banking firms used any type of derivative. In the case of OTC credit derivatives, which have proved to be particularly effective in risk management, a mere 0.2 percent of U.S. banking organizations have begun to use such tools. Even among the fifty largest, less than half use these instruments. Thus, judging from the data on the use of derivatives, the potential for financial innovation to have a broader impact and thereby to continue contributing to globalization appears considerable. Evidence of Financial Globalization in Capital Flows Implicit in the criterion for complete globalization that opportunities for cross-border arbitrage disappear is that global savings should flow irrespective of location to investment in projects with the highest risk-adjusted rate of return. A half-century ago, Harry Markowitz showed mathematically that an investor can reduce the variance, and hence the riskiness, of his portfolio for a given expected return by diversifying into assets with imperfectly correlated returns. Subsequent research showed that foreign assets are excellent candidates for diversification. Direct barriers to capital flows, such as restrictions on foreign purchases of domestic assets and limitations on the ability of domestic residents to invest abroad, have promoted home bias, although, as I will discuss shortly, many such direct obstacles in recent decades have been mitigated. Indirect barriers, such as high costs of foreign transactions, inadequate information on foreign investments and cultural and linguistic differences between foreign and domestic investors, are also seen as sustaining home bias. And finally, there are exchange rate and country risks. Wild swings in exchange rates can entirely erase earnings on foreign assets, even as those same assets yield a healthy return in local currencies. Concern over who will bear the exchange-rate risk or, alternatively, who will bear the costs of hedging that risk are an additional factor retarding international investment. Along with foreign exchange risk, political risk helps to drive a wedge between foreign and domestic perceptions of the expected risk-adjusted return to an asset. The consequence of such dual expectations is a lower market clearing price for those assets and a lower level of foreign investment than would exist in the absence of such distortions. Aside from any direct or indirect barriers, people seem to prefer to invest in familiar local businesses even though currency and country risks do not exist. The United States has no barriers to interstate investment, and the states share a common currency, culture, language, and legal system, yet studies have shown that individual investors and even professional money managers have a slight preference for investments in their own communities and states. Trust, so crucial an aspect of investing, is most likely to be fostered by the familiarity of local communities. Researchers have consistently found that, in general, investors direct too much of their savings domestically. Owing to risk aversion, they tend, to their own detriment, to over-discount foreign returns. Such suboptimal allocation of capital lowers living standards everywhere. In their seminal paper twenty years ago, Feldstein and Horioka pointed out that, on net, nations' savings are generally invested domestically. Their research implies that global savings are inefficiently distributed to investment, meaning that savers are bearing too much risk for the returns they achieve and that countries with high-potential investment projects are getting less financing than they could productively employ. A clear benefit of financial globalization is that, to the extent that it reduces home bias, savings will be better directed to the most promising investments in the world, increasing global economic growth and prosperity. However, so long as risk aversion exists and trust is enhanced by local familiarity, we cannot expect that home bias will fully dissipate. Nevertheless, is globalization at least reducing home bias toward its minimum level? Survey data collected in the United States suggest a large swing toward foreign investment. U.S. residents began to increase the share of foreign assets in their portfolios from less than 9 percent in the late 1970s to about 15 percent by the mid-1990s. Since then, the trend has leveled off. The increased allocation to foreign assets was broad based, encompassing portfolio flows into debt and equity securities as well as foreign direct investment. A substantial part of the swing to holdings of foreign assets by U.S. residents coincided with a significant liberalization of capital accounts in both developed and emerging-market economies. In Western Europe, as goods markets became increasingly integrated, capital accounts followed suit. Starting in the 1980s, controls on foreign exchange and on inbound and outbound capital flows were relaxed. In Japan, the most-restrictive capital controls were relaxed in the early 1980s, but major liberalization came in the mid-1990s with the "Big Bang" financial reform measures. Similarly, many emerging-market economies removed or weakened currency and capital account controls in the 1990s. One cross-country study finds that, from 1983 to 1998, capital account openness improved markedly. With increased experience, U.S. investors doubtless improved their familiarity with foreign investment opportunities, and home bias, accordingly, declined. Data on financial flows into the United States indicate that foreign purchases of U.S. securities and foreign direct investment in the United States began to pick up in the early 1990s, and it has surged in the past four years. A similar pattern is apparent in the accumulated foreign holdings of securities issued by U.S. residents. As late as 1998, foreign residents owned just 6 percent of U.S. equities, but by 2001 that figure had risen to almost 15 percent. Reliable data on capital flows and securities holdings outside the United States are scarce, but what data we can muster tell a similar story. Although international diversification appears to have increased over the past two decades, it remains puzzling that, as I mentioned previously, shares of foreign assets in U.S. residents' portfolios began to plateau in the mid-1990s at levels still well below full diversification. This outcome might indicate either that substantial indirect barriers to capital flows still exist or that an irreducible home bias among U.S. investors is inhibiting geographic diversification. Formidable indirect institutional barriers to lowering home bias beyond those to which I alluded earlier obviously do remain. Legal restrictions on foreign ownership of domestic assets or limits on the flow of domestic funds abroad can be significant. Informal disclosure practices that favor local investors may lead to information asymmetries--that is, an advantage to domestic residents in acquiring information about prospective investments--that discourage foreign investment in a country. These asymmetries may be exacerbated by differences in corporate governance and local norms of fairness that diverge from foreign standards, undercutting trust. This unfamiliarity fosters risk aversion and elevates home bias. Recent studies suggest that differing disclosure and corporate governance standards preserve home bias. Researchers have shown that, in most countries, holding a controlling interest in a firm yields significant benefits that do not accrue to minority shareholders, and that a substantial portion of home bias in those countries can be attributed to local holdings of closely held firms. Additionally, staff at the Federal Reserve Board and International Monetary Fund have shown that, for firms from emerging-market economies that meet U.S. standards for disclosure and protection of minority shareholder rights, U.S. residents hold the theoretically predicted proportion of company shares in their portfolios. Thus, it appears that an improvement in global reporting and corporate governance standards could significantly reduce global home bias. So do derivatives markets that help to narrow the wedge between the perceived risk-adjusted returns of foreign and domestic residents on any particular investment. Foreign exchange forward contracts and swaps have helped reduce the overall risk of securities denominated in foreign currencies or to transfer the risks to agents with either a greater appetite for risk or a longer investment horizon over which to smooth losses. Even the imposition of capital controls, foreign exchange restrictions, or devaluations of fixed currencies can now be at least partially hedged through nondeliverable forward contracts that settle in dollars for the change in value of an underlying currency over some pre-determined period. Credit default swaps now allow agents to hedge or exchange even sovereign risk. Argentina's recent default provided a powerful test of these new derivatives and proved their worth, perhaps even helping to limit contagion. The further development of derivatives markets, particularly in smaller economies where idiosyncratic risk may be more difficult to hedge, will likely facilitate greater cross-border flows and a more productive distribution of global savings. The coincident development of local derivatives markets may facilitate the development of local currency bond markets in small or emerging-market economies by giving foreign and domestic investors more tools with which to hedge their exposure to the country risk. What Are the Real Economic Implications of Financial Globalization? It should be apparent that the process of financial globalization has come a long way but is as yet incomplete. Further development should lead to the enrichment and growth of developing economies as global savings are efficiently directed to capital accumulation in those countries where the marginal product of capital is highest. Another possible result of the process of financial globalization is increasingly large international payment imbalances as countries exporting capital run current account surpluses and those receiving capital run current account deficits. However, such developments should not necessarily be taken as a sign of a systemic problem. They can, in fact, be a sign that the global economy is becoming more efficient at directing capital to assets with the highest risk-adjusted rate of return. Along the way, the economies that liberalize first and to the greatest extent, and credibly commit to respect the property rights of foreigners, may receive the greater portion of free-flowing capital and thus potentially both greater net inflows and larger current account deficits. This process may have contributed to the recent expansion of the U.S. current account deficit. That expansion coincided with a steady appreciation of the U.S. dollar in the late 1990s, suggesting that net demand for U.S. assets was an important factor driving the significant widening of the U.S. current account deficit. As noted earlier, U.S. savers' appetite for increasing the share of their portfolio devoted to foreign assets began to wane, and at roughly the same time capital account liberalization in other countries freed a large pool of savings to be invested internationally. These newly freed savings flowed disproportionately to the United States, where as a consequence one must assume risk-adjusted returns were perceived to be highest. Apparently, rapid U.S. productivity gains not seen elsewhere raised expectations for the return to capital on U.S. assets. Moreover, the Asian crisis in 1997 combined with the Russian default a year later to reverse global investors' enthusiasm for investments in developing economies. The crises reminded foreign investors of the indirect barriers that continue to exist, especially in the developing world: a lack of adequate corporate disclosure and governance; underdeveloped, and often capricious, legal structures for contract dissolution and bankruptcy; and ex post government intervention in favor of domestic residents over foreign investors. Capital flows to the emerging-market economies, which had been at record levels throughout the early 1990s, dried up as a result. In contrast, the deep and broad financial markets of the United States and a well-developed legal system with a long history of respect for private property drew record financial flows into the United States. The lesson we should draw, however, is not that continued financial globalization will draw ever greater amounts of capital to the United States or even to the industrial world more generally. There are limits to the accumulation of net claims against an economy that persistent current account deficits imply. The cost of servicing such claims adds to the current account deficit and, under certain circumstances, can be destabilizing. The gross size of global quarterly or annual surpluses and matching deficits should rise as indirect barriers to cross-border investment are eliminated and home bias is reduced. However, portfolio adjustments will presumably continuously ameliorate such imbalances. As international accounting and reporting standards become better, information asymmetries that currently exist between foreign and domestic investors will diminish. Adequate disclosure will, one hopes, accompany the development of institutions that will reduce corruption, and improve corporate governance, respect for private property and the rights of minority shareholders. Together with the growth of deeper and broader markets for derivatives, these developments should lower the risk of cross-border investment, making a wider array of the world's assets more attractive to international investors. Despite much progress, the process of global financial integration is far from complete. Though most direct barriers to international capital flows have been eliminated, numerous indirect barriers remain in place. While a dazzling array of financial innovations has sprouted in recent decades, the inability of market participants to hedge, trade, or share certain risks, especially those related to cross-border investment, implies that financial markets still need further innovation and deepening. Such barriers to capital flows preserve home bias and impede the efficient distribution of global savings to the most productive investments. We must remember that as financial globalization matures it will have consequences to economies that we cannot ignore. Global capital flows will increase in size and will switch directions more easily. As a result, temporary imbalances will naturally occur from time to time. To counter these, we need to consider various multilateral policy initiatives, from international accounting standards to international capital requirements for banks, from a "New Financial Architecture" to crisis prevention and resolution mechanisms. Also, market participants will need to enhance their ability to manage vast quantities of collateral that are integral to globalized modern finance. Our goals should include not only global financial stability, but also the promotion of free flowing capital directed to its most productive uses throughout the world. That goal will bring about greater financial stability and a more prosperous future for all who choose to participate in the global economy. Footnotes 1. See W. Guay and S.P. Kothari, "How Much Do Firms Hedge with Derivatives?" Journal of Financial Economics , forthcoming. 2. Risk-neutral investors, if they exist, will price an asset solely on the basis of its expected return. But at best, very few humans are risk neutral. In general, investors require an asset's price to be discounted below the risk-neutral price as compensation for bearing risk. The amount of compensation required will vary both with the actual riskiness, or variance, of the asset's returns and with the investor's degree of risk aversion. If familiarity reduces an investor's uncertainty over expected returns to an asset, one would expect that that investor would discount unfamiliar assets more heavily than familiar assets. In such a case, differences between foreign and domestic investors' familiarity with an investment would lead to under-investment by foreigners relative to domestic investors, leaving an irreducible minimum bias toward investing locally. It is thus total risk, not neutral risk, that is arbitraged. 3. H. Markowitz,"Portfolio Selection," Journal of Finance , vol. 7, no. 1 (1952), pp. 77-91. 4. See H.G. Grubel, "Internationally Diversified Portfolios," American Economic Review , vol. 58 (1968), pp. 1299-314; or B.H. Solnik, "Why Not Diversify Internationally Rather than Domestically?" Financial Analyst Journal , vol. 30 (1974), pp. 91-135. 5. M. Feldstein and C. Horioka, "Domestic Savings and International Capital Flows," Economic Journal , vol. 90 (1980), pp. 314-29. 6. J. Miniane, "A New Set of Measures on Capital Account Restrictions," mimeo, Johns Hopkins University, November 2000. 7. See A. Dyck and L. Zingales, "Why are private benefits of control so large in certain countries and what effect does this have on their financial development?" mimeo, University of Chicago, 2001; or T. Nenova, "The value of corporate votes and control benefits: cross-country analysis," Journal of Financial Economics , forthcoming; and M. Dahlquist et alia, "Corporate governance and the home bias," Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis , forthcoming. 8. H. J. Edison and F. E. Warnock, "U.S. investors' emerging market equity portfolios: a security-level analysis," prepared for the IMF Global Linkages Conference , January 2003.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board today announced its approval of the applications and notice under the Bank Holding Company Act ("BHC Act") by M&T Bank Corporation, Buffalo, New York ("M&T"), to merge with Allfirst Financial Inc., Baltimore, Maryland ("Allfirst"), and to indirectly acquire certain nonbanking subsidiaries of Allfirst. In addition, the Board approved the application under the Bank Merger Act by Manufacturers & Traders Trust Company, also in Buffalo, to merge with Allfirst Bank, also in Baltimore. The Board also approved a related application under the BHC Act by Allied Irish Banks, p.l.c., Dublin, Ireland, the parent company of Allfirst, to acquire up to 25 percent of the voting shares of M&T. Attached are the Board's Orders relating to these actions.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the issuance of an Order to Cease and Desist and of Prohibition against Terry Frierson, a former chief executive officer, president, and institution-affiliated party of MSB Shares, Inc., and the Midsouth Bank, Jonesboro, Arkansas. A copy of the Cease and Desist Order is attached.
Remarks by Governor Mark W. Olson At the Conference on "Whither the Community Bank?" Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois March 13, 2003 Community Bank Performance in the Twenty-first Century A natural place to begin these remarks about the future of community banking is in the present, with a snapshot of where we are now. The year that just ended was one of record profits for the industry as a whole, and for community banks in particular. Community banks-- that is, those with assets of less than $1 billion--earned $12.5 billion, or 11.7 percent, on equity, an increase of 80 basis points over 2001. This past year was one in which commercial loan demand was very weak, and some of our largest banks stumbled. Community banks were able to adapt successfully to these conditions and made significant changes, in particular to their balance sheets. Low interest rates, strong home values and weak equity markets all had important roles to play. Total assets of community banks grew 3.7 percent, about the same as 2001, after several years of declines or minor increases. Nearly all of this year's loan growth came in lending secured by real estate. Construction and other commercial real estate lending represented about two-thirds of that growth and rose more than 10 percent during the year. Loans drawn under home equity lines of credit grew nearly 25 percent. Outside of the loan portfolio, real estate was an important story as well. Holdings of residential mortgage pass-through securities grew 20 percent in 2002, part of an interesting reversal in community bank balance sheet trends. Securities holdings increased in 2002 after eight consecutive years of decline, while total loans have declined only once over the same period (in 1998). Over the past two years, community bank holdings of mortgage pass-through securities have risen some 50 percent. By and large, lending that is not secured in some fashion by real estate declined last year. Consumer loans declined nearly 9 percent, a bit faster than in 2001, while commercial and industrial loans were off very slightly. Net interest margins rose slightly, to 4.29 percent, but remain about 25 basis points below levels that prevailed in the first half of the 1990s. Partly as a result of low interest rates and uncertainty in the stock market, Money Market Deposit Account (MMDA) and savings deposits grew 10 percent in both 2001 and 2002 and, at this point, fund nearly 25 percent of community bank assets. For the first time on record, these balances exceeded the volume of small-denomination certificates of deposit (that is, those under $100,000), although some of the CD balances may have been transferred to money market or savings accounts. Noninterest income overall remained at about 1.4 percent of assets, although up slightly (about 4 basis points) from 2001. Deposit growth overall also brought higher deposit account fees. Mortgage origination revenues were aided by the refinancing boom, although their beneficial effects were moderated by write-downs of servicing rights at those institutions with mortgage-servicing portfolios. Income from fiduciary activities--trust fees--also declined, attributable in large part to weakness in equity markets. Problem credits remain elevated but, on the whole, manageable. Nonperforming assets continued to rise moderately, reaching 0.95 percent of loans at year's end. While significant, this figure is less than half the 2.46 percent ratio seen in 1992. Loan losses amounted to 40 basis points of loans, about the same as 2001. Provisions once again exceeded charge-offs, at 0.57 percent of loans, allowing loan-loss reserves to remain at about 1.45 percent of loans and about 2.0 times nonaccrual loans. Although total assets rose during the year, 2002 also brought further consolidation in the number of community banks. At year's end, there were just under 7,500 community banks, down 200 from 2001 and some 3,600 from ten years earlier. There are indications that some mergers took place within banking groups with multiple bank subsidiaries in the wake of the Riegle-Neal Act as a step toward improved operating efficiency. Vitality of the community bank franchise As the financial results suggest, the community banking franchise remains vital and vibrant. It's worth talking about that for a minute. Consolidation is not the right or only measure of value in a community bank franchise. This value is better measured in economic terms, that is, by the flows of start-up capital and long-term financial returns on capital invested. Over the past five years, for every three bank charters that have disappeared through consolidation, one new charter has been approved. These new charters require very tangible investment of investor capital. Since January 2000, some $2 billion to $2.5 billion has been invested in new bank charters. As an important aside to the number of new banks, for some time 75 percent of all new charters issued have been state bank charters. In 2002, the ratio was still high, although closer to two-thirds. The dual banking system, which is such an important part of our financial heritage, continues to function well. Our nation's state banking commissioners can claim much of the credit for this result, having facilitated banks' interest in branching across state lines by developing home/host state bank supervision accords. This influx of start-up capital reflects the longer-term financial success of community banking as a business model. Over time, return on equity for the bulk of community banks has been consistently high: Returns for the top 60 percent of community banks have exceeded 11 percent to 12 percent annually. As noted earlier, aggregate assets have been on the rise since 1998, and are now 5 percent higher than in 1992 even though there are significantly fewer institutions. Strategic sources of this vitality The basic business story behind this vitality is familiar. It is keyed to community banks' ability to attract deposits, draw upon natural lending opportunities, and leverage their connections with the community. Community banks continue to thrive by providing retail-banking customers with the convenient locations, high-quality service, and attractive prices that they desire. Surveys conducted by the Federal Reserve Board indicate that the single most important factor influencing a customer's choice of banks is the location of the institution's branches. In the 2001 Survey of Consumer Finances, approximately 43 percent of households report that the primary reason for choosing the institution where they have their main checking account is the location of the institution's offices. Likewise, data collected in the 1998 Survey of Small Business Finances indicate that, for approximately 30 percent of small businesses in the United States, the most important reason for selecting their primary financial institution is "location of offices" or "convenience." Consistent with these findings, responses to questions included in the Michigan Surveys of Consumers in June, July and August 1999 indicate that the most important reason households change banks is a household relocation. Other important factors underlying household choice of banks include low fees or minimum balance requirements and the ability to obtain many services at one place. For small businesses, the existence of a prior business or personal relationship with the institution or someone affiliated with the institution is a frequently cited reason for choosing a particular provider. Once a household has chosen a particular depository institution as the location for its main checking account, there is a strong tendency to stick with that institution. According to the Michigan Survey, the median tenure at a depository institution is ten years. The most frequently reported reasons for remaining with a bank are customer service and location. Among those households that changed banks for reasons other than household relocation, the most frequently cited factors are better customer service and more attractive prices. These patterns of behavior among households and small businesses bode well for the future of community banking. They do not suggest that community banks face any inherent disadvantage relative to larger institutions when it comes to attracting and retaining retail customers. Common sense, as well as the data, suggests that there isn't a single blueprint for a successful community bank. One idea that is commonly cited is that community banks are at a disadvantage in terms of operating efficiency and the ability to generate fee income. Let's look first at operating efficiency and then define some terms. One measure of efficiency commonly used in the industry is the efficiency ratio, which compares the level of non-interest expense needed to support one dollar of operating revenue. A lower ratio thus indicates a more efficient bank. In comparing these efficiency ratios for all insured commercial banks in the United States between 1997 and 2001, some interesting results emerge. One way of comparing these ratios across size categories is to look at the median bank in each category--that is, if you lined up all the banks in a size grouping from highest to lowest in terms of their efficiency ratios, the one that ends up in the middle of the list is the median. For our purposes, we can treat the middle bank as the typical bank in that group. The median efficiency ratio for larger banks--that is, those with more than $5 billion in assets--ranged between 57 percent and 62 percent between 1997 and 2001. The median ratio for community banks indeed comes out higher, at between 60 percent and 67 percent. In other words, by this measure, a typical community bank needs to spend 3 to 5 cents more than its large-bank counterpart to generate one dollar of operating revenue. That difference is material, but not overwhelming. But that median is not the whole story. There is a wide range of efficiency ratios across the population of community banks, and many community banks are indeed not at a disadvantage at all. As a general proposition, some 40 percent of community banks have efficiency ratios that match or fall below that of the typical large bank. The top 10 percent of community banks are extremely efficient, with efficiency ratios generally well below 50 percent, and the best one-third of community banks are well below 60 percent. All of this suggests that many community banks are as efficient as a typical large bank, and that any efficiency advantage that large banks may have over others may not be that large. Efficiency measures like this do not take account of other key elements of a business strategy, including service quality and the level of customer attention, which have proved to be key advantages for community bankers. Efficiency measures across the industry improved significantly in the year just ended, because of a change in accounting practice that ended amortization of goodwill. Interestingly, efficiency ratios did not improve nearly as much for community banks as they did for large banks. One also hears the claim that large banks are better able to generate fee income than community banks and that this ability puts smaller banks at a competitive disadvantage. There is some evidence that bolstering fee income is related to profitability. The top 20 percent of community banks in terms of profitability generate nearly 40 percent of their revenues from fee income, twice the level of other community banks. Nonetheless, based on the profitability figures cited earlier, it is not at all clear that a community bank needs to dramatically build noninterest revenue to be quite successful. Fee income at the remaining 80 percent of community banks consistently represents about one-fifth of total revenue within all but the top profitability stratum, and that includes a very large number of quite profitable institutions. Protecting the community banking franchise A healthy business franchise does not guarantee financial success, nor does it ensure a safe and sound banking system. From either perspective, it is important that community bankers continue to protect the value of their franchise by avoiding key missteps we have seen in the past. Let me offer you a bit of a bank supervisor's perspective in that regard. With market yields at long-term lows and with a relatively steep yield curve, community banks need to keep a watchful eye on interest rate risk issues. Long-term residential mortgage lending comes immediately to mind. I noted earlier the remarkable recent growth in community bank holdings of mortgage pass-through securities. Direct one- to four-family and indirect holdings of one- to four-family mortgage loans as a share of the community bank balance sheet has remained fairly stable for a decade at around 20 percent of assets, but there is evidence that some institutions have sought to extend maturities to take advantage of the steep yield curve. Those institutions active in mortgage servicing have found their servicing rights have lost significant value with the surge in refinancings. Most of the loan growth at community banks over the past two years has been in the form of commercial real estate lending--that is, lending secured by nonfarm nonresidential properties, construction projects, and multifamily units. Commercial real estate lending at year-end 2002 reached almost 22 percent of aggregate community bank assets. That's 6 percent higher than five years ago and the highest degree of concentration on record--yes, even higher than in the early 1990s. This increase appears to be fairly widespread across the population of community banks, both at highly profitable and at less-profitable institutions. There are anecdotal indications that some portion of that growth may reflect conversion of unsecured C&I loans to secured loans in response to deterioration in the borrowers' condition, although it is not likely that this effect is very large. Commercial real estate lending is a normal and natural part of the community banking business, and underwriting practices are much better than in the 1980s. For both reasons, there is no indication at this time that the overall credit quality of community bank commercial real estate exposures has deteriorated. That said, there are a number of markets nationwide that have experienced weakness in recent years, and many of these markets will take some time to recover. Management and supervisors will need to monitor further developments in this area closely. More generally, a critical "franchise" issue for community bankers has been recognizing and managing credit risk concentrations that also tend to be a natural part of the community banking business. When credit quality problems emerge at an institution, they of course bring lower returns and more attention from your friendly bank supervisors. The presence of lending concentrations means that such problems can develop both more quickly and more broadly across a pool of borrowers. Successful management of concentrations requires adherence to good credit fundamentals. There have been important advances in the measurement and management of credit risk that community bankers should probably take a good look at in the coming years. There are no magic bullets here, of course, but community bankers may find that these advances provide useful tools and concepts that reinforce systematic and objective risk assessment in the credit management process. Strong capital ratios, well in excess of regulatory minimums, have also been a key to managing credit concentrations and, indeed, a striking attribute of the most profitable community banks. The top one-fifth of community banks, in terms of profitability, typically holds 1.6 percentage points more capital relative to assets than other community banks. With the growth in assets and lending opportunities come potential complications with liquidity management. Assets have grown more rapidly than lower-cost nonmaturity deposits over time among community banks and across the industry, a trend that was only modestly reversed in 2002 by the balloon in MMDA and savings deposits. Among other factors, this trend has contributed to narrowing margins over the past few years. The relative stability of these nonmaturity deposits has been an important strength to community banks. Conversely, there have been too many instances where rapidly growing banks face unexpected liquidity pressures as they come to rely more heavily on noncore funding sources. Careful planning of growth and funding needs is a key aspect of sound management and requires the appropriate degree of management attention. Let me also make a brief cautionary note about the importance of good internal controls and the need for management attention to their upkeep. This is simply good business practice, of course, but it's more than that. You may recall that a provision of the FDIC Improvement Act of 1991 required that the management of banks--including many community banks--report on the quality and integrity of internal controls and that auditors attest to this. Unfortunately, in several recent examinations, bank examiners were able to identify clear internal control weaknesses that neither the banks' own processes nor outside auditors had noted. Some of these weaknesses raised safety and soundness concerns. Much more progress needs to be made in this area, and we will be following this matter closely in the coming months. Conclusion Community banking has a long history of strength and success and a bright future. The past year was a good one for community banks. Once again the vitality and adaptability of the community banking franchise were amply demonstrated. It is important that community bankers stay closely attuned to current and emerging risk issues, and that they explore further advances in risk-management practice in ways that are consistent with their basic business practices and the core strengths of their franchise.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced its approval of the applications and notices under sections 3 and 4 of the Bank Holding Company Act by Forest Merger Corporation and FBR TRS Holdings, Inc. to become bank holding companies by acquiring Friedman, Billings, Ramsey Group, Inc. ("FBR Group"), all in Arlington, Virginia, and thereby acquiring FBR National Bank & Trust, Bethesda, Maryland. The proposal represents a corporate reorganization of FBR Group. Attached are the Board's Orders relating to these actions.
Joint Press Release Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Office of the Comptroller of the Currency Office of Thrift Supervision For Immediate Release March 17, 2003 AGENCIES ISSUE UPDATED POLICY STATEMENT ON INTERNAL AUDITING The federal banking and thrift regulatory agencies today revised their guidance on the independence of accountants who provide institutions with both external and internal audit services to reflect the provisions of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002. The updated Interagency Policy Statement on the Internal Audit Function and Its Outsourcing, which replaces a policy issued in 1997, also reflects the agencies' experience with the 1997 policy and incorporates recent developments in internal auditing. It was issued by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Office of Thrift Supervision. The Sarbanes-Oxley Act and recently adopted Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) rules prohibit an accounting firm from acting as the external auditor of a public company during the same period that the firm provides internal audit services to the company. The revised policy statement separately discusses the applicability of this prohibition to institutions that are public companies; insured depository institutions with $500 million or more in assets that are subject to the annual audit and reporting requirements of Section 36 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act; and non-public institutions that are not subject to Section 36. The existing guidelines for institutions subject to Section 36 provide for their external auditors to meet the SEC's independence requirements. Auditors for these institutions, whether or not they are public companies, should comply with the prohibition on internal audit outsourcing in the SEC's rules. The policy statement encourages non-public institutions not subject to Section 36, which includes non-public depository institutions with less than $500 million in assets, to refrain from outsourcing internal audit activities to their external auditor. If such an institution decides to use the same firm for both internal and external audit work, however, the audit committee should document its consideration of the independence issues associated with this arrangement. In addition to changes related to the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, the agencies enhanced the 1997 policy statement's discussion of the responsibilities of the board of directors and senior management with respect to the internal audit function and its placement within an organization, its management and staffing, and the communication of concerns and weaknesses in accounting and internal control. The policy also reiterates the need for institutions to maintain strong systems of internal control, including internal controls over financial and regulatory reporting, and high quality internal audit programs. Expanded guidance has been provided on the use of independent reviews of significant internal controls by small institutions that do not have a formal internal audit manager or staff. The policy statement also includes guidance for examiners on addressing concerns they may have about the adequacy of the internal audit function or related outsourcing arrangements. ### Federal Reserve Dave Skidmore (202) 452-2955 FDIC David Barr (202) 898-6992 OCC Bob Garsson (202) 874-5770 OTS Sam Eskenazi (202) 906-6677
No content found
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced its approval of the applications under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act, the Bank Merger Act, and section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act for SouthTrust Corporation, Birmingham, Alabama, to merge with Founders Bancshares, and thereby indirectly acquire its subsidiaries, including Founders Bank, all in Dallas, Texas. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Barnes Banking Company, Kaysville, Utah, and the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
Remarks by Governor Donald L. Kohn At the National Bureau of Economic Research Conference on Inflation Targeting, Bal Harbour, Florida January 25, 2003 Comments on Marvin Goodfriend's "Inflation Targeting in the United States?" Introduction Marvin Goodfriend answers the question in his title with a "yes" and, in the process, has provided us with an excellent foundation for a discussion of inflation targeting in the United States. I completely agree with the fundamental premise that low inflation is an indispensable long-run focus of the central bank. Low and stable rates of inflation allow economies to function more effectively, and having inflation expectations anchored facilitates countercyclical monetary policy and improves the trade-off between output and inflation that policymakers face. For the most part, in a regime of flexible exchange rates, the trend of prices over the long run should be under the control of the central bank, and exercising that control to achieve something approximating price stability over time is the way the central bank can best contribute to the long-run prosperity of its economy. Marvin builds his case in the first part of his paper by recounting the experience of the United States over the last 30 years or so. I have no quarrel with the overall arc of his story. The rise of inflation from the mid-1960s through the 1970s was highly damaging to the performance of the U.S. economy and could have been stopped and reversed much earlier than it was by a determined monetary policy better focused on price stability. The restoration of price stability has taken time and entailed considerable cost to output in the 1979-82 period and, perhaps, some constraint on policy flexibility thereafter. A number of factors have contributed to the reestablishment of price stability, but surely an essential ingredient has been the attention that the Federal Reserve has paid to long-run trends in inflation and inflation expectations since 1979. We are better off now that price stability has been restored and economic agents expect inflation to stay low and stable. Moreover, this stability has been accomplished in the context of a highly successful policy strategy that, by anticipating emerging imbalances and actively leaning against shocks to the financial sector and the real economy, has contributed to two extraordinarily long expansions since 1980. Marvin argues that to extend this successful policy record the United States should adopt an explicit, numerical target range for inflation and the Federal Reserve should strive to keep inflation in or near that range. However, in my opinion, adopting such an inflation target would not be an effective means for locking in past policy practices. I do not believe that inflation targeting, in any meaningful sense of that term, describes what the Federal Reserve has been doing over the last twenty years, or even in recent years, when Marvin claims that policy has evolved into "implicit" inflation targeting. Instead, the success of U.S. monetary policy has in large part derived from its ability to adapt to changing conditions--a flexibility that likely has benefited from the absence of an inflation target. Nonetheless, the U.S. economy has enjoyed most of the benefits ascribed to inflation targeting in terms of anchoring inflation expectations as well as inflation itself. It is the focus on long-term price stability that has fostered these benefits, and I believe that this focus will not be at risk with a change in personnel at the Federal Reserve. Considering these points, I am skeptical that for the United States the potential benefits of changing to a regime of inflation targeting would outweigh its possible costs. Let me develop my argument. The Federal Reserve has not been practicing inflation targeting. One difficulty in assessing whether the United States has been practicing inflation targeting is in defining the term. For more than 20 years, the Federal Reserve has conducted policy with one eye on fostering long-run price stability over time. The law specifies price stability as one of the Federal Reserve's long-term objectives; its importance to economic performance has been supported by theory and experience; and hence achieving this objective has been a key influence, together with promoting maximum sustainable output, on monetary policy actions. The Federal Reserve has stated publicly many times that it considers long-run price stability both its unique responsibility and the way it can contribute to maximum growth and employment over time. Although some might view this policy approach as inflation targeting, this would be a very weak definition. I believe that inflation targeting, as commonly understood and recommended, involves more substance and constraint than this allegiance to achieving price stability over the long run. As Marvin's discussion suggests, there are two key elements in inflation targeting. First is the announcement of an explicit, numerical inflation target. The numerical goal is important because putting a number on the objective gives it weight and importance and a focus for accountability--it becomes an explicit yardstick against which to measure performance. The second element is a priority for price stability in monetary policy. Such a priority usually implies a presumption that the central bank should act to keep inflation at the target (or in the range) within some time horizon--that is, that the central bank would not deliberately allow inflation to deviate from the target and would return it to the target promptly if shocks pushed it away. I recognize that flexible inflation-targeting frameworks can be derived from structures that minimize the variability of output around potential as well as inflation around its target. But inflation targeting is not usually framed that way in practice. In inflation-targeting countries, either the central bank law or the agreement between the central bank and the government usually is stated so that inflation is expected to be held at the target. To be sure, inflation targeting has not meant that countries have ignored output fluctuations. In many circumstances, especially in response to demand shocks, no conflict exists between stabilizing inflation around its objective and stabilizing output around potential. And some deviations from target, of course, are inevitable and permitted; indeed, inflation targeting has become more flexible over time in many countries. But in practice, the presumption still is that the numerical goal will be hit consistently, with the burden of proof on any deviations--and that presumption must be part of the mindset of the policymaker; in most inflation-targeting countries the periodic reports of the central banks are called inflation reports, not inflation and output variability reports. The attitude of policymakers is understandable. Inflation targeting is usually accompanied by elements of accountability linked directly to the inflation target--and to that target alone--and that shapes much of the transparency associated with this framework. The Federal Reserve is not an inflation targeter in the obvious sense that it has not had an announced inflation target. Nonetheless, it is interesting to ask whether the Federal Reserve has been an "implicit inflation targeter," as Marvin and others have asserted. That is, has Federal Reserve policy been consistent with the second aspect of the definition above--a priority for placing inflation at its "implicit" target and keeping it there? In my judgment, it has not. This is clearest for policy between 1983 and the mid-1990s, as Marvin acknowledges. Over this period, inflation remained above most definitions of price stability, and the Federal Reserve was not actively seeking to reduce it. This can be seen by the FOMC's forecasts for inflation reported in the semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress, shown in . Inflation forecasts for the subsequent year were mostly at or above those for the current year, even though inflation was running well in excess of any reasonable notion of price stability. An inflation-targeting central bank presumably would have been setting policy so that inflation forecasts were moving toward the "implicit" price stability target. The Federal Reserve leaned against potential upticks in inflation, but it had no commitment to achieving price stability in a particular time frame; the priority seemed to be on realizing "maximum sustainable growth" so long as inflation was not rising from moderate levels. Since the mid-1990s, inflation has been low and stable as measured by the core PCE chain price index--within the range that Marvin has designated as price stability. However, the level and stability of core PCE inflation since 1997 is as much a consequence of unexpected developments as of deliberate policy choices. Importantly, the speedup in productivity growth, even after it was detected, seemed to have greater disinflationary force than anticipated; the broad-based strength of the dollar and the weakness in global commodity prices that accompanied the East Asian crisis that began in 1997 put substantial downward pressure on prices in the United States; and more recently, the recession and resulting output gap have provided another unexpected source of disinflation. Notably, as can be seen in figure 1, in 1997, 1998, and 1999, the FOMC was projecting an increase in inflation the following year from levels already to the high side of Marvin's implicit target. And in 2000 and 2001, the FOMC's projections of total PCE inflation for the year ahead exceeded the 2 percent upper end of Marvin's range (see figure 1). Still, the FOMC took no action to bring inflation down; tightening from mid-1999 through mid-2000 was seen as necessary to forestall a sustained acceleration in prices. It was not until July 2002 that the FOMC projected inflation to remain within the range Marvin takes to be its implicit target. In addition, at few key junctures in the past five years, the Federal Reserve exercised a more flexible monetary policy than inflation targeting probably would have suggested or allowed. The first occurred in reaction to the "seizing up" of financial markets that followed the Russian debt default in the late summer of 1998. Although forecasts were marked down at this time, the easing was faster and larger than would have been suggested by Taylor-type rules based on our past pattern of behavior and incorporating an implicit inflation target. In effect, to protect against the potential for a really bad outcome for markets and economic activity, the policymakers raised the most likely outcome for inflation--or at least skewed the risks toward the possibility that inflation would pick up. Similarly, in 2001, easing was unusually aggressive, even before September 11, as the extent of the demand shock gradually revealed itself. To be sure, when one looks back, the outcomes in both instances in terms of stable inflation were not any different than inflation targeting would have sought. At issue, however, is whether the FOMC would have responded so aggressively to these shocks if it had been constrained by an inflation target. It is a matter of how the central bank is likely to weigh the risks and rewards of various courses of action--where it takes its chances. My sense is that, given the stress on hitting inflation objectives, the pressures of an inflation target would have constrained flexibility that in the end turned out to be useful. Marvin argues that such flexibility is not critical. His argument is that, in an RBC model with flexible wages, policymakers face no trade-off between stabilizing inflation and the output gap, which obviously bolsters the case for inflation targeting. Unfortunately, though, in thinking about appropriate policy frameworks, we have to leave the comfort of his model for the real world. I think it would be naive to assume that circumstances would not arise in which the central bank faced short-term choices between inflation stability and economic or financial stability. The U.S. economy has realized the benefits of inflation targeting for anchoring inflation and inflation expectations without its constraints. Inflation targeting would benefit the United States if it would help tie down inflation expectations or reduce errors in private-sector inflation forecasts. The former would give the central bank more scope to lean against economic imbalances and result in a more favorable trade-off between changes in inflation and in the output gap than otherwise. Better forecasts would produce more efficient allocation of resources as private agents made decisions about spending and saving, and it would reduce arbitrary redistributions of wealth from inflation surprises. In general, however, the empirical evidence does not support a conclusion that shifting to inflation targeting would produce such benefits for the United States. In some countries, the adoption of inflation targeting (and the granting of central bank independence, which often occurs at the same time) has helped to reduce inflation expectations. But the countries that have taken this step are often those with a history of high and variable inflation, and it has tended to bring their inflation experience more closely into line with other countries. Since the late 1970s, inflation and inflation expectations have come down in inflation targeting and noninflation targeting countries alike. Studies do not tend to show that inflation-targeting countries have gained an advantage relative to other countries in anchoring inflation expectations and reducing sacrifice ratios or in reducing the variance of inflation forecast errors. Apparently, credibility and predictability flow primarily from achieving low inflation, not from the presence of an announced target. As a consequence, inflation expectations seem to be as well anchored and as accurate in the United States as they are in inflation-targeting countries, despite the absence of a numerical inflation target or specification of "price stability" here. To investigate further whether inflation targeting helps tie down longer-term inflation expectations, I took a closer look at the sensitivity of some measures of such expectations to economic developments in the United States and several other countries. One such proxy is the survey by Consensus Economics, which records the forecasts of economists and other market commentators over various horizons. To measure how firmly long-term inflation expectations are held, I looked at the extent to which long-term forecasts react to changes in short-term forecasts. The three columns of give the variation in short- and long-term forecasts and the ratio of the two. Column 2 clearly shows that long-term forecasts have varied no more--and perhaps slightly less--in the United States than in inflation-targeting countries, and column three indicates that they are also no more sensitive to variations in short-term forecasts in the United States. Apparently, long-term inflation expectations are as well anchored against short-term inflation variations in the United States as in inflation-targeting countries; variations in short-term inflation forecasts do not appear to pass through to long-term forecasts in any of these countries, whatever the policy regime. shows another proxy for changes in inflation expectations--movements in long-term forward rates derived from the government securities yield curve. These are of particular interest since they are related to the "inflation scares" identified by Marvin, which he defined by sizable increases in long-term interest rates. However, long-term rates are influenced to some extent by anticipated near-term movements in short-term rates, which may not be related to longer-term inflation expectations, and so the use of a long-term forward rate in this context is preferred. Even so, these rates, like those used by Marvin, can vary with changes in longer-term expected real rates, resulting for example from changes in the longer-term prospects for fiscal policy or the trend rate of growth in productivity. Thus, these measures are, at best, a rough proxy of inflation expectations. Since 1990, long-term forward rates in the United States have risen substantially on two occasions--in 1994 and in 1999. Marvin identifies the former as an inflation scare but, for unexplained reasons, not the latter, though the change in the forward rate is no smaller in the second case. In 1994, forward rates rose in all the countries shown. However, inflation targeting was just beginning in Sweden and the United Kingdom and was not well established or, arguably, credible. In 1999, forward rates also rose in the United States in response to strong economic growth and high levels of resource utilization. But they increased as much in Canada and Sweden, both inflation targeters. The exception is the United Kingdom, whose forward rates have been quite stable in recent years. The behavior of forward rates in 2001 is also instructive. The Federal Reserve eased aggressively--more so than other central banks and more so than might have been expected based on its past pattern of actions. Nonetheless, forward rates behaved similarly in all the countries shown. Judging from this proxy, even without an explicit inflation target, the Federal Reserve could strongly counter a perceived demand shock without significant adverse consequences for expectations. An inflation-targeting framework is not necessary to lock in low inflation in the future. So far I have argued that inflation targeting would not simply replicate existing policy practices, it would not buy credibility or clarity about future inflation prospects, and it would likely reduce the flexibility that has so importantly contributed to the success of U.S. monetary policy. One could still argue that inflation targeting might be worthwhile, though, if its added constraints on central bank actions were needed to forestall a tendency to backslide toward higher inflation in the future. However, a number of features in the policy environment in the United States already provide considerable protection against such a development. First, the importance of long-run price stability and its appropriateness as an essential long-run goal of monetary policy are widely recognized and acknowledged. Certainly, this objective for the central bank and the limits of its ability to affect long-term trends in income and employment are agreed on within the academic and central banking communities. More important, the key role of price stability is also recognized and supported by the public and its elected representatives. Price stability has been a legislated long-term goal of the Federal Reserve since 1977; notably, it was retained in 1978 when the Humphrey-Hawkins Act was passed, despite that legislation's overall emphasis on high employment. The contrast between the economic difficulties of the 1970s and the successes of the 1980s and 1990s likely has contributed to public understanding and support for low inflation. Even when politicians call for easier monetary policy, they usually frame their recommendation in the context that such a policy would still be consistent with keeping inflation low. Second, the Federal Reserve Act has established an institutional structure for making monetary policy that militates against forgetting or ignoring the lessons of theory and experience or the requirements of the law. Policy is made by a large and diverse committee within a central bank that has substantial insulation from short-term political pressures. In addition, owing to the length of governors' terms and the nature of the Reserve Bank presidents' positions, there has been considerable continuity in the makeup of the FOMC over the years, which has been echoed on the staff level as well. To be sure, the FOMC has tended to operate by consensus under the leadership of the Chairman, who exerts a strong influence on the nature of the consensus. But it is a committee, and deference to a new Chairman is not likely to be as strong as it has become for the existing Chairman, given his record of extraordinary judgment and success over the years. Indeed, a leader whose recommendations seem to be leading to higher inflation would likely lose influence rapidly. Marvin foreshadows and supports his argument that inflation targeting is needed to sustain good inflation performance across leadership shifts by raising the possibility that the "inflation scare" of 1987 was linked to the change in Chairmen that year and emphasizing how long the subsequent rise in inflation and inflation expectations took to unwind. Inflation and inflation expectations did rise in 1987, reversing a decline in 1986. Oil and import prices escalated rapidly, likely triggering memories of similar circumstances in the 1970s, and import prices were expected to continue to increase for some time as the dollar corrected its earlier overvaluation. In addition, strong demand was boosting capital and labor utilization rates. Consequently, a number of reasons existed for a rise in inflation expectations that were not linked to the leadership change. Moreover, as Marvin notes, inflation expectations had increased a few years earlier and were to do so again in 1989 and 1994, when leadership change was not in the winds. The rise in underlying inflation and inflation expectations was far smaller and less persistent in the late 1980s than Marvin implies. He cites a jump of more than 2 percentage points from 1986 to 1990 in total PCE inflation, but this increase was greatly influenced by movements in oil prices, which fell in 1986 and spiked higher in 1990 because of the invasion of Kuwait. The acceleration in core PCE inflation, the measure Marvin recommends be targeted, was one-third as much--from 3-3/4 to 4-1/2 percent--from 1986 to 1990. The ten-year CPI forecasts of Blue Chip respondents rose from 4 percent in 1986 to 4-1/2 percent in 1987 but by the beginning of 1990 had reversed that uptick. Of course, erosion of the weight that the Federal Reserve has placed on long-term price stability is not impossible and would have adverse consequences for inflation and economic performance. Inflation targeting with an explicit political mandate to give long-term price stability priority would make erosion much less likely. But it is not very likely in any event, and I would be hesitant to incur the constraints of inflation targeting until they seemed more necessary. Even if I favored inflation targeting, I still would have serious reservations about the way Marvin seems to propose it be implemented. Marvin notes several levels on which the Federal Reserve could "make inflation targeting explicit," differing by their specificity and whether they would hold in the short run as well as in the long run. They range from declaring that inflation in the long run should never vary much on a sustained basis from recent levels to announcing a specific numerical target range for core PCE inflation of 1 to 2 percent and setting policy so that realized inflation would be expected to remain in that range almost always. To implement explicit targeting, he argues that the Federal Reserve could obtain "congressional acceptance" of a priority for low long-term inflation by offering in exchange to participate in policy forums that would allow outside commentators to voice their opinions and interact with Federal Reserve officials. However, this trade is not likely to have great appeal to congressional skeptics, since they already have the authority to get testimony and analysis from outside observers and critics of monetary policy. Indeed, such hearings used to be a regular feature in the weeks leading up to semiannual monetary policy hearings. More fundamental is the issue of "congressional acceptance." Marvin does not specify what he means by this, which is problematic because it could encompass a variety of interactions between the central bank and the legislature. In my view, because the Federal Reserve, appropriately, has limited "goal independence," it has little scope for announcing a numerical inflation target that would tend to constrain its actions without explicit authorization and direction from new legislation. The place of an independent central bank in a democratic society is finely balanced. In exchange for insulation from political pressures, the central bank agrees to strive for the objectives it has been given by the elected representatives. The Federal Reserve has already exercised considerable discretion in interpreting its "dual mandate" of price stability and maximum employment in ways it has made clear in its testimonies and reports. In the absence of legislation, going appreciably further in the direction of prioritizing price stability, as would be implied by a numerical target that was expected to be achieved most of the time, would be potentially damaging to the democratic balance and would risk a backlash. The Congress has had several opportunities over the past 15 years to consider bills proposed by legislators to make price stability the primary goal of the Federal Reserve, and it has not passed them nor even given them serious consideration. This statement does not necessarily imply that the Congress would oppose such a step if it were asked again--especially if the Federal Reserve were strongly behind the proposal. But it does reinforce the view that it should be asked, and actions to adopt and give priority to numerical inflation targets should await explicit legislative authorization. Moreover, acting without specific authorization would abrogate one of the important advantages of inflation targeting as practiced in most countries--it requires the elected representatives to discuss and reach a conclusion on just what they can and should expect from the central bank. This point does not mean that there are no steps the Federal Reserve might consider taking within its current mandate to clarify its views on price stability. One such step might be similar to the first level in Marvin's list--discussing in a general way how recent inflation rates relate to the central bank's view of price stability. A more specific approach would be to announce a numerical range of a particular index that might be expected to prevail over the long run, but with no change in the Federal Reserve's relative priorities on price stability and growth. To avoid the constraints of inflation targeting, the Federal Reserve would need to be clear that the range did not constitute a firm or presumptive target for inflation over the short- or intermediate-term and that the range could change in response to shifting assessments of the costs and benefits of particular inflation rates, to improvements in measurement techniques, and to readings from other price indexes that seemed to be conveying different information about underlying price trends. However, I have some concerns about even such a "soft" inflation target. Placing any number on an inflation objective--however much it would be surrounded with caveats--has the potential to constrain policy in some circumstances in which it would not be desirable to do so. That is, the quantification itself might tend to create a presumption that deviations from the long-run goal would need to be resisted more than would be consistent with the policy flexibility exercised over the past 20 years. And I would be hesitant to proceed down this path without some kind of explicit congressional acceptance. The Congress might in fact perceive that the weight on its legislated goals had been changed, without its approval. If, partly as a consequence, it demanded that the Federal Reserve also quantify "maximum employment" or "maximum sustainable growth" and give weight to those specifications, policy could be adversely affected. As we have seen so graphically in the last several years, assessments of the level and growth of potential GDP must be revised frequently, and of course these variables are not under the control of the central bank. As I noted earlier, markets seem no less certain of the path for inflation in the United States than in many of those countries with numerical inflation targets, and so the gains from putting numbers on "price stability" are likely to be limited.. Footnotes *"Inflation Targeting in the United States?" is a paper presented by Marvin Goodfriend, Senior Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, at the same conference. It is available on the National Bureau of Economic Research web site at . **The views are my own and do not necessarily represent the views of other members of the Federal Open Market Committee, the Board, or its staff. Brian Sack of the Board’s staff contributed importantly to this comment. 1. However, I do take issue with his descriptions of several episodes over the period. In particular, see my critique of his discussion of the 1986-90 period. 2. He does not recommend "inflation forecast targeting" in which the cental bank, to achieve an inflation target, aims at the intermediate objective of an explicit, published inflation forecast. Consequently, I have not commented on this aspect of many inflation-targeting frameworks. 3. In this regard, the Federal Reserve has been very clear on many occasions about its emphasis on achieving long-run price stability. For example, in his monetary policy testimony of July 1992, Chairman Greenspan said, "As I have often noted to this committee, the most important contribution the Federal Reserve can make to encouraging the highest sustainable growth the U.S. economy can deliver over time is to provide a backdrop of reasonably stable prices on average for business and household decisionmaking" (Greenspan, 1992, pp. 675-6). Nearly every monetary policy testimony (and many reports) for the past 15 years contains similar sentiments and reasoning. Consequently, I do not agree with Marvin's characterization of the Federal Reserve's communication of the importance or priority it places on its long-run price stability objective as "don't ask, don't tell"; the Federal Reserve has in fact been telling the Congress and the public that price stability is its most important long-run responsibility and intention. 4. The level comparisons to Marvin's target in those years are admittedly ambiguous. Until 2000, the FOMC was projecting total CPI inflation, not core PCE price movements. 5. Of course, the FOMC might have had higher (implicit) targets than Marvin is suggesting, but a policy regime in which one cannot discern the implicit inflation target over several years is probably not inflation targeting. 6. See for example, Bernanke, Laubach, Mishkin, and Posen (1999) and Ball and Sheridan (forthcoming in this volume). All empirical work on this subject is handicapped by the relatively recent advent of inflation targeting and, as a consequence, the paucity of episodes in which to differentiate behaviors in targeting and nontargeting economies. 7. This comparison is also handicapped by the paucity of countries for which yield curves are sufficiently detailed to derive forward rates. 8. See Economic Report of the President (1988), pp. 26-28. 9. See, for example, Meyer (2001). References Ball, Laurence, and Niamh Sheridan. 2003. Does inflation targeting matter? Forthcoming in this volume. Bernanke, B.S., T. Laubach, F. S. Michkin, and A. S. Posen. 1999. Inflation targeting: lessons from the international experience. Princeton: Princeton University Press. Economic Report of the President. 1988. Greenspan, Alan. "Statement before the Committee on Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate," July 21, 1992. Federal Reserve Bulletin , vol. 78, (September 1992), pp. 673- 678. Meyer, L. H. 2001. "Inflation targets and inflation targeting." Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review , vol. 83: pp. 1-13.
Remarks by Governor Ben S. Bernanke At the Annual Washington Policy Conference of the National Association of Business Economists, Washington, D.C. March 25, 2003 A Perspective on Inflation Targeting
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced its approval of the application of Bancolombia, S.A., Medellin, Colombia, to establish an agency in Miami, Florida. Attached is the Order relating to this action.
Testimony of Governor Mark W. Olson Financial Services Regulatory Relief Act of 2003 Before the Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit of the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives March 27, 2003 Mr. Chairman and members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify on the Financial Services Regulatory Relief Act of 2003. The Federal Reserve supports the efforts of the committee to periodically review the federal banking laws to determine whether they may be streamlined without sacrificing the safety and soundness of this nation's insured depository institutions. I know from personal experience that developing regulatory relief legislation that appropriately balances burden reduction and sound public policy is no easy task, and I commend the committee for again addressing the issue of regulatory relief. Earlier this year, Chairman Oxley asked the Federal Reserve and the other federal banking agencies for suggestions on how to improve the banking laws and relieve unnecessary burden. I am pleased to note that some of our suggestions--including those authorizing depository institutions to pay interest on demand deposits, permitting the Federal Reserve to pay interest on balances held at Reserve Banks, and enhancing the Board's flexibility to set reserve requirements--recently were passed by the full committee as part of H.R. 758, the Business Checking Freedom Act of 2003. Many of our other suggestions have been incorporated into this bill. Before I review the most important of these provisions, let me note that we would be happy to continue to work with the subcommittee and the full committee and their staffs as the bill moves forward. The bill includes provisions that should enhance the efficiency of the banking industry and benefit consumers. De novo interstate branching Both the Federal Reserve and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency recommend that Congress remove outdated barriers to de novo interstate branching. Since enactment of the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act of 1994, all fifty states have permitted banks to expand on an interstate basis through the acquisition of another bank. As a result, interstate branching is a reality. And it is a reality with good results: commercial banks currently operate more than 67,000 branches in the United States, an amount that far exceeds the 51,000 branches operated by banks in 1990. More than 1,700 branches were opened by banks in 2002 alone. The creation of new branches helps maintain the competitiveness and dynamism of the American banking industry and improve access to banking services in otherwise under-served markets. Branch entry into new markets leads to less concentration in local banking markets, which, in turn, results in better banking services for households and small businesses, lower interest rates on loans and higher interest rates on deposits. As customers become more mobile and live, work and operate across state borders, they also benefit from allowing banks to operate branches across state lines. However, the Riegle-Neal Act permitted banks to open a branch in a new state without acquiring another bank only if the host state enacted legislation that expressly permits entry by de novo branching (an "opt in" requirement). To date, seventeen states have enacted some form of opt-in legislation, and thirty-three states and the District of Columbia continue to require interstate entry through the acquisition of an existing bank. This limitation on de novo branching is an obstacle to interstate entry for all banks and also creates special problems for small banks seeking to operate across state lines. Moreover, it creates an unlevel playing field between banks and federal savings associations, which have long been allowed to establish de novo branches on an interstate basis. The Financial Services Regulatory Relief Act of 2003 would remove this last obstacle to interstate branching for all banks and level the playing field between banks and thrifts by allowing banks to establish interstate branches on a de novo basis. The bill also would remove the parallel provision that allows states to impose a minimum requirement on the age of banks that are acquired by an out-of-state banking organization. These changes would allow banks, including in particular small banks near state borders, to better serve their customers by establishing new interstate branches and acquiring newly chartered banks across state lines. It also would increase competition by providing banks a less costly method for offering their services at new locations. The establishment and operation of any new interstate branches would continue to be subject to the other regulatory provisions and conditions established by Congress for de novo interstate branches, including the financial, managerial, and Community Reinvestment Act requirements set forth in the Riegle-Neal Act. While we support the bill's provisions expanding the de novo branching authority of banks, we continue to believe that Congress should not grant this new branching authority to industrial loan companies (ILCs) unless the owners of these institutions are subject to the same type of consolidated supervision and activities restrictions as the owners of other insured banks. ILCs are FDIC-insured banks that operate under a special exemption from the Bank Holding Company Act (BHC Act). This exemption allows a commercial company to own an ILC without being subject to the supervisory requirements and activities limitations generally applicable to the corporate owners of other insured banks. The bill as currently drafted would allow large retail companies to establish an ILC and then open a branch of the bank in each of the company's retail stores nationwide. Allowing a commercial firm to operate a nationwide bank outside the supervisory framework established by Congress for the owners of insured banks raises significant safety and soundness concerns and creates an unlevel competitive playing field. In addition, permitting commercial firms to control a nationwide bank would undermine this nation's policy of maintaining the separation of banking and commerce--a policy recently reaffirmed by the Congress in the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLB Act). Reduction of cross-marketing restrictions Another important provision of the bill amends the cross-marketing restrictions imposed by the GLB Act on the merchant banking investments of financial holding companies. Currently, a depository institution controlled by a financial holding company may not engage in cross-marketing activities with a nonfinancial company owned by the same financial holding company under the GLB Act's merchant banking authority. This restriction was intended to help preserve the separation between the financial holding company's depository institutions on the one hand, and the nonfinancial portfolio company on the other hand. The GLB Act, however, already permits a depository institution subsidiary of a financial holding company to engage in cross-marketing activities through statement stuffers and Internet websites with nonfinancial companies held by an insurance underwriting affiliate under the parallel insurance company investment authority granted by the GLB Act. These cross-marketing activities are permitted only if they are conducted in accordance with the anti-tying restrictions of the Bank Holding Company Act Amendments of 1970 and the Board determines that the proposed arrangement is in the public interest, does not undermine the separation of banking and commerce, and is consistent with the safety and soundness of depository institutions. The bill would allow depository institutions controlled by a financial holding company to engage in cross-marketing activities with companies held under the merchant banking authority to the same extent, and subject to the same restrictions, as companies held under the insurance company investment authority. We believe that this parity of treatment is appropriate, and see no reason to treat the merchant banking and insurance investments of financial holding companies differently for purposes of the cross-marketing restrictions of the GLB Act. The bill also would permit a depository institution subsidiary of a financial holding company to engage in cross-marketing activities with a nonfinancial company held under the merchant banking authority if the nonfinancial company is not controlled by the financial holding company. When a financial holding company does not control a portfolio company, cross-marketing activities are unlikely to materially undermine the separation between the nonfinancial portfolio company and the financial holding company's depository institution subsidiaries. In these noncontrol situations, we believe the separation of banking and commerce is maintained adequately by the other restrictions contained in the GLB Act that limit the holding period of the investment as well as the authority of the financial holding company to routinely manage and operate the portfolio company. Shortening the post-approval waiting period for bank acquisitions and mergers Currently, banks and bank holding companies are required by statute to delay consummation of a proposal to merge with or acquire another bank or bank holding company for thirty days after the date the transaction is approved by the appropriate federal banking agency. This statutory delay is designed to allow the U.S. Attorney General an opportunity to initiate legal action if the Attorney General believes the transaction will have a significantly adverse effect on competition. The Bank Holding Company Act and the Bank Merger Act allow this post-approval waiting period to be shortened to fifteen days if the relevant federal banking agency and the U.S. Attorney General concur. However, those acts do not permit the agencies to shorten the period to less than fifteen days, even in cases in which the relevant federal banking agency and the Attorney General agree that the transaction will not have an adverse effect on competition. The bill would allow the appropriate federal banking agency and the Attorney General to jointly reduce this waiting period to five days if both agencies determine that the proposal would not result in significantly adverse effects on competition in any relevant market. This revision would allow the parties to an approved bank merger or acquisition to more quickly consummate their transaction and seek to achieve any resulting economies of scale or efficiencies. Importantly, the amendment would not shorten the time period that private parties have to challenge the appropriate banking agency's approval of the transaction under the Community Reinvestment Act. In addition, a mandatory thirty-day waiting period would continue to be required for any transaction unless the Attorney General agreed to a shorter period (other than in cases involving a bank failure or an emergency, for which the statutes already set different periods). Eliminate certain unnecessary reports Another provision in the bill would eliminate certain reporting requirements that currently are imposed by statute on banks and their executive officers and principal shareholders. In particular, the bill repeals three reporting provisions. The first requires any executive officer of a bank to file a report with the bank's board of directors whenever the executive officer obtains a loan from another bank in an amount that exceeds the amount the executive officer could obtain from his or her own bank. The second provision requires a bank to file a separate report with its quarterly call report regarding any loans the bank has made to its executive officers during the current quarter. The third reporting provision requires the executive officers and principal shareholders of a bank to file an annual report with the bank's board of directors if the officer or shareholder has any loan outstanding from a correspondent bank of the bank. This provision also authorizes the federal banking agencies to issue rules requiring a bank to publicly disclose information received from an executive officer or principal shareholder concerning his or her loans from a correspondent bank. These three reporting requirements are of limited usefulness and the Board has not found that they contribute significantly to the effective monitoring of insider lending or the prevention of insider abuse. Based on our supervisory experience, we believe the costs of preparing and collecting these reports outweigh their benefits. Accordingly, we view them as precisely the type of requirements that should be eliminated in a regulatory relief bill. Moreover, elimination of these reporting requirements would not alter the statutory restrictions on loans by banks to their executive officers and principal shareholders, or limit the authority of the federal banking agencies to take enforcement action against a bank or its insiders for violation of these statutory lending limits. In addition, the Board's Regulation O already requires that depository institutions and their insiders maintain sufficient information to enable examiners to monitor the institution's compliance with the federal banking laws regulating insider lending, and each federal banking agency also would retain authority under other provisions of law to collect information regarding insider lending. Update exception allowing interlocks with small depository institutions The bill also would update an exception already granted by statute under the Depository Institutions Management Interlocks Act. That act generally prohibits depository organizations that are not affiliated with each other from having management officials in common if the organizations are located or have a depository institution affiliate located in the same metropolitan statistical area (MSA), primary metropolitan statistical area, or consolidated metropolitan statistical area. The Act provides some modest leeway for interlocks with a depository institution that has less than $20 million in assets. This exception for small institutions was established in 1978 in recognition of the special hardships that small institutions face in attracting and retaining qualified management. The asset limit embodied in the exception, however, has not been increased since 1978 despite inflation and the growth in the average size of depository institutions. Accordingly, the bill would amend the exception to cover organizations with less than $100 million in assets that are located in an MSA. This change would conform the asset limit for small institution director interlocks with the exception already provided by statute for advisory and honorary director interlocks. Permit the Board to grant exceptions to attribution rule The bill also contains a provision that we believe will help banking organizations maintain attractive benefits programs for their employees. The BHC Act generally prohibits a bank holding company from owning, in the aggregate, more than 5 percent of the voting shares of any company without the Board's approval. The BHC Act also provides that any shares held by a trust for the benefit of a bank holding company or its shareholders, members or employees are deemed to be controlled by the holding company. This attribution rule was intended to prevent a bank holding company from using a trust established for the benefit of its management, shareholders or employees to evade the BHC Act's restrictions on the acquisition of shares of banks and nonbanking companies. While this attribution rule generally is a useful tool in preventing evasions of the BHC Act, it does not always provide an appropriate result. For example, it may not be appropriate to apply the attribution rule when shares are acquired by a retirement trust, 401(k) plan or profit-sharing plan that operates for the benefit of employees of the bank holding company. In these situations, the bank holding company may not have the ability to influence the purchase or sale decisions of the employees or otherwise control shares that are held in trust for its employees. The bill would allow the Board to address these situations by authorizing the Board to grant exceptions from the attribution rule where appropriate. Conclusion The bill includes certain other provisions suggested by the Federal Reserve, including useful clarifications of the ability of insured banks to acquire savings associations in interstate merger transactions and of the authority of the federal banking agencies to maintain the confidentiality of supervisory information obtained from foreign supervisory authorities. My colleagues at the other federal banking agencies also have made numerous suggestions that you will hear about this morning. I appreciate the opportunity to speak about the Board's legislative suggestions, and I look forward to working with both the subcommittee and the full committee on this legislation.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the launch of an online resource for researchers, educators, program directors, and others interested in advancing financial education programs. The Financial Education Research Center was developed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago to promote excellence in financial education by encouraging research and disseminating information through its repository of research studies and listing of major financial education programs throughout the country. The Center is housed on the Chicago Fed's web site ( ). The Federal Reserve Board and the twelve Federal Reserve Banks undertake a variety of educational programs and partnerships with financial education providers. The Financial Education Research Center is one aspect of the Federal Reserve's efforts to increase awareness and further the implementation of effective financial education programs and initiatives. To date, little broad-based empirical data have been gathered regarding the most effective means for improving individuals' personal financial practices. The online center is an additional tool for those interested in supporting financial education. Inquiries regarding the submission of material for inclusion on the site should be directed to .
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan Community economic development At the Federal Reserve System's Community Affairs Research Conference, Sustainable Community Development: What Works, What Doesn't, and Why, Washington, D.C. March 28, 2003 It is a pleasure to join this group of dedicated researchers, bankers, community leaders, and policymakers interested in the worthwhile and challenging process of program assessment. Meaningful program review can be achieved only through measurement and critical analysis. Systematic research of community economic development programs has been limited. Accordingly, your challenge is to vastly expand the information base. Measuring the Impact of Community Economic Development Programs The overarching objective of community economic development and empowerment is to help underserved populations accumulate assets and improve their economic well-being. Measuring the results of programs dedicated to such goals is essential to maximizing the impact of these programs and managing scarce resources. Meeting the goals, particularly in areas and among populations where biases and negative perceptions may have contributed to market failures, helps people improve their financial standing, regardless of their current economic status. For nearly four decades, numerous policies and programs have been implemented with the intent of increasing economic opportunity. They have used a variety of management and funding strategies, ranging from federal government appropriations to debt and equity financing from private sources. Nevertheless, despite the broad spectrum of programs, the length of time they have been in place, and the array of funding participants, empirical research quantifying their impact is rare, regardless of whether government agencies, nonprofit organizations, or private entities sponsor the programs. The lack of measurement is particularly regrettable for government-sponsored programs, because quantifying their impact is crucial to the legislative process. When a bill is proposed in Congress, the nature of the problem and the factors presumed to be contributing to that problem typically are explicitly stated. And generally there is a projection of the outcomes that would indicate success. This process of problem diagnosis, program justification, and projection of results, if fully embraced, provides a cost-benefit structure for assessing a program's value. The program can be judged worthwhile when the data demonstrate that the benefits exceed the costs, including the opportunity costs of any investment. Even with such a framework, conducting research on community development and economic empowerment programs can be challenging, in part because the effects these programs intend to achieve are often quite difficult to measure and may not become apparent for relatively long periods of time. Initiatives aimed at complex economic and social challenges that were decades in the making require, more than likely, many years to achieve their goals. Unlike the standards for macroeconomic performance, virtually no specifically defined standards exist for monitoring the value of social and economic improvement programs. For community development researchers, the challenge is to develop parameters that can be used to objectively assess the value of their programs. For example, the measures that affordable housing organizations use could illustrate the extent to which their programs have, or have not, increased homeownership rates and property values, reduced crime, improved school performance, or spurred new private-sector investment in a disadvantaged neighborhood. Effective research must isolate the variables that best convey the impact of a program, define the specific data that must be collected, and develop a system for maintaining and retrieving the data over time. In other words, the challenge is to quantify the marginal effect of a program. The value of such a system is clear. So too, however, is the complexity of creating it. Consider, for example, the difficulty of measuring the marginal impact of a financial education program. It requires unique data collection techniques and unconventional tracking systems to gauge the benefit to an individual derived from making informed financial decisions that resulted from that educational program. Socioeconomic Trends in Central Cities The relative paucity of data and research on community development programs has limited the ability to fully demonstrate their impact and credibly differentiate those that are successful from those that are ineffective. Undeniably, impressive local community development initiatives have been undertaken, and individual testimonials reveal advances in the economic well-being of many of the beneficiaries. However, the absence of formal data collection and research for the numerous neighborhood revitalization efforts over the past several decades has resulted in a reliance on mostly anecdotal reporting at a neighborhood or individual level. Anecdotal information is not without value. It offers clues to the construction of a more formal statistical analysis. But, as I am sure all of you have experienced, anecdotes can be selective and can convey a false message of the success or failure of a community development program. Given the lack of data demonstrating outcomes from new initiatives, the inclination is to examine existing data to identify trends in areas where community development organizations have been a consistent presence for some time. One hopes that broad positive trends that cannot be understood fully from conventional market forces will suggest the possibility of community development being at least a partial explanation of these trends. Since most community development initiatives focus on urban areas, data on socioeconomic trends in central cities may offer some insight into the influence of local economic and social programs. For example, Census statistics compiled for the State of the Cities database of the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) show that increases in the rates of change in homeownership in central cities slightly exceeded the increases in suburban communities between 1970 and 2000. The Federal Reserve Board's 2001 Survey of Consumer Finances concluded that between 1998 and 2001, families in the lowest quintile of the income distribution increased their rate of homeownership nearly 5 percent, saw their median income grow more than 14 percent, and realized a 25 percent gain in their median net worth. Although these gains in homeownership rates in central cities and the economic progress of lower-income families are encouraging, other data covering a longer time frame are less sanguine. In particular, HUD's State of the Cities database indicates that residents in central cities barely increased their real median family income between 1969 and 1999, while families in suburban communities did appreciably better. In addition, the poverty rate in central cities, according to this database, increased 23 percent during this thirty-year period, while it decreased 7 percent in suburban areas. These seemingly contradictory data undermine efforts to plan an appropriate course of action. The absence of credible data clearly renders researchers unable to attribute the gains to a particular program or the continued challenges to a particular failure. In weighing the implications of recent trends in data, it is important to factor in the presence of changes in external market influences. For example, advances in mortgage underwriting and delivery systems have resulted in increased availability of funding for homeownership. Community development investors' funding strategies have also changed considerably over this thirty-year span. At the Federal Reserve, economists strive to identify the appropriate variables for assessing the impact of regulations, in particular the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA). In addition to the research presented at this conference, Federal Reserve economists have undertaken studies to assess whether the CRA causes banks to provide a mortgage subsidy and to determine the performance and profitability of CRA-eligible loans. But the lack of broad data management systems to identify and track the performance and profitability of most CRA-eligible loans presents researchers with a challenge, as does the need to focus on changes that can truly be attributed to the CRA, rather than to changing market forces. Information Gains in Community Development While empirical research on specific community development programs is limited, insights nonetheless have been gained from experience over the past several decades. Many community development corporations (CDCs) have modified their strategies and their structures accordingly. Most notably, CDCs have realized the necessity of diversifying their funding sources and reducing their reliance on government funding, which is vulnerable to the vagaries of shifting political priorities. In seeking to ensure continued financial support for their programs, community development leaders have expanded their range of financing and, in the process, have gained a better understanding of the risk tolerance and return requirements of their various capital providers. In addition to diversifying funding sources, community developers have also sought to broaden their financing strategies. They once viewed debt as the primary, if not the sole, vehicle available for capitalizing community development efforts, but now recognize the vital role of equity investment in helping communities withstand economic downturns. New sources of equity--community development venture capital funds and secondary markets that securitize community development loan pools--have become available to energize market forces in economically distressed neighborhoods. Advances in technology have significantly improved the identification and development of new financing strategies. With increased information-processing capacity, loan portfolio managers can better assess risk and monitor credit performance. Additionally, the ever-increasing availability of data facilitates the development of neighborhood profiles that can be useful in understanding and tracking community socioeconomic trends. For example, the cross-referencing of data sets on mortgage lending patterns, business start-ups, and employment figures against crime statistics and property values can provide a valuable perspective. Benefits of Research Many valuable lessons have been learned in community development over the years. And the dissemination and application of such lessons as they emerge are essential to improving program effectiveness. Formal research can accelerate the rate of such learning. Only through a comprehensive understanding of the outcomes of a program can success be emulated and failures reduced. By consistently and reliably measuring outcomes, and thus helping current and prospective investors better assess their risks and predict their returns, community development organizations can attract more funding. Such accountability is crucial for any organization, regardless of its size. In addition to increasing funding options, research can also increase the scope and scale of programs. As effective strategies are identified, they can be replicated and incorporated into efforts in other communities, as well as by organizations seeking to develop programs to address related issues. The Process of Measuring Outcomes As I noted earlier, it is important to establish formal procedures for program assessment. At the start of a program, the nature of the problem should be identified, as well as the presumptions of the various causes of that problem. With a clearer understanding of the issues, policymakers and community leaders are better able to devise a strategy for overcoming the problem. Finally, a well-constructed program must include a projection of its benefits to serve as a benchmark for later evaluation. In conclusion, I want to emphasize the importance of the role of the interpreter of the research. Analysts must be scrupulously honest in characterizing research results, or their work becomes advocacy and is no longer research. This objectivity is paramount because research findings from previous efforts become the basis for subsequently targeting scarce resources to their highest and best use. Such objectivity requires great discipline and integrity on the part of the researcher; it requires that researchers resist any innate desire to characterize results in the most, or least, favorable light possible. An understanding of the findings, positive or negative, is the greatest contribution of research. The failure of a program is not a research failure; it is a source of information. And acknowledgement of unadulterated research findings, regardless of how disappointing, contributes to a foundation of knowledge upon which future successes can be built. I often say at the end of a day that I learned a great deal. Unfortunately, most of what I learned was that what I thought I knew at the beginning of the day was false. In the quest to do good for our society's most vulnerable populations and communities--the objective compelling the work of this group--we must embrace the challenge to develop objective and quantifiable standards to assess community development programs. Ultimately, such research is the only means for determining whether we are making advances in overcoming failures in distressed neighborhoods and improving access to economic opportunities for traditionally underserved populations. I applaud your efforts and look forward to learning of your future progress.