Joint Press Release Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Office of the Comptroller of the Currency Office of Thrift Supervision For Immediate Release August 4, 2003 Agencies Announce Publication of Documents Related to Basel Accord Implementation The four federal bank and thrift regulatory agencies announced today the publication of joint Federal Register notices and requests for comment on two interagency documents related to the proposed implementation of the new Basel Capital Accord in the United States. Earlier this month, the agencies approved issuance of the two documents for public comment. The new Accord, which is being developed by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, builds on and, for certain banks, would replace the Basel Capital Accord of 1988, which is the framework for capital adequacy standards for large, internationally active banks and the basis for the risk-based capital adequacy standards now in place for all U.S. banks and bank holding companies. The first document, an Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, sets forth for public comment the agencies' current views on a proposed framework for implementing the revised Capital Accord in the United States. Under the proposal, internationally active banks meeting certain criteria would be subject to the advanced internal ratings-based approach for credit risk and the advanced measurement approaches for operational risk. The second document contains two sections. The first section sets forth draft supervisory guidance on internal ratings-based systems for corporate credits and the second describes draft supervisory expectations for operational risk management. Comments on the two documents will be accepted by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of Thrift Supervision, through November 3, 2003. ### OCC Robert Garsson (202) 874-5770 Federal Reserve Dave Skidmore (202) 452-2955 FDIC David Barr (202) 898-6992 OTS Chris Smith (202) 906-6677
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the approval of the application of CITIC Ka Wah Bank Limited, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, People's Republic of China, to establish branches in New York, New York, and Los Angeles, California. Attached is the Order relating to this action.
Remarks by Governor Susan Schmidt Bies At the Community Bank Directors Conference of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Des Moines, Iowa August 7, 2003 The Role of Community Bank Directors in Strengthening Corporate Governance I want to thank you for inviting me to participate in this Community Bank Directors Conference. As I travel and speak to bank directors and management, I frequently am asked questions about corporate governance. While some of the questions have been prompted by the corporate scandals of the last two years, many go beyond the details of specific cases to focus on best practices in the area of corporate governance. While the Sarbanes-Oxley Act and new Securities and Exchange Commission regulations are directed to public companies, the message I hope to convey today is that aspects of these reforms can provide benchmarks for private and community banks who wish to strengthen internal controls. One of my responsibilities as a governor on the Federal Reserve Board is to chair the Board's Committee on Supervisory and Regulatory Affairs. In that role I apply my knowledge of banking to the continuing task of adapting the Federal Reserve's supervision process to meet the needs of the evolving financial services industry. Today I want to explore some issues of joint interest to us, as directors and supervisors, to think about how we can improve corporate governance in banking organizations. First, I will discuss the basic framework of good corporate governance and internal control. Then I will talk about the role of the board of directors in the control process and how directors can become more informed about the nature of changing risks in their banks. I will give examples of types of risks that can occur at community banks without effective governance. And finally, I'll discuss why it is important for bank directors and managers to be fully aware of the implications of operational risk and reputational risk. Internal Control Framework Over the past two years, we all have been shocked by the headlines announcing corporate governance or accounting problems at a variety of companies, such as Enron, Worldcom, and HealthSouth. As we read these headlines, the question that comes to mind is, "What were the underlying deficiencies in the internal control processes of these companies that rendered their governance practices ineffective?" As the details about the scandals have been made public, it has become clear that they exemplify breakdowns in fundamental systems of internal control. These companies lost track of the basics of effective corporate governance--internal controls and a strong ethical compass. While most companies have effective governance processes in place, these events remind all of us of the importance of doing the basics well. After an earlier series of corporate frauds, the National Commission on Fraudulent Financial Reporting, also known as the Treadway Commission, was created in 1985 to make recommendations to reduce the incidence of these types of frauds. The Committee of Sponsoring Organizations (COSO) of the Treadway Commission issued a report titled Internal Control--Integrated Framework that has become the most-referenced standard on internal control. If one re-reads that report, the need to return to focusing on the basics becomes clear. The report defines internal control as: a process, effected by an entity's board of directors, management and other personnel, designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the achievement of... Effectiveness and efficiency of operations Reliability of financial reporting Compliance with applicable laws and regulations. The COSO framework was the model considered when the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act (FDICIA) was enacted in 1991. FDICIA came after the savings and loan failures, the series of corporate governance scandals in the 1980s, and the work of the Treadway Commission were well known. Section 112 of FDICIA requires bank management to report annually on the quality of internal controls and outside auditors to attest to that control evaluation. The internal control framework of COSO became the standard by which the FDICIA and, now, the Sarbanes-Oxley reports are modeled. While banks with assets less than $500 million do not have to file FDICIA reports with regulators, a modified form of the process can be very effective for smaller organizations. In fact, the COSO framework is versatile enough that it recognizes that the size and complexity of an organization are important determinants of an effective system of internal controls. Each chapter of the report discusses how small and mid-sized entities can incorporate the aspects of effective internal controls relevant to their organization. I would encourage those of you who are interested to read a copy, and I have included a reference to the source of this publication in the copy of my remarks. Control Assessments COSO requires all managers to, at least once a year, step back from their other duties and evaluate risks and controls. Managers should look at the risks inherent in the businesses and processes they manage, and determine what level of risk exposure is appropriate given the profit and strategic goals of the organization. Once the risk limit is set, managers should evaluate the mitigating controls and monitoring processes to see if they are effective in achieving the designated level of risk. Managers should also look at the organization's business plan to see how risk exposures are expected to change and to determine whether new controls, or changes in existing controls, are needed to manage that level of risk. Finally, managers should prepare action plans for building or modifying existing controls to effectively manage risk. Managers then report their assessment up the chain of command to the chief executive officer, with each new level of management in turn considering the risks and controls under their broader areas of responsibility. The results of this process are ultimately to be reported to the audit committee of the board of directors. In the case of FDICIA banks, management publicly reports on its assessment of the effectiveness of controls over financial reporting and the external auditor is required to attest to this self-assessment. Thus, the process helps managers communicate among themselves and with the board about the dynamic issues affecting risk exposures, risk appetites, and risk controls throughout the company. Risk assessments such as the one outlined in COSO are also useful in assessing the risks and controls when formulating business strategies. But not all corporations and boards consider risk as a part of their annual strategic planning or other evaluation processes. The 2002 survey of 178 corporate directors conducted jointly by the Institute of Internal Auditors and the National Association of Corporate Directors showed that directors were not focusing on risk management. I was surprised to learn that 45 percent of directors surveyed said their organization did not have a formal enterprise risk management process--or any other formal method of identifying risk. An additional 19 percent said they were not sure whether their company had a formal process for identifying risks. These percentages indicate that there are companies out there that have directors who don't understand their responsibilities. I trust that none of the directors who participated in the survey were on the board of a financial services company. At the Fed, we have been looking at the FDICIA reports produced by banks at which internal control breakdowns led to significant losses. We have found instances in which failures of internal controls that were known to management were not mentioned in the management report. These failures include various types of internal control breakdowns, such as failure to reconcile accounts in a timely fashion or failure to segregate duties in critical transaction-processing or accounting functions. Our review also identified more serious internal control deficiencies. In some of these cases, the external auditor did not identify the known failure in the attestations. We are working with banks and independent auditors to make sure this basic control process has substance in the future. Examiners also observed that at some banks with breakdowns in internal controls the process of reporting on internal controls had become a "paper pushing" exercise rather than a robust part of the corporate governance process. FDICIA is now twelve years old, and the results of these regulatory reviews again show how important the tone at the top is to reinforcing the importance of good governance and effective internal controls. Banks which try to delegate the update of annual control assessments to junior auditors, rather than "wasting the time" of management, lose an opportunity to remind managers that they have the responsibility for maintaining effective internal control--a responsibility that cannot really be delegated. These banks also demonstrated how challenging it can be to keep focused on doing the basics well, year after year, when the excitement and rewards of management are focused on developing and implementing strategies for the future. Communicating Internal Control Assessments to Boards of Directors Although directors are not expected to understand every nuance of every line of business or to oversee every transaction, they do have the responsibility for setting the tone regarding their corporations' risk-taking and establishing an effective monitoring program. They also have the responsibility for overseeing the internal control processes, so that they can reasonably expect that their directives will be followed. They are responsible for hiring executives who have integrity, can exercise sound judgment and are competent. In light of recent events, I might add that directors have a further responsibility for periodically determining whether their initial assessment of management's integrity was correct. Management reports on internal controls can also help bank boards of directors and audit committees gain a better understanding of the nature of the risks and the quality of the controls in place. Audit committees should not just hear that the outside auditors have "signed off" on the FDICIA report. Rather, the report itself can be the basis for an effective discussion of internal controls among managers, internal auditors, external auditors, and the audit committee. Audit committee members can use these reports to discuss how risks are changing and what the priorities for strengthening controls should be. Audit committees can also use the reports to focus on recurring concerns, such as control weaknesses that managers fail to address in a timely manner. The COSO framework and management's process for developing the FDICIA annual report can be an effective tool for the internal auditor to communicate risks and control processes to the audit committee. Members of that committee should use the reports to ensure business strategy, changing business processes, management reorganizations, and positioning for future growth are conducted within the context of a sound system of internal controls and governance. The report should identify those areas for which priorities should be established to strengthen the effectiveness of internal controls. In fact, the issues highlighted in the COSO internal control report can provide a basis for setting the audit committee calendar for the year--areas where internal controls need to be reviewed and strengthened, and to monitor progress in achieving those results. Indeed, beyond legal requirements, boards of directors of all firms should periodically assess where management, which has stewardship over shareholder resources, stands on ethical business practices. They should ask, for example: "Are we getting by on technicalities, adhering to the letter but not the spirit of the law? Are we compensating ourselves and others on the basis of contribution, or are we taking advantage of our positions? Would our reputation be tainted if word of our actions became public?" Directors should ensure that processes are in place for employees to raise ethical and control concerns in an environment that protects them from retribution from affected managers. Finally, but to regulators surely not least important, bank examiners can provide information to boards to benchmark the level of risks and effectiveness of internal controls at their organizations. Board members have an opportunity to talk with examiners when they report the results of the exams at Board meetings. This will occur every twelve to eighteen months, depending on your bank's exam frequency. The examiners should be using the Board's time effectively, by highlighting the key issues arising from the exam. They should make the board aware of how new products or processes are changing the risk exposure of the bank. They also should prioritize the areas where internal controls, compliance, risk management, capital, management and governance need to be strengthened. Further, they should give the board a "heads up" about emerging issues that regulators are seeing at similar organizations that boards may want to monitor. Your examiners are part of an organization that is constantly observing best practices and changing risks and profitability at other financial institutions. Examiners will be glad to respond to any issues you may raise; indeed they provide an independent objective perspective that is not available to non-regulated companies. Internal Controls The basics of internal controls for directors and management are simple. Directors do not serve full time, so it is important that senior management establish an annual agenda for boards and audit committees to focus their attention on the high-risk and emerging risk areas while ensuring that there are effective preventive or detective controls over the low-risk areas. The internal auditor should test and evaluate the effectiveness of management's program and communicate the results to the board and audit committee. The challenge of the audit committee is to ensure that the internal audit approach is well designed and the internal audit staff has the expertise, ongoing training, and other resources to meet the specific and changing risks of the organization. Before a company moves into new and higher-risk areas, the board of directors, management, and the auditors need assurances that they have the tools to ensure adherence to the basics of sound governance. Many of the organizations that have seen their reputations tarnished in the past two years have also neglected to consider emerging conflicts of interest when the organization adds new products and lines of business. It is important that, if a customer service or control function must be done in an independent, fiduciary or unbiased manner relative to other activities, appropriate firewalls are in place before the product or activity begins. Boards of directors are responsible for ensuring that their organizations have an effective audit process and that internal controls are adequate for the nature and scope of their businesses. The reporting lines of the internal audit function should be such that the information that directors receive is impartial and not unduly influenced by management. A strong internal audit function can help management fulfill its responsibility to validate the strength of internal controls. Effective internal control is the responsibility of line management. Line managers must determine the acceptable level of risk in their line of business and must assure themselves that the combination of earnings, capital, and internal controls is sufficient to compensate for the risk exposures. Supporting functions such as accounting, internal audit, risk management, credit review, compliance, and legal should independently monitor the control processes to ensure that they are effective and that risks are measured appropriately. The results of these independent reviews should be routinely reported to executive management and boards of directors. Directors should be sufficiently engaged in the process to determine whether these reviews are in fact independent of the operating areas and whether the auditors conducting the reviews can speak freely. Directors must demand that management fix problems promptly and provide appropriate evidence to internal audit confirming this. Internal Audit Earlier this year, the Federal Reserve, along with the other federal banking agencies, issued an amended policy statement on the internal audit function that called for each regulated institution to have an internal audit function that is appropriate to its size and the nature and scope of its activities. This amended policy statement addresses several different areas of internal audit, and I want to use that document to comment on some other aspects of corporate governance that should be considered by directors. First, the internal audit function must be independent from day-to-day operations. It says, "The manager of internal audit should report directly to the board of directors or its audit committee, which should oversee the internal audit function." It also states that the board should develop objective performance criteria to evaluate the work of internal audit. The auditor should meet periodically with the chair of the audit committee outside of formal meetings to review audit plans and the results of audits, determine issues of concern to the committee, and create an agenda that engages audit committee members in effective oversight of the internal audit process. Second, we take the position that the frequency and extent of internal audit review and testing engaged in during the audit "should be consistent with the nature, complexity, and risk of the institution's on- and off-balance-sheet activities." We also state that the audit committee should at least annually review and approve the internal audit manager's control risk assessment, the scope of the audit plan, including how much the manager relies on the work of an outsourcing vendor, and adherence to the audit plan. At the end of each audit plan year, a critical assessment of the validity of the initial assumptions should be made and appropriate re-allocations of resources scheduled for the new plan. Third, the policy statement advises banking organizations that the auditor independence rules of the Securities and Exchange Commission apply to institutions covered by FDICIA 112. As a result, internal audit outsourcing to the external auditor is prohibited for such institutions. Nonpublic, non-FDICIA 112 institutions are encouraged to adhere to this prohibition. As directors, you should make certain that you are receiving value for audit services. As you hire your independent accountant, or if you outsource internal auditing, look for an auditor who is a partner in a firm with other financial institutions as clients and who is aware of and concerned about emerging risks and best-practice controls. Such a firm will provide resources to ensure that corporate governance and controls are appropriate for your organization and that internal controls evolve to keep pace with changing business practices. Operational Risk "Operational risk" is a relatively new concept that began to receive attention at banks and nonfinancial firms as enterprise-risk management began to evolve in the mid-1990s. For purposes of my talk today, I am going to refer to operational risk as any risk that arises from inadequate or failed internal processes, people, or systems or from external events. Examples of operational risk include employee fraud, customer lawsuits, failed information system conversions, and mis-sent wires. Earlier this year, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision released a paper titled Sound Practices for the Management and Supervision of Operational Risk . This paper sets forth a set of broad principles that should govern the management of operational risk at banks of all sizes. These principles will likely play a key role in shaping our ongoing supervisory efforts in the U.S. with regard to operational risk management. As with the COSO framework, I encourage you to read the sound practices paper, and have included a reference to the source of this publication in the copy of my remarks. Operational risk has always been part of banking. But the greater variety of products and services that banks provide, the evolution of business processes (including substantially greater reliance on information technology and telecommunications), and changes in the ethical environment in which we live have all contributed to more observable exposures to this type of risk. Many of the community bank failures in recent years have been due to operational risks. In a few cases, dominant chief executives perpetrated frauds by manipulating the internal controls. In others, the management information systems necessary to monitor exposures in riskier lines of business were never built. As a result, other managers and the boards did not have the information necessary to monitor and understand the growing risks inherent in what appeared to be profitable strategies. Let me further illustrate operational risks by referring to some guidance that bank regulators issued earlier this year--accounting for subprime credit card activity. For subprime accounts, rapid growth of the account base can mask underlying revenue trends. As new accounts begin to age, the level of charge-offs of fees, finance charges, purchases and advances generally increase. By relying on reports for the portfolio as a whole, rather than by vintage of the account, portfolio growth can mask the increasing amount of losses. Charge-offs of fees, finance charges, purchases and advances in seasoned accounts at some banks ran higher than 30 percent, rather than the lower level reported when losses were measured by the size of the entire portfolio, including new accounts. Thus, when growth slows, losses catch up. While losses in these portfolios ultimately manifest themselves as credit losses, a major underlying contributor to the losses is the operational risk of inadequate monitoring and reporting. This is a good example of how changes in the customer mix and profit drivers of a traditional banking product can lead to unintended loss exposures if management information and accounting do not reflect the economics and risks of the product when it is altered. Another example of how controls should change as products are modified is bounced-check protection. Banks have always paid occasional overdrafts for good customers, but recently vendors have been selling programs to banks to market these services to customers. Banks are recognizing the increase in fees for these services, but not all banks are monitoring the changing risk profile and losses that may be inherent in their increased exposures. These marketing campaigns may be changing the traditional prudence of customers to remedy their overdraft positions promptly. Reputational Risk Another area of risk that has received attention because of recent events is reputational risk. Bankers know that a critical element of success is customer and investor perceptions of the organization's integrity. When customers select an organization to manage their wealth and financial transactions, they have a few essential expectations--that their privacy will be protected, their transactions will be conducted in a timely manner, the advice they are given will be reliable, and their assets will be invested appropriately and consistently with their financial goals and appetite for risk. Events of the past eighteen months have shown that customers and investors react quickly when a reputation is tainted. The case of Arthur Andersen has several lessons for bankers, and I want to focus on the reputational risk aspects. A key component of many banks' strategies is the use of relationship managers. Bankers believe that a single point of contact will help a customer understand the range of the bank's services that are available, will provide a consistent level of service quality, and will increase the cross-selling of services. As a result, customer retention will increase and profitability will improve. Arthur Andersen had a similar relationship-management strategy. The breakdown occurred because engagement partners who served as relationship managers had the final word on signing-off on accounting policy. Because the engagement partner was compensated on the basis of total revenues paid by the client, the partner had a natural conflict between trying to increase his or her compensation and holding firmly to recognized accounting standards. Further, it appears that Andersen did not have an effective quality-assurance process so that executive management would know when a particular partner was compromising accounting standards to meet his or her own compensation goals. Since the reputation of an independent auditing firm rests on its perceived integrity in ensuring that all its clients meet generally accepted accounting standards, the core value of the enterprise was compromised. As bankers offer more products via a relationship-management model, they should heed the lessons of the Arthur Andersen incident: Make sure operational controls are in place to monitor the conflicts that the account officer is facing. Controls are especially necessary in the area of credit oversight. Rarely can enough fee income be generated to offset credit losses. An effective risk-management process can help identify areas of conflict that emerge as new products and management processes are adopted. Risk assessments initiated early in the planning process can give the bank time to get mitigating controls and monitors in place and conduct an internal audit validation of the quality of those controls, before product launch. Thus, risk management functions can be effective tools for bankers to help limit surprises that affect their reputation in the marketplace. Conclusion Banks are becoming more differentiated as they choose to serve different customer mixes, focus on specialized activities, or rely on new delivery channels. Thus, it is important that directors make governance and internal control assessments a part of the strategic planning process. Corporate governance and audit failures over recent months demonstrate how quickly trust can be lost. Reputation and integrity are vital to building and maintaining good relations with bank customers, employees, investors and communities. Good governance and continued attention to internal controls are responsibilities that boards of directors and management cannot afford to neglect. Many failures of community banks are due to breakdowns in internal controls, thus increasing operational risk. In smaller banks, it is more difficult to segregate duties and hire expertise for specialized areas. Thus it is more important that community banks go through the process of assessing risks and controls and ensuring that they are appropriate for the culture and business mix of the organization. A faster growing financial services company in riskier lines of business will need a stronger, more-formalized system of internal controls than a well-established company engaged broadly in traditional financial services. Footnotes 1. "Internal Control--Integrated Framework," available from the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, Order Department, Harborside Financial Center, 201 Plaza Three, Jersey City, NJ 07311-3881; ; (phone 1-888-777-7077). 2. Sound Practices for the Management and Supervision of Operational Risk , Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, February 2003, available on the public web site of the Bank for International Settlements: ( ).
Joint Press Release Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Office of the Comptroller of the Currency Office of Thrift Supervision For Immediate Release August 8, 2003 Agencies Issue Final Rules on Disciplinary Actions Against Accountants and Accounting Firms Performing Certain Audit Services The federal bank and thrift regulatory agencies today issued final rules governing their authority to take disciplinary actions against independent public accountants and accounting firms that perform audit and attestation services required by section 36 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act. Proposed rules were published for comment in the Federal Register in January 2003. The final rules, which take effect on October 1, 2003, establish procedures under which the agencies can, for good cause, remove, suspend, or bar an accountant or firm from performing audit and attestation services for insured depository institutions with assets of $500 million or more. The rules permit immediate suspensions in limited circumstances. The rules provide that certain violations of law, negligent conduct, reckless violations of professional standards or lack of qualifications to perform auditing services may be considered good cause to remove, suspend or bar an accountant or firm from providing audit services for banking organizations subject to section 36. Also, the rules prohibit an accountant or accounting firm from performing audit services if the accountant or firm has been removed, suspended, or debarred by one of the agencies, or if the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission or the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board has taken certain disciplinary action against the accountant or firm. The rules are being issued by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the Office of Thrift Supervision. The rules amend each agency's rules of practice separately, but are substantively identical. Federal Reserve Dave Skidmore (202) 452-2955 FDIC David Barr (202) 898-6992 OCC Dean DeBuck (202) 874-5770 OTS Chris Smith (202) 906-6677
Remarks by Governor Susan Schmidt Bies At the Annual Meeting of the American Bar Association, San Francisco, California August 10, 2003 Effective Corporate Governance and the Role of Counsel Good morning. Thank you for the invitation to speak to the American Bar Association about a subject that has been in the spotlight in the business community the past two years. This morning I would like to make a few remarks about the role that legal counsel and other professionals should play in ensuring effective corporate governance. The problems associated with companies such as Enron, HealthSouth, and WorldCom, to name a few, have caused lawmakers, regulators, managers, and directors to dramatically increase their attention to internal controls, accounting policies, risk management, and corporate governance procedures. At government agencies, a great deal of time and effort has gone into reviewing and clarifying standards of how companies should implement these basic functions. Within industry, corporate leaders have worked to enhance existing controls and procedures to address these areas. Much has been accomplished, but still more needs to be done in today's changing environment. Some of the most high-profile problems reported in the media have caused us to step back and ask, "How did this happen?" We've seen some astonishing corporate governance and internal control breakdowns in companies that exhibited no outward indication of serious problems. In some cases it appears that critical internal controls were treated as very low priorities or simply ignored altogether. In a number of cases, regulatory or law enforcement actions precipitated the very active involvement of rafts of highly capable outside professionals, including auditors, consultants, and attorneys, to investigate and address the identified issues. It is fair to ask why those resources and expertise were absent earlier in the risk-management processes, when more diligent attention to fundamental principles could have helped companies and their shareholders avoid serious reputational and financial harm. I would like to talk about the role the legal community can play in ensuring that the important basic elements of risk management and internal controls are effectively addressed on a proactive basis, rather than after problems arise. First I will describe some problems we have recently seen at financial institutions. Then I will provide a suggested framework for effective internal controls and compliance in the context of good corporate governance. Finally, I will outline some specific enforcement actions we have recently taken that relate to effective legal and reputational risk management. Examples of Some Current Problems at Financial Institutions As a member of the Federal Reserve Board and the Chair of the Board's Committee on Supervisory and Regulatory Affairs, I've seen several problem situations recently that have been the result of weak internal control environments, poor accounting practices, inadequate corporate governance mechanisms, or less-than-thorough risk-management procedures. Here are some examples of notable recent situations that have come to our attention and in some instances to the attention of the press and the public. These particular fact patterns relate to financial institutions, but the underlying corporate governance issues have wider application. We have seen instances where inadequate anti-money laundering programs permitted criminals to launder funds through banks. The programs had deficient audit and management oversight, and did not receive an appropriate level of compliance and legal review. In a couple of cases, failures to segregate duties enabled individuals to commit fraud by entering false information into a bank's books and records or by accessing the general ledger and authorizing fraudulent funds transfers. In one case, grossly inadequate management oversight resulted in the operation of a trading program with numerous phony transactions. This extended over a period of years, causing significant financial losses to the financial institution. A repeated problem is inadequate management and audit committee oversight of business lines. In one case, this resulted in an institution engaging in transactions with special purpose entities without adequate director knowledge and without effective identification and management of risks. Despite apparent approval by outside auditors and lawyers, we have seen transactions that elevated form over substance, transgressed accounting rules, created serious reputational and legal risk for the institution and ultimately resulted in serious sanctions. During the subsequent investigations, moreover, facts surfaced that raised serious questions about the independence of the outside professionals engaged to provide crucial advice. Finally, we have seen banking organizations enter into novel, complex financial transactions, driven almost entirely by business line managers, without adequate review by supporting areas and without full consideration of attendant risks. In the course of our review of these situations, we found that the banking organizations subject to the Board's enforcement actions generally had no hesitation in securing the assistance of experienced and qualified counsel to represent them during the discussions with the Board's supervision and enforcement staff. However, that expertise often was apparently not consulted before the problems became so severe that formal, public corrective action became necessary. This failure raises several questions: Did these financial institutions properly utilize their in-house and outside counsel? Did companies' counsel get involved, did they perform poorly, or did management ignore their advice? Alternatively, are current legal standards and practices inadequate to address the types of problems that are now arising in these very important areas? I don't believe there is a single answer that applies in each case, but as a general matter, we may conclude that in each case the institution failed to give risk management the appropriate attention and resources until it was too late to fix the problems without significant financial or reputational damage. Therefore, a clear priority for companies should be to refocus on the basics of internal controls and risk management, and to review how these basics should be applied from the inception of projects rather than in hindsight. I'd like to mention a few principles of good corporate governance that particularly apply to the effective use of professional expertise, whether in-house or independent. Internal Control Fundamentals A mainstay of standards on internal controls is the report of the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations (COSO) titled Internal Control--Integrated Framework . The report defines internal control as "a process, effected by an entity's board of directors, management and other personnel, designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the achievement ofï¿½: effectiveness and efficiency of operations, reliability of financial reporting, and compliance with applicable laws and regulations." The COSO model served as the basis for the internal control assessment and reporting requirements that have applied to depository institutions as part of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act since 1991, and that now are broadly applicable to public companies under the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. In July, COSO issued draft guidance on enterprise risk management (ERM), which identifies all of the aspects that should be present in an enterprise risk management framework and describes how they can be implemented. It also identifies the interrelationships between risk and ERM, and the COSO Internal Control framework. The guidance defines enterprise risk management as: ï¿½a process, effected by an entity's board of directors, management and other personnel, applied in strategy setting and across the enterprise, designed to identify potential events that may affect the entity, and manage risks to be within its risk appetite, to provide reasonable assurance regarding the achievement of entity objectives. As in-house or outside legal counsel, you are one of the "other personnel" referred to in this definition. As such, you will likely be part of the company's team that will implement ERM. I strongly encourage you to become familiar with your role in this process as outlined in the draft guidance. Since the guidance is currently out for a ninety-day comment period, which ends on October 14, 2003, I also encourage you to provide comment to COSO. The COSO internal control framework provides a comprehensive approach that is versatile enough to apply to organizations of all sizes and complexity. COSO requires all managers to, at least once a year, step back from their other duties and evaluate risks and controls within their scope of authority. Each manager should consider current and planned operational changes, identify risks, determine appropriate mitigating controls, establish an effective monitoring process, and evaluate the effectiveness of those controls. Managers then should report their assessment up the chain of command to the chief executive officer, with each new level of management in turn considering the risks and controls under its responsibility. The results of this process are ultimately reported to the audit committee of the board of directors. In the case of banks with assets greater than $500 million, management publicly reports on its assessment of the effectiveness of controls over financial reporting and the external auditor is required to attest to this self-assessment--a process that soon will be in place for public companies as well. Thus, the process helps managers communicate among themselves and with the board about the dynamic issues affecting risk exposures, risk appetites, and risk controls throughout the company. Risk assessments such as the one outlined in COSO presumably could also be useful in assessing various lines of business when formulating business strategies. But not all corporations and boards consider risk during their annual strategic planning or other evaluation processes. The 2002 survey of corporate directors conducted jointly by the Institute of Internal Auditors and the National Association of Corporate Directors showed that directors were not focusing on risk management. I was surprised to learn that 45 percent of directors surveyed said their organization did not have a formal enterprise risk-management process--or any other formal method of identifying risk. An additional 19 percent said they were not sure whether their company had a formal process for identifying risks. These percentages indicate that some companies have directors who don't understand their responsibilities as the representatives of shareholders. The shareholders of those companies should be asking the directors how they govern an organization without a good understanding of the risks the company is facing and without knowledge of a systematic approach to identifying, assessing, monitoring, and mitigating excessive risk-taking. I trust that none of the directors who participated in the survey were on the board of a financial services company. Although directors are not expected to understand every nuance of every line of business or to oversee every transaction, they do have responsibility for setting the tone regarding their corporations' risk-taking and establishing an effective monitoring program. They also have responsibility for overseeing the internal control processes, so that they can reasonably expect that their directives will be followed. They are responsible for hiring individuals who have integrity and can exercise sound judgment and are competent. In light of recent events, I might add that directors have a further responsibility for periodically determining whether their initial assessment of management's integrity was correct. The COSO framework and the internal controls annual report process can be effective tools for management and the auditor to communicate risks and control processes to the audit committee. Members of that committee should use the reports to be sure business strategy, changing business processes, management reorganizations, and positioning for future growth are conducted within the context of a sound system of internal controls and governance. The report should identify priorities for strengthening the effectiveness of internal controls. Indeed, beyond legal requirements, boards of directors of all firms should periodically assess the adherence by management, which has stewardship over shareholder resources, to ethical business practices. They should ask, for example: "Are we getting by on technicalities, adhering to the letter but not the spirit of the law? Are we compensating ourselves and others on the basis of contribution, or are we taking advantage of our positions? Would our reputation be tainted if word of our actions became public?" Legal professionals, whether in-house or outside counsel, can help direct management to focus on these kinds of questions. They can also help ensure that processes are in place for employees to raise ethical and compliance concerns in an environment that protects them from retribution from affected managers. Internal Controls Over Compliance While much of the public attention around Sarbanes-Oxley focuses on the first two areas of the COSO framework--operations and financial reporting, counsel especially should not forget about the third area, "compliance with applicable laws and regulations." Risk management clearly cannot be effective within a company if we forget about the basics of internal controls. It is worth stating that many of the problems at the heart of those headline cases stemmed from violations of the fundamental tenets of internal control, particularly those pertaining to operational risks. Based on the headlines, it seems that boards of directors, management, auditors, and counsel need a remedial course in Internal Controls 101. As corporations grow larger and more diverse, internal controls become more, not less, important to the ability of management and the board to monitor activity across the company. The basics of internal controls for directors and managers are simple. Directors do not serve full time, so it is important that they establish an annual agenda to focus their attention on the high-risk and emerging-risk areas while ensuring that there are effective preventive or detective controls over the low-risk areas. A board of directors has the responsibility to understand the legal, reputational, and compliance risks facing an organization; legal professionals can assist in identifying those risks, quantifying them, and providing expertise in managing them. Before a company moves into new and higher-risk areas, the boards of directors and management need assurances that the organization's governance practices are sound and effective. Many of the organizations that have seen their reputations tarnished in the past few years have neglected to consider emerging conflicts of interest when the organization adds new products and lines of business. For example, if a customer service or control function must be done in an independent, fiduciary, or unbiased manner relative to other activities, appropriate firewalls must be in place before the product or activity begins. Internal controls and compliance are the responsibility of line managers, who must determine the acceptable level of risk in their line of business and assure themselves that the combination of earnings, capital, and internal controls is sufficient to compensate for the risk exposures. However, supporting functions such as legal, accounting, internal audit, and risk management should independently monitor the control processes to ensure that they are effective and that risks are measured appropriately. The results of these independent reviews should be routinely reported to executive management and boards of directors. Directors should be sufficiently engaged in the process to determine whether these reviews are in fact independent of the operating areas and whether the officers conducting the reviews can speak freely. Where it appears that supporting functions have not been sufficiently involved, directors must demand that management adjust the processes as necessary. If the in-house legal, accounting, or audit staff believes that a supporting function has not been given adequate information or opportunity for consultation, it must bring this deficiency to the attention of the board. Sarbanes-Oxley Act Now let's turn to Sarbanes-Oxley. I am not going to dwell on the specifics of the Act. You most likely already know the details of this important piece of legislation including, in particular, the provisions directly affecting attorneys practicing before the Securities and Exchange Commission. What I'd like to focus on is the purpose of the Act. At its core, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act is a call to return to the basics that we have been discussing. Simply stated, the current status quo for corporate governance is unacceptable and must improve. This message is applicable to both public and private companies alike and affects everyone within a company, as well as outside professionals hired by the company. As in-house or independent counsel you should fulfill your duties with the competence, integrity, and independence expected of members of the bar and be sure that any material concerns that you have concerning the company's conduct are raised to appropriate levels within the organization. On a broader level, the role for legal counsel, in-house and outside, also is to ensure that the client understands the messages of Sarbanes-Oxley and that all areas within a company are taking appropriate steps to fulfill their obligations. To accomplish this task, legal professionals must become engaged in the mechanisms of internal controls, ensure that they receive prompt, comprehensive information from management, and have adequate access to the appropriate level of management and the board to be able to offer useful and timely counsel. The Role of Legal Professionals In many recent cases, including the fact patterns I described a little earlier, companies did not take adequate steps to prevent the problem behavior in the first instance, and the companies' accountants, auditors and counsel were not asked to assist, were not able to assist, or were simply not actively engaged in foreseeing, identifying or addressing problems as they developed. As legal representatives to various corporate entities, you are charged with making sure that your clients understand the basic need to put into place strong internal controls, state-of-the art accounting practices, and robust corporate governance systems. You also need to make sure that your clients understand potential corporate and individual liabilities in the event that basic functions are not adequately performed. Professionals such as yourselves can do a number of things to participate in effective corporate governance. When a problem rises to the level of a formal enforcement action, we give institutions a lot of fairly detailed direction on how to improve internal controls and risk management, and professionals generally have a very important role in making these improvements. In some of our recent public actions we have required financial institutions to take steps to ensure that legal and reputational risks are adequately addressed, and these steps all involve or have the potential to involve legal professionals. We have required institutions to establish controls that include the following: a formal policy that addresses tolerance for legal and reputational risks, including regular reassessments of risk tolerance by appropriate senior management; procedures for assessing legal and reputational concerns and, where appropriate, escalating them to appropriate levels of senior management; transaction approval and monitoring procedures that involve all relevant areas, including legal; and that everyone in the process receive complete information about the transaction, including the counterparty's purpose; appropriate due diligence on control processes at the institution's corporate clients, and procedures for addressing any deficiencies in those processes that could result in increased risk exposure for the institution; depending on the risk assessment for particular transactions, enhanced review of the overall customer relationship that considers the entire consolidated organization, so that risks are identified and managed on a comprehensive basis and not in silos; and procedures to ensure that business lines comply fully with company policy for consulting with or obtaining opinions from outside counsel on particular transactions or client relationships. These measures provide a few examples of areas where professionals can and should assist their corporate clients. And it is clear that the timing is essential--almost as important as what to do is when to do it. Institutions cannot allow problems to develop to the point where regulators or law enforcement must identify them. Similarly, legal professionals should be proactive, informed, and engaged, and should not confine themselves to a responsive role of addressing problems once they have progressed to a very serious stage. Conclusion In today's environment, regulators, lawmakers and shareholders are looking for providers of legal services to be vigilant on behalf of their clients and to ensure that clients receive the best possible assistance in meeting the standards for corporate governance, compliance, internal controls, and legal and reputational risk management. Your clients will be better served if your work reflects the highest professional standards and you take a proactive approach to help them avoid the financial, reputational and other penalties for failures in corporate governance. Footnotes 1. Internal Control--Integrated Framework , available from the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, Order Department, Harborside Financial Center, 201 Plaza Three, Jersey City, NJ 07311-3881; ; (phone 1-888-777-7077). 2. Copies of the draft may be obtained on the web site at .
Joint Press Release Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Office of the Comptroller of the Currency Office of Thrift Supervision For Immediate Release August 12, 2003 Agencies Jointly Issue Request for Comment on Interagency Guidance on Response Programs to Protect Against Identity Theft The federal bank and thrift regulatory agencies today requested public comment on proposed guidance that would require financial institutions to develop programs to respond to incidents of unauthorized access to customer information, including procedures for notifying customers under certain circumstances. The proposed guidance interprets the interagency customer information security guidelines, issued in February 2001, that require financial institutions to implement information security programs designed to protect their customersï¿½ information. The proposed interpretation describes the components of a response program and sets a standard for providing notice to customers affected by unauthorized access to or use of customer information that could result in substantial harm or inconvenience to those customers, thereby reducing the risk of losses due to fraud or identity theft. The proposed guidance states that ï¿½an institution should notify affected customers when it becomes aware of unauthorized access to sensitive customer information unless the institution, after an appropriate investigation, reasonably concludes that misuse is unlikely to occur and takes appropriate steps to safeguard the interests of affected customers, including monitoring affected customersï¿½ accounts for unusual or suspicious activity.ï¿½ The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Office of Thrift Supervision are requesting public comment on all aspects of this proposal, including whether the agencies have identified the appropriate standard for financial institutions to provide notice to their customers. Comment on the proposed guidance is requested by October 14, 2003. Specific information on how to file a comment is contained in the Federal Register notice. Federal Reserve Andrew Williams (202) 452-2955 FDIC Phil Battey (202) 898-6993 OCC Bob Garsson (202) 874-5770 OTS Chris Smith (202) 906-6677
Joint Press Release Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Department of the Treasury For Immediate Release August 13, 2003 Treasury and Federal Reserve Identify Top Five Fundamentals For Management of Personal Credit The Treasury Department and the Federal Reserve Board today announced the top five fundamental practices that consumers should follow to manage their personal credit. During a May 22, 2003 credit management panel discussion hosted by Treasury and the Federal Reserve and attended by representatives of financial services organizations and community and consumer groups, consensus was reached on the following five fundamental practices: 1. Build savings to avoid high-cost debt and improve payment options. 2. Pay bills on time. 3. Pay more than the minimum payment. 4. Comparison shop for credit and obtain only the credit you need. 5. Understand your credit history and how it affects you. "These fundamentals are an important first step toward educating all Americans about the importance of responsible credit management," said Treasury Assistant Secretary for Financial Institutions Wayne A. Abernathy. "Wise management of personal credit is vitally important to reaching goals such as homeownership, higher education, and small business development." "Credit must be managed carefully and these concepts offer guidance on how to do so," said Federal Reserve Board Governor Edward M. Gramlich. "The fundamentals of money management can help people make smart decisions that promote their own well-being and, on a broader scale, foster a more efficient economy." Participants in the May 22 panel discussion, chaired by Assistant Secretary Abernathy and Governor Gramlich, included representatives from the National Foundation for Credit Counseling, the Association for Financial Counseling and Planning Education, the In-Charge Institute, the American Bankers Association, America's Community Bankers, the Credit Union National Association, the Fannie Mae Foundation, Freddie Mac, American Express, MasterCard, Visa, the Community Financial Services Association of America, the Consumer Federation of America, the National Council of La Raza, AARP, and College Parents of America. The issue of credit management is one of four areas of focus for the Treasury Department's Office of Financial Education (OFE), established in 2002. The OFE works to promote access to financial education programs so that Americans obtain the practical knowledge and skills that will enable them to make informed financial choices throughout their lives. The OFE chairs the Federal Government Financial Education Coordinating Group. As the agency with responsibility for the Truth in Lending Act regulations, the Federal Reserve has worked to promote access to credit and fair lending for under-served consumers and communities. In 2000, the Federal Reserve hosted a discussion on best practices in consumer credit education; and through its Web site and consumer education materials is working to ensure that consumers know their rights and responsibilities in credit transactions. The Treasury Department and the Federal Reserve Board today announced the top five fundamental practices that consumers should follow to manage their personal credit. During a May 22, 2003 credit management panel discussion hosted by Treasury and the Federal Reserve and attended by representatives of financial services organizations and community and consumer groups, consensus was reached on the following five fundamental practices: 1. Build savings to avoid high-cost debt and improve payment options. 2. Pay bills on time. 3. Pay more than the minimum payment. 4. Comparison shop for credit and obtain only the credit you need. 5. Understand your credit history and how it affects you. "These fundamentals are an important first step toward educating all Americans about the importance of responsible credit management," said Treasury Assistant Secretary for Financial Institutions Wayne A. Abernathy. "Wise management of personal credit is vitally important to reaching goals such as homeownership, higher education, and small business development." "Credit must be managed carefully and these concepts offer guidance on how to do so," said Federal Reserve Board Governor Edward M. Gramlich. "The fundamentals of money management can help people make smart decisions that promote their own well-being and, on a broader scale, foster a more efficient economy." Participants in the May 22 panel discussion, chaired by Assistant Secretary Abernathy and Governor Gramlich, included representatives from the National Foundation for Credit Counseling, the Association for Financial Counseling and Planning Education, the In-Charge Institute, the American Bankers Association, America's Community Bankers, the Credit Union National Association, the Fannie Mae Foundation, Freddie Mac, American Express, MasterCard, Visa, the Community Financial Services Association of America, the Consumer Federation of America, the National Council of La Raza, AARP, and College Parents of America. The issue of credit management is one of four areas of focus for the Treasury Department's Office of Financial Education (OFE), established in 2002. The OFE works to promote access to financial education programs so that Americans obtain the practical knowledge and skills that will enable them to make informed financial choices throughout their lives. The OFE chairs the Federal Government Financial Education Coordinating Group. As the agency with responsibility for the Truth in Lending Act regulations, the Federal Reserve has worked to promote access to credit and fair lending for under-served consumers and communities. In 2000, the Federal Reserve hosted a discussion on best practices in consumer credit education; and through its Web site and consumer education materials is working to ensure that consumers know their rights and responsibilities in credit transactions. Media Contacts : Federal Reserve Board Susan Stawick (202) 452-2955 Treasury Betsy Holohan (202) 622-2960
Remarks by Governor Edward M. Gramlich At the 25th anniversary of the Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation and the NeighborWorks® System, Washington, D.C. August 18, 2003
For immediate release
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the execution of an Amendment to the Written Agreement by and among the Consolidated Bank and Trust Company, Richmond, Virginia, the Bureau of Financial Institutions of the Commonwealth of Virginia, Richmond, Virginia, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond. A copy of the Amendment to the Written Agreement is attached.
No content found
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced its approval of the notice under the Bank Holding Company Act by Arvest Bank Group, Inc., Bentonville, to acquire Superior Financial Corp., Little Rock (“Superior”), and Superior’s wholly owned subsidiary, Superior Federal Bank, FSB, Fort Smith, all in Arkansas. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Monday requested public comment on an official interpretation of the anti-tying restrictions in section 106 of the Bank Holding Company Act Amendments of 1970 and related supervisory guidance. Section 106 generally prohibits a bank from conditioning the availability or price of one product on a requirement that the customer also obtain another product from the bank or an affiliate. The Board's proposed interpretation of section 106 provides banking organizations and their customers a comprehensive guide to the special anti-tying restrictions applicable to banks under section 106. The related supervisory guidance describes the types of policies and procedures that should help banks ensure and monitor their compliance with section 106. The Board also proposed to adopt an exception under section 106 for the financial subsidiaries of state nonmember banks. The exception would treat financial subsidiaries of state nonmember banks, like financial subsidiaries of national and state member banks under current law, as an affiliate (and not a subsidiary) of the parent bank for purposes of section 106. The proposed interpretation, supervisory guidance and financial subsidiary exception will be published in the Federal Register. Comment is requested by September 30, 2003. The Board's notices relating to these actions are attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the issuance of a Combined Consent Order to Cease and Desist and an Order of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty against WestLB AG, Dusseldorf, Germany, and its New York Branch. The foreign bank, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Combined Order for violations of anti-tying restrictions in section 106 of the Bank Holding Company Act Amendments of 1970 and related unsafe and unsound banking practices. The Combined Order resolves allegations that in 2001, WestLB conditioned the availability or price of credit to corporate customers on the corporate customer's appointment of WestLB as an underwriter for issuances of debt securities. The Order requires that WestLB pay a civil money penalty of $3 million and implement various policies and procedures designed to prevent future violations of this law. A copy of the Order is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced amendments to Appendix A of Regulation CC, effective November 1, 2003, that reflect the restructuring of the Federal Reserve's check processing operations in the Fourth District. These amendments are the first in a series of amendments to Appendix A that will take place through the end of 2004, associated with the previously-announced restructuring of the Reserve Banks' check processing operations. Appendix A provides a routing number guide that helps depository institutions determine the maximum permissible hold periods for most deposited checks. As of November 1, 2003, the Pittsburgh office of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland no longer will process checks, and banks currently served by that office for check processing purposes will be reassigned to the Reserve Bank's head office in Cleveland. To reflect this operational change, the final rule deletes the reference in Appendix A to the Pittsburgh office and reassigns the routing numbers listed thereunder to the Reserve Bank's head office. As a result of this change, some checks deposited in the affected regions that currently are nonlocal checks will become local checks that are subject to shorter permissible hold periods. The final rule also makes other minor technical changes to Appendix A and to the Regulation CC Commentary (Appendix E). Attached is the Board's Federal Register notice relating to these actions.
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan At a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming August 29, 2003 Monetary Policy under Uncertainty Uncertainty is not just an important feature of the monetary policy landscape; it is the defining characteristic of that landscape. As a consequence, the conduct of monetary policy in the United States at its core involves crucial elements of risk management, a process that requires an understanding of the many sources of risk and uncertainty that policymakers face and the quantifying of those risks when possible. It also entails devising, in light of those risks, a strategy for policy directed at maximizing the probabilities of achieving over time our goal of price stability and the maximum sustainable economic growth that we associate with it. Toward that objective, we have drawn on the work of analysts who over the past half century have devoted much effort to improving our understanding of the economy and its monetary transmission mechanism. A critical result has been the identification of a relatively small set of key relationships that, taken together, provide a useful approximation of our economy's dynamics. Such an approximation underlies the statistical models that we at the Federal Reserve employ to assess the likely influence of our policy decisions. Despite the extensive efforts to capture and quantify these key macroeconomic relationships, our knowledge about many of the important linkages is far from complete and in all likelihood will always remain so. Every model, no matter how detailed or how well designed conceptually and empirically, is a vastly simplified representation of the world that we experience with all its intricacies on a day-to-day basis. Consequently, even with large advances in computational capabilities and greater comprehension of economic linkages, our knowledge base is barely able to keep pace with the ever-increasing complexity of our global economy. Given this state of flux, it is apparent that a prominent shortcoming of our structural models is that, for ease in parameter estimation, not only are economic responses presumed fixed through time, but they are generally assumed to be linear. An assumption of linearity may be adequate for estimating average relationships, but few expect that an economy will respond linearly to every aberration. Although some nonlinearities are accounted for in our modeling exercises, we cannot be certain that our simulations provide reasonable approximations of the economy's behavior in times of large idiosyncratic shocks. Recent history has also reinforced the perception that the relationships underlying the economy's structure change over time in ways that are difficult to anticipate. This has been most apparent in the changing role of our standard measure of the money stock. Because an interest rate, by definition, is the exchange rate for money against non-monies, money obviously is central to monetary policy. However, in the past two decades, what constitutes money has been obscured by the introduction of technologies that have facilitated the proliferation of financial products and have altered the empirical relationship between economic activity and what we define as money, and in doing so has inhibited the keying of monetary policy to the control of the measured money stock. Another example of ongoing structural change relates to innovations in mortgage finance. This includes the elimination of Regulation Q, the emergence of variable rate loans, the growth of the mortgage-backed securities market, and improvements in the efficiency of the credit application process. These developments appear to have buffered activity in the housing market to some extent from shifts in monetary policy. But some of the same innovations in housing finance have opened new avenues of policy influence on economic behavior. For example, households have been able with increasing ease to extract equity from their homes, and this doubtless has helped support consumer spending in recent years, complementing the traditional effects of monetary policy. * * * What then are the implications of this largely irreducible uncertainty for the conduct of monetary policy? A well-known proposition is that, under a very restrictive set of assumptions, uncertainty has no bearing on the actions that policymakers might choose, and so they should proceed as if they know the precise structure of the economy. These assumptions--linearity in the structure of the economy, perfect knowledge of the interest-sensitivity of aggregate spending and other so-called slope parameters, and a very specific attitude of policymakers toward risk--are never met in the real world. Indeed, given our inevitably incomplete knowledge about key structural aspects of our ever-changing economy and the sometimes asymmetric costs or benefits of particular outcomes, a central bank seeking to maximize its probability of achieving its goals is driven, I believe, to a risk-management approach to policy. By this I mean that policymakers need to consider not only the most likely future path for the economy but also the distribution of possible outcomes about that path. They then need to reach a judgment about the probabilities, costs, and benefits of the various possible outcomes under alternative choices for policy. A policy action that is calculated to be optimal based on a simulation of one particular model may not, in fact, be optimal once the full extent of uncertainty in the policymaking environment is taken into account. In general, it is entirely possible that different policies will exhibit different degrees of robustness with respect to the true underlying structure of the economy. For example, policy A might be judged as best advancing the policymakers' objectives, conditional on a particular model of the economy, but might also be seen as having relatively severe adverse consequences if the true structure of the economy turns out to be other than the one assumed. On the other hand, policy B might be somewhat less effective in advancing the policy objectives under the assumed baseline model but might be relatively benign in the event that the structure of the economy turns out to differ from the baseline. These considerations have inclined Federal Reserve policymakers toward policies that limit the risk of deflation even though the baseline forecasts from most conventional models would not project such an event. * * * At times, policy practitioners operating under a risk-management paradigm may be led to undertake actions intended to provide some insurance against the emergence of especially adverse outcomes. For example, following the Russian debt default in the fall of 1998, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) eased policy despite our perception that the economy was expanding at a satisfactory pace and that, even without a policy initiative, was likely to continue to do so. We eased policy because we were concerned about the low-probability risk that the default might severely disrupt domestic and international financial markets, with outsized adverse feedback to the performance of the U.S. economy. The product of a low-probability event and a severe outcome, should it occur, was judged a larger threat than the possible adverse consequences of insurance that might prove unnecessary. The cost--or premium--of the financial-contagion insurance was the associated increase in the risk of higher inflation at some future date. This cost was viewed as relatively low at the time, largely because increased competition, driven by globalization, thwarted employers' ability to pass through higher labor costs into prices. Given the Russian default, the benefits of the unusual policy action were deemed to outweigh its costs. Such a cost-benefit analysis is an ongoing part of monetary policy decisionmaking, and tips more toward monetary ease when the fallout from a contractionary event such as the Russian default seems increasingly likely and its occurrence seems especially costly. Conversely, in 1979, with inflation threatening to get out of control, the cost to the economy of a major withdrawal of liquidity was judged far less than the potential long-term consequences of leaving accelerating prices unaddressed. * * * In implementing a risk-management approach to policy, we must confront the fact that only a limited number of risks can be quantified with any confidence. And even these risks are generally quantifiable only if we accept the assumption that the future will replicate the past. Other risks are essentially unquantifiable--representing Knightian uncertainty, if you will--because we may not fully appreciate even the full range of possibilities, let alone each possibility's likelihood. As a result, risk management often involves significant judgment on the part of policymakers, as we evaluate the risks of different events and the probability that our actions will alter those risks. For such judgment, we policymakers, rather than relying solely on the specific linkages expressed in our formal models, have tended to draw from broader, though less mathematically precise, hypotheses of how the world works. For example, inference of how market participants might respond to a monetary policy initiative may need to reference past behavior during a period only roughly comparable to the current situation. Some critics have argued that such an approach to policy is too undisciplined--judgmental, seemingly discretionary, and difficult to explain. The Federal Reserve should, some conclude, attempt to be more formal in its operations by tying its actions solely to the prescriptions of a formal policy rule. That any approach along these lines would lead to an improvement in economic performance, however, is highly doubtful. Our problem is not the complexity of our models but the far greater complexity of a world economy whose underlying linkages appear to be in a continual state of flux. Rules by their nature are simple, and when significant and shifting uncertainties exist in the economic environment, they cannot substitute for risk-management paradigms, which are far better suited to policymaking. Were we to introduce an interest rate rule, how would we judge the meaning of a rule that posits a rate far above or below the current rate? Should policymakers adjust the current rate to that suggested by the rule? Should we conclude that this deviation is normal variance and disregard the signal? Or should we assume that the parameters of the rule are misspecified and adjust them to fit the current rate? Given errors in our underlying data, coupled with normal variance, we might not know the correct course of action for a considerable time. Partly for these reasons, the prescriptions of formal interest rate rules are best viewed only as helpful adjuncts to policy, as indeed many proponents of policy rules have suggested. * * * In summary then, monetary policy based on risk management appears to be the most useful regime by which to conduct policy. The increasingly intricate economic and financial linkages in our global economy, in my judgment, compel such a conclusion. Over the next couple of days, we will have the opportunity to consider in greater detail some important changes in our economic and financial systems and their implications for the conduct of monetary policy. As always, I look forward to an engaging discussion. Footnotes 1. Nonetheless, in the tradition of Milton Friedman, it is difficult to disregard the long-run relationship between money and prices. In particular, since 1959 unit money supply, the ratio of M2 to real GDP, has increased at an annual rate of 3.7 percent and GDP prices have risen 3.8 percent per year. (A consistent time-series for M2 is available back to 1959. Among other changes, deposit data at a daily frequency were incorporated in measures of the monetary aggregates as of that date.) 2. William Brainard, "Uncertainty and the Effectiveness of Monetary Policy," American Economic Review, May 1967, pp. 411-25. 3. See .