Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan At the Meetings of the American Economic Association, San Diego, California January 3, 2004 Risk and Uncertainty in Monetary Policy This morning I plan to sketch the key developments of the past decade and a half of monetary policy in the United States from the perspective of someone who has been in the policy trenches. I will offer some conclusions about what I believe has been learned thus far, though I suspect, as is so often the case, the passing of time, further study, and reflection will deepen our understanding of these developments. This is a personal statement; I am not speaking for my current colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or the many others with whom I have served over these many years. * * * The tightening of monetary policy by the Federal Reserve in 1979, then led by my predecessor Paul Volcker, ultimately broke the back of price acceleration in the United States, ushering in a two-decade long decline in inflation that eventually brought us to the current state of price stability. The fall in inflation over this period has been global in scope, and arguably beyond the expectations of even the most optimistic inflation fighters. I have little doubt that an unrelenting focus of monetary policy on achieving price stability has been the principal contributor to disinflation. Indeed, the notion, advanced by Milton Friedman more than thirty years ago, that inflation is everywhere and always a monetary phenomenon is no longer a controversial proposition in the profession. But the size and geographic extent of the decline in inflation raises the question of whether other forces have been at work as well. I am increasingly of the view that, at a minimum, monetary policy in the last two decades has been operating in an environment particularly conducive to the pursuit of price stability. The principal features of this environment included (1) increased political support for stable prices, which was the consequence of, and reaction to, the unprecedented peacetime inflation in the 1970s, (2) globalization, which unleashed powerful new forces of competition, and (3) an acceleration of productivity, which at least for a time held down cost pressures. I believe we at the Fed, to our credit, did gradually come to recognize the structural economic changes that we were living through and accordingly altered our understanding of the key parameters of the economic system and our policy stance. The central banks of other industrialized countries have grappled with many of the same issues. But as we lived through it, there was much uncertainty about the evolving structure of the economy and about the influence of monetary policy. Despite those uncertainties, the trauma of the 1970s was still so vivid throughout the 1980s that preventing a return to accelerating prices was the unvarying focus of our efforts during those years. In recognition of the lag in monetary policy's impact on economic activity, a preemptive response to the potential for building inflationary pressures was made an important feature of policy. As a consequence, this approach elevated forecasting to an even more prominent place in policy deliberations. * * * After an almost uninterrupted stint of easing from the summer of 1984 through the spring of 1987, the Fed again began to lean against increasing inflationary pressures, which were in part the indirect result of rapidly rising stock prices. We had recognized the risk of an adverse reaction in a stock market that had recently experienced a steep run-up--indeed, we actively engaged in contingency planning against that possibility. In the event, the crash in October 1987 was far more traumatic than any of the possible scenarios we had identified. Previous planning was only marginally useful in that episode. We operated essentially in a crisis mode, responding with an immediate and massive injection of liquidity to help stabilize highly volatile financial markets. However, most of our stabilization efforts were directed at keeping the payments system functioning and markets open. The concern over the possible fallout on economic activity from so sharp a stock price decline kept us easing into early 1988. But the economy weathered that shock reasonably well, and our easing extended perhaps longer than hindsight has indicated was necessary. That period was followed by a preemptive tightening that brought the federal funds rate close to 10 percent by early 1989. In the summer of that year, we sensed enough softening of activity to warrant beginning a series of rate reductions. However, the weakening of demand already under way, some pullback of credit by lenders, and the spike in oil prices associated with Iraq's invasion of Kuwait were sufficient to produce a marked contraction of activity in the fall of 1990. But perhaps aided by our preemptive action, the recession was, to then, the mildest in postwar history. However, the recovery also was more modest than usual, in large measure because of the notable financial "headwinds" that confronted businesses. Those headwinds were primarily generated by the constriction of credit in response to major losses at banks, associated with real-estate and foreign lending, coupled with a crisis in the savings and loan industry that had its origins in a serious maturity mismatch as interest rates rose. With their access to managed funds threatened and the quality of their loan portfolio--and hence their capital--uncertain, these depositories were most reluctant to lend. Policy eased gradually but persistently to counter the effects of these developments, with the funds rate falling to 3 percent by September 1992, its lowest level since the early 1960s. The uptilt to the term structure of interest rates in a generally low interest rate environment restored bank profitability and, eventually, bank capital. The credit crunch slowly lifted. By early 1994, as the headwinds of financial restraint abated, it became clear that underlying price pressures were again building. If we had left those pressures unchecked, we would have put at risk some of the hard-won gains that had been achieved over the preceding decade and a half. So, starting from a real federal funds rate that was close to zero, a preemptive tightening was initiated. The resulting rise in the funds rate of 300 basis points over twelve months apparently defused those nascent inflationary pressures. Though economic activity hesitated in early 1995, it soon steadied, confirming the achievement of a historically elusive soft landing. The success of that period set up two powerful expectations that were to influence developments over the subsequent decade. One was the expectation that inflation could be controlled over the business cycle and that price stability was an achievable objective. The second expectation, in part a consequence of more stable inflation, was that overall economic volatility had been reduced and would likely remain lower than it had previously. Of course, these new developments brought new challenges. In particular, the prospect that a necessary cyclical adjustment was now behind us fostered increasing levels of optimism, which were manifested in a fall in bond risk spreads and a rise in stock prices. The associated decline in the cost of equity capital further spurred already developing increases in capital investment and productivity growth, both of which broadened impressively in the latter part of the 1990s. The rise in structural productivity growth was not obvious in the official data on gross product per hour worked until later in the decade, but precursors had emerged earlier. The pickup in new bookings and order backlogs for high-tech capital goods in 1993 seemed incongruous given the sluggish economic environment at the time. Plant managers apparently were reacting to what they perceived to be elevated prospective rates of return on the newer technologies, a judgment that was confirmed as orders and profits continued to increase through 1994 and 1995. Moreover, even though hourly labor compensation and profit margins were rising, prices were being contained, implying increasing growth in output per hour. As a consequence of the improving trend in structural productivity growth that was apparent from 1995 forward, we at the Fed were able to be much more accommodative to the rise in economic growth than our past experiences would have deemed prudent. We were motivated, in part, by the view that the evident structural economic changes rendered suspect, at best, the prevailing notion in the early 1990s of an elevated and reasonably stable NAIRU. Those views were reinforced as inflation continued to fall in the context of a declining unemployment rate that by 2000 had dipped below 4 percent in the United States for the first time in three decades. Notions that prevailed for a time in the 1970s and early 1980s that even high single-digit inflation did not measurably impede economic growth were gradually abandoned as the evidence of significant benefits of low inflation became increasingly persuasive. Moreover, the variance of GDP growth markedly lessened as inflation tumbled from its double-digit high in the early 1980s. To preserve these benefits, we engaged in our most recent preemptive tightening in early 1999 that brought the funds rate to 6-1/2 percent by May 2000. Our goal of price stability was achieved by most analysts' definition by mid-2003. Unstinting and largely preemptive efforts over two decades had finally paid off. Throughout the period, a key objective has been to ensure that our response to incipient changes in inflation was forceful enough. As John Taylor has emphasized, in the face of an incipient increase in inflation, nominal interest rates must move up more than one-for-one. * * * Perhaps the greatest irony of the past decade is that the gradually unfolding success against inflation may well have contributed to the stock price bubble of the latter part of the 1990s. Looking back on those years, it is evident that technology-driven increases in productivity growth imparted significant upward momentum to expectations of earnings growth and, accordingly, to stock prices. At the same time, an environment of increasing macroeconomic stability reduced perceptions of risk. In any event, Fed policymakers were confronted with forces that none of us had previously encountered. Aside from the then-recent experience of Japan, only remote historical episodes gave us clues to the appropriate stance for policy under such conditions. The sharp rise in stock prices and their subsequent fall were, thus, an especial challenge to the Federal Reserve. It is far from obvious that bubbles, even if identified early, can be preempted at lower cost than a substantial economic contraction and possible financial destabilization--the very outcomes we would be seeking to avoid. In fact, our experience over the past two decades suggests that a moderate monetary tightening that deflates stock prices without substantial effect on economic activity has often been associated with subsequent increases in the level of stock prices. Arguably, markets that pass that type of stress test are presumed particularly resilient. The notion that a well-timed incremental tightening could have been calibrated to prevent the late 1990s bubble while preserving economic stability is almost surely an illusion. Instead of trying to contain a putative bubble by drastic actions with largely unpredictable consequences, we chose, as we noted in our mid-1999 congressional testimony, to focus on policies "to mitigate the fallout when it occurs and, hopefully, ease the transition to the next expansion." * * * During 2001, in the aftermath of the bursting of the bubble and the acts of terrorism in September 2001, the federal funds rate was lowered 4-3/4 percentage points. Subsequently, another 75 basis points were pared, bringing the rate by June 2003 to its current 1 percent, the lowest level in 45 years. We were able to be unusually aggressive in the initial stages of the recession of 2001 because both inflation and inflation expectations were low and stable. We thought we needed to be, and could be, forceful in 2002 and 2003 as well because, with demand weak, inflation risks had become two-sided for the first time in forty years. There appears to be enough evidence, at least tentatively, to conclude that our strategy of addressing the bubble's consequences rather than the bubble itself has been successful. Despite the stock market plunge, terrorist attacks, corporate scandals, and wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, we experienced an exceptionally mild recession--even milder than that of a decade earlier. As I discuss later, much of the ability of the U.S. economy to absorb these sequences of shocks resulted from notably improved structural flexibility. But highly aggressive monetary ease was doubtless also a significant contributor to stability. * * * The Federal Reserve's experiences over the past two decades make it clear that uncertainty is not just a pervasive feature of the monetary policy landscape; it is the defining characteristic of that landscape. The term "uncertainty" is meant here to encompass both "Knightian uncertainty," in which the probability distribution of outcomes is unknown, and "risk," in which uncertainty of outcomes is delimited by a known probability distribution. In practice, one is never quite sure what type of uncertainty one is dealing with in real time, and it may be best to think of a continuum ranging from well-defined risks to the truly unknown. As a consequence, the conduct of monetary policy in the United States has come to involve, at its core, crucial elements of risk management. This conceptual framework emphasizes understanding as much as possible the many sources of risk and uncertainty that policymakers face, quantifying those risks when possible, and assessing the costs associated with each of the risks. In essence, the risk management approach to monetary policymaking is an application of Bayesian decisionmaking. This framework also entails devising, in light of those risks, a strategy for policy directed at maximizing the probabilities of achieving over time our goals of price stability and the maximum sustainable economic growth that we associate with it. In designing strategies to meet our policy objectives, we have drawn on the work of analysts, both inside and outside the Fed, who over the past half century have devoted much effort to improving our understanding of the economy and its monetary transmission mechanism. A critical result has been the identification of a relatively small set of key relationships that, taken together, provide a useful approximation of our economy's dynamics. Such an approximation underlies the statistical models that we at the Federal Reserve employ to assess the likely influence of our policy decisions. However, despite extensive efforts to capture and quantify what we perceive as the key macroeconomic relationships, our knowledge about many of the important linkages is far from complete and, in all likelihood, will always remain so. Every model, no matter how detailed or how well designed, conceptually and empirically, is a vastly simplified representation of the world that we experience with all its intricacies on a day-to-day basis. Given our inevitably incomplete knowledge about key structural aspects of an ever-changing economy and the sometimes asymmetric costs or benefits of particular outcomes, a central bank needs to consider not only the most likely future path for the economy but also the distribution of possible outcomes about that path. The decisionmakers then need to reach a judgment about the probabilities, costs, and benefits of the various possible outcomes under alternative choices for policy. A policy action that is calculated to be optimal based on a simulation of one particular model may not, in fact, be optimal once the full extent of the risks surrounding the most likely path is taken into account. In general, different policies will exhibit different degrees of robustness with respect to the true underlying structure of the economy. For example, policy A might be judged as best advancing the policymakers' objectives, conditional on a particular model of the economy, but might also be seen as having relatively severe adverse consequences if the true structure of the economy turns out to be other than the one assumed. On the other hand, policy B might be somewhat less effective in advancing the policy objectives under the assumed baseline model but might be relatively benign in the event that the structure of the economy turns out to differ from the baseline. A year ago, these considerations inclined Federal Reserve policymakers toward an easier stance of policy aimed at limiting the risk of deflation even though baseline forecasts from most conventional models at that time did not project deflation; that is, we chose a policy that, in a world of perfect certainty, would have been judged to be too loose. As this episode illustrates, policy practitioners operating under a risk-management paradigm may, at times, be led to undertake actions intended to provide insurance against especially adverse outcomes. Following the Russian debt default in the autumn of 1998, for example, the FOMC eased policy despite our perception that the economy was expanding at a satisfactory pace and that, even without a policy initiative, it was likely to continue doing so. We eased policy because we were concerned about the low-probability risk that the default might trigger events that would severely disrupt domestic and international financial markets, with outsized adverse feedback to the performance of the U.S. economy. The product of a low-probability event and a potentially severe outcome was judged a more serious threat to economic performance than the higher inflation that might ensue in the more probable scenario. That possibility of higher inflation caused us little concern at the time, largely because increased productivity growth was resulting in only limited increases in unit labor costs and heightened competition, driven by globalization, was thwarting employers' ability to pass through those limited cost increases into prices. Given the potential consequences of the Russian default, the benefits of the unusual policy action were judged to outweigh its costs. Such a cost-benefit analysis is an ongoing part of monetary policy decisionmaking and causes us to tip more toward monetary ease when a contractionary event, such as the Russian default, seems especially likely or the costs associated with it seem especially high. The 1998 liquidity crisis and the crises associated with the stock market crash of 1987 and the terrorism of September 2001 prompted the type of massive ease that has been the historic mandate of a central bank. Such crises are precipitated by the efforts of market participants to convert illiquid assets into cash. When confronted with uncertainty, especially Knightian uncertainty, human beings invariably attempt to disengage from medium to long-term commitments in favor of safety and liquidity. Because economies, of necessity, are net long--that is, have net real assets--attempts to flee these assets cause prices of equity assets to fall, in some cases dramatically. In the crisis that emerged in the autumn of 1998, pressures extended beyond equity markets. Credit-risk spreads widened materially and investors put a particularly high value on liquidity, as evidenced by the extraordinarily wide yield gaps that emerged between on-the-run and off-the-run U.S. Treasuries. The immediate response on the part of the central bank to such financial implosions must be to inject large quantities of liquidity--or as Walter Bagehot put it, describing such policies of the Bank of England more than a century ago, in a panic the Bank should lend at very high rates of interest "to all that bring good securities quickly, freely, and readily." This was perhaps an early articulation of a crisis risk management policy for a central bank. * * * The economic world in which we function is best described by a structure whose parameters are continuously changing. The channels of monetary policy, consequently, are changing in tandem. An ongoing challenge for the Federal Reserve--indeed, for any central bank--is to operate in a way that does not depend on a fixed economic structure based on historically average coefficients. We often fit simple models only because we cannot estimate a continuously changing set of parameters without vastly more observations than are currently available to us. Moreover, we recognize that the simple linear functions underlying most of our econometric structures may not hold outside the range in which adequate economic observations exist. For example, it is difficult to have much confidence in the ability of models fit to the data of the moderate inflations of the postwar period to accurately predict what the behavior of the economy would be in an environment of aggregate price deflation. In pursuing a risk-management approach to policy, we must confront the fact that only a limited number of risks can be quantified with any confidence. And even these risks are generally quantifiable only if we accept the assumption that the future will, at least in some important respects, resemble the past. Policymakers often have to act, or choose not to act, even though we may not fully understand the full range of possible outcomes, let alone each possible outcome's likelihood. As a result, risk management often involves significant judgment as we evaluate the risks of different events and the probability that our actions will alter those risks. For such judgment, policymakers have needed to reach beyond models to broader--though less mathematically precise--hypotheses about how the world works. For example, inferences about how market participants and, hence, the economy might respond to a monetary policy initiative may need to be drawn from evidence about past behavior during a period only roughly comparable to the current situation. Some critics have argued that such an approach to policy is too undisciplined--judgmental, seemingly discretionary, and difficult to explain. The Federal Reserve, they conclude, should attempt to be more formal in its operations by tying its actions solely, or in the weaker paradigm, largely, to the prescriptions of a simple policy rule. Indeed, rules that relate the setting of the federal funds rate to the deviations of output and inflation from their respective targets, in some configurations, do seem to capture the broad contours of what we did over the past decade and a half. And the prescriptions of formal rules can, in fact, serve as helpful adjuncts to policy, as many of the proponents of these rules have suggested. But at crucial points, like those in our recent policy history--the stock market crash of 1987, the crises of 1997-98, and the events that followed September 2001--simple rules will be inadequate as either descriptions or prescriptions for policy. Moreover, such rules suffer from much of the same fixed-coefficient difficulties we have with our large-scale models. To be sure, sensible policymaking can be accomplished only with the aid of a rigorous analytic structure. A rule does provide a benchmark against which to assess emerging developments. However, any rule capable of encompassing every possible contingency would lose a key aspect of its attractiveness: simplicity. On the other hand, no simple rule could possibly describe the policy action to be taken in every contingency and thus provide a satisfactory substitute for an approach based on the principles of risk management. As I indicated earlier, policy has worked off a risk-management paradigm in which the risk and cost-benefit analyses depend on forecasts of probabilities developed from large macromodels, numerous submodels, and judgments based on less mathematically precise regimens. Such judgments, by their nature, are based on bits and pieces of history that cannot formally be associated with an analysis of variance. Yet, there is information in those bits and pieces. For example, while we have been unable to readily construct a variable that captures the apparent increased degree of flexibility in the United States or the global economy, there has been too much circumstantial evidence of this critically important trend to ignore its existence. Increased flexibility is a likely source of changing structural coefficients. Our problem is not, as is sometimes alleged, the complexity of our policymaking process, but the far greater complexity of a world economy whose underlying linkages appear to be continuously evolving. Our response to that continuous evolution has been disciplined by the Bayesian type of decisionmaking in which we have engaged. * * * While all, no doubt, would prefer that it were otherwise, there is no way to dismiss what has to be obvious to every monetary policymaker: The success of monetary policy depends importantly on the quality of forecasting. The ability to gauge risks implies some judgment about how current economic imbalances will ultimately play out. Thus, both econometric and qualitative models need to be continually tested. The first signs that a relationship may have changed is usually the emergence of events that seem inconsistent with our hypotheses of the way the economic world is supposed to behave. The anomalous rise in high-tech capital goods orders in 1993, to which I alluded earlier, is one such example. The credit crunch of the early 1990s is another. The emergence of inflation targeting in recent years is an interesting development in this regard. As practiced, it emphasizes forecasts, but within a more rule-like structure that skews monetary policy toward inflation containment as the primary goal. Indeed, its early applications were in high-inflation countries where discretionary monetary policy fell into disrepute. Inflation targeting often originated as a fairly simple structure concentrating solely on inflation outcomes, but it has evolved into more-discretionary forms requiring complex judgments for implementation. Indeed, this evolution has gone so far that the actual practice of monetary policy by inflation-targeting central banks now closely resembles the practice of those central banks, such as the European Central Bank, the Bank of Japan, and the Federal Reserve, that have not chosen to adopt that paradigm. In practice, most central banks, at least those not bound by an exchange rate peg, behave in roughly the same way. They seek price stability as their long-term goal and, accounting for the lag in monetary policy, calibrate the setting of the policy rate accordingly. Central banks generally appear to have embraced a common model of the channels through which monetary policy functions, although the specifics and emphasis given to those channels vary according to our particular circumstances. All banks ease when economic conditions ease and tighten when economic conditions tighten, even if in differing degrees, regardless of whether they are guided by formal or informal inflation targets. As yet unresolved is whether the mere announcement that a central bank intends to engage in inflation targeting increases the credibility of the central bank's inclination to maintain price stability and, hence, assists in the anchoring of inflation expectations. The Bank of England's recent experiences may be encouraging in this regard. But, presumably, we will not know for sure the significance of formal inflation targeting as a tool until the world economy is subjected to shocks of sufficient magnitude to assess the differential performance of those who do not employ formally announced inflation targets. To date, inflation has fallen for formal targeters, but it has fallen for others as well. * * * Under the rubric of risk management are a number of specific issues that we at the Fed had to address over the past decade and a half and that will likely resurface to confront future monetary policymakers. Most prominent is the appropriate role of asset prices in policy. In addition to the narrower issue of product price stability, asset prices will remain high on the research agenda of central banks for years to come. As the ratios of gross liabilities and gross assets to GDP continue to rise, owing to expanding domestic and international financial intermediation, the visibility of asset prices relative to product prices will itself rise. There is little dispute that the prices of stocks, bonds, homes, real estate, and exchange rates affect GDP. But most central banks have chosen, at least to date, not to view asset prices as targets of policy, but as economic variables to be considered through the prism of the policy's ultimate objective. * * * As the transcripts of FOMC meetings attest, making monetary policy is an especially humbling activity. In hindsight, the paths of inflation, real output, stock prices and exchange rates may have seemed preordained, but no such insight existed as we experienced it at the time. In fact, uncertainty characterized virtually every meeting, and, as the transcripts show, our ability to anticipate was limited. From time to time the FOMC made decisions, some to move and some not to move, that we came to regret. Yet, during the last quarter century, policymakers managed to defuse dangerous inflationary forces and dealt with the consequences of a stock market crash, a large asset price bubble, and a series of liquidity crises. These events did not distract us from the pursuit and eventual achievement of price stability and the greater economic stability that goes with it. As we confront the many unspecifiable dangers that lie ahead, the marked improvement in the degree of flexibility and resilience exhibited by our economy in recent years should afford us considerable comfort. Assuming that it will persist, the trend toward increased flexibility implies that an ever-greater part of the resolution of economic imbalances will occur through the actions of business firms and households. Less will be required from the risk-laden initiatives of monetary policymakers. Each generation of policymakers has had to grapple with a changing portfolio of problems. So while we eagerly draw on the experiences of our predecessors, we can be assured that we will confront different problems in the future. The innovative technologies that have helped us reap enormous efficiencies will doubtless present us with challenges that we cannot currently anticipate. We were fortunate, as I pointed out in my opening remarks, to have worked in a particularly favorable structural and political environment. But we trust that monetary policy has meaningfully contributed to the impressive performance of our economy in recent decades. Footnotes I, nonetheless, wish to thank my colleagues David Stockton, David Wilcox, Don Kohn, Ben Bernanke, and John Taylor, for their many suggestions and reminiscences. That growth was showing through in gross income per hour. An increasingly negative statistical discrepancy was masking the rise in productivity as measured by the official data that relied on gross product per hour. As I indicated in the fall of 1994, "we are observing . . . [an] opening up of margins . . . But unit labor costs apparently have been so well contained by productivity gains at this stage that cost pressures have not flowed into final goods prices." (FOMC transcripts, September 27, 1994, pg. 37) See, for example, "A Half-Century of Changes in Monetary Policy," John B. Taylor, remarks delivered at the conference in honor of Milton Friedman, November 8, 2002, pp 9-10, manuscript, Department of the Treasury. It is notable, that in the United States, surges in price-earnings ratios, a presumed essential characteristic of an equity price bubble, are not observed with elevated inflation expectations. But, as the Federal Reserve indicated in congressional testimony in July 1999, "... productivity acceleration does not ensure that equity prices are not overextended. There can be little doubt that if the nation's productivity growth has stepped up, the level of profits and their future potential would be elevated. That prospect has supported higher stock prices. The danger is that in these circumstances, an unwarranted, perhaps euphoric, extension of recent developments can drive equity prices to levels that are unsupportable even if risks in the future become relatively small. Such straying above fundamentals could create problems for our economy when the inevitable adjustment occurs." before the Committee on Banking and Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, July 22, 1999. For example, stock prices rose following the completion of the more than 300 basis point rise in the federal funds rate in the twelve months ending in February 1989. And during the year beginning in February 1994, when the Federal Reserve again raised the federal funds target 300 basis points, stock prices initially flattened. But as soon as that round of tightening was completed, prices resumed their marked upward advance. From mid-1999 through May 2000, the federal funds rate was raised 150 basis points. However, equity price increases were largely undeterred during that period despite what now, in retrospect, was the exhausted tail of a bull market. Stock prices peaked in March 2000, but the market basically moved sideways until September of that year. Such data suggest that nothing short of a sharp increase in short-term rates that engenders a significant economic retrenchment with all its attendant risks is sufficient to check a nascent bubble. Certainly, 300 basis points proved inadequate to even dent stock prices in 1994. Some have asserted that the Federal Reserve can deflate a stock-price bubble--rather painlessly--by boosting margin requirements. The evidence suggests otherwise. First, the amount of margin debt is small, having never amounted to more than about 1-3/4 percent of the market value of equities; moreover, even this figure overstates the amount of margin debt used to purchase stock, as such debt also finances short sales of equity and transactions in non-equity securities. Second, investors need not rely on margin debt to take a leveraged position in equities. They can borrow from other sources to buy stock. Or, they can purchase options, which will affect stock prices given the linkages across markets. Thus, not surprisingly, the preponderance of research suggests that changes in margins are not an effective tool for reducing stock market volatility. It is possible that margin requirements inhibit very small investors whose access to other forms of credit is limited. If so, the only effect of increasing margin requirements is to price out of the market the very small investor without addressing the broader issue of stock price bubbles. If a change in margin requirements were taken by investors as a signal that the central bank would soon tighten monetary policy enough to burst a bubble, then there might be the appearance of a causal effect. But it is the prospect of monetary policy action, not the margin increase, that should be viewed as the trigger. In a similar manner, history tells us that "jawboning" asset markets will be ineffective unless backed by action. Op. cit. Some have argued that, as a consequence of the 1995-2000 speculative episode, long-term imbalances remain, having been only partly addressed since early 2001, the peak of the post-bubble business cycle. For example, large residues of household and external debt are perceived as barriers to future growth. But in the past, imbalances that led to business contractions were rarely fully reversed before the subsequent economic upturn began. Presumably they were fully reversed in later periods, or they continued to fester, but not by enough to halt economic growth. Even if imbalances still persist in our current environment, the business decline that began in March 2001 came to an end in November of that year, according to the National Bureau of Economic Research. We experienced tepid recovery until the second half of last year, when GDP accelerated considerably. Hence, when the next recession arrives, as it inevitably will, it will be a stretch to attribute it to speculative imbalances of many years earlier. See of September 29, 1998. Walter Bagehot, Lombard Street: A Description of the Money Market , (Orion Editions, 1873) p. 85. See before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, February 11, 2003.
Remarks by Governor Ben S. Bernanke At the Meetings of the American Economic Association, San Diego, California January 4, 2004 Monetary Policy and the Economic Outlook: 2004 The turn of the year is the traditional time to review the high and low points of the year just past and to contemplate the challenges that lie ahead in the year just begun. In that spirit, I will provide a brief progress report on the economic recovery, as well as some remarks on the evolution of monetary policy. As always, the views I will express are my own and are not to be attributed to my colleagues on the Board of Governors or the Federal Open Market Committee. It is beginning to appear that 2003 was a watershed year for the American economy, following what had been, on many dimensions, a subpar performance for the better part of three years. Though officially the recession lasted only eight months, from March to November 2001, a period of economic underperformance began with the sharp decline in stock prices and business investment in mid-2000 and continued through the months leading up to the Iraq war this past spring. To a degree that is unusual for postwar recessions, the economic weakness of the period was most apparent in the business sector, even as consumer spending and residential construction remained robust. Businesses radically pared their spending on new capital goods and cut the ratio of inventory stocks to sales to historical lows. In an effort to restore profitability in an environment of weak demand and nonexistent pricing power, businesses also worked hard to improve efficiency and cut costs. These efforts have paid off in terms of remarkable increases in productivity, but, together with insufficient growth in aggregate demand, they also contributed to a significant decline in employment. Like the aftermath of the 1990-91 recession, the two years since the recession trough in November 2001 have been described as a "jobless recovery." Indeed, the lag between the recovery in output and the recovery in employment has been significantly greater this time than it was after the 1990-91 downturn. Monetary policy was deployed to support the weakening economy, as the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) aggressively cut rates in 2001 and has continued its policy of accommodation since then. Fiscal policy, including two rounds of tax cuts, has also been highly stimulative. However, despite some early promise, initially the upturn proved halting and erratic. Policymakers and private-sector economists recognized early on that a balanced recovery would require willingness on the part of the business sector to begin investing and hiring again, but forecasts of improved business sentiment repeatedly proved wrong, or at least premature. In some sectors, such as nonresidential construction and communications, capital overhangs and capital misallocation, the result of the earlier boom, reduced both the need and the financial capacity to invest. Importantly, the economy was also hit by a succession of shocks--notably the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, the corporate governance and accounting scandals of the summer of 2002, and the Iraq war in the spring of 2003--each of which created new uncertainties and left its mark on business confidence. Despite all this adversity, there could never have been any doubt that the diversified and resilient U.S. economy, assisted by ample monetary and fiscal stimulus, would eventually stage a comeback. After several false starts, it now appears that that comeback began in earnest in the summer of 2003. As you know, the third quarter of the year displayed near-record levels of real economic growth, in the vicinity of 8 percent at an annual rate, and growth appears to have continued strong in the fourth quarter of 2003. The most heartening aspect of this vigorous expansion is that, finally, the business sector appears to have emerged from its funk. Corporate investment has been strong, particularly in equipment and software, and there are some recent signs that both inventory investment and hiring have begun to pick up. Of course, downside risks to the economy remain: The recovery in capital investment may prove less durable than it now appears, the moderation of fiscal stimulus in the latter part of next year could adversely affect household spending, or new unfavorable shocks--geopolitical or otherwise--may yet appear. Still, the incoming data have continued for the most part to surprise on the upside, and the odds accordingly have increased that 2003 will be remembered as the year when this recovery turned the corner. Private-sector forecasters generally expect real growth to be approximately 4 percent in 2004, and they foresee modest improvements in the unemployment rate this year and continued reductions in unemployment in 2005. I think these predictions are broadly reasonable, and indeed I would not be surprised if the pace of real growth next year exceeded 4 percent. With this generally upbeat scenario in mind, some observers in the markets and the media have questioned the appropriateness of the current stance of monetary policy. Certainly, the policy stance we have today is historically unusual. More than two years after the recession trough, and following several quarters of strong growth, the historically normal pattern would be for the Fed to be well into the process of tightening policy by now. Instead, the FOMC has held its policy instrument rate, the federal funds rate, at the very low level of 1 percent. I would like to take some time now to explain why I believe this policy remains appropriate, despite its historically unusual character. The positive case for maintaining an accommodative monetary policy at this stage of the recovery has three elements, some of which will be familiar to many of you, at least in broad outline. First, core inflation rates in the United States are as low today as they have been in forty years, and they have been trending downward. For example, the twelve-month inflation rate as measured by the consumer price index, current-methods basis and excluding food and energy prices, was 2.7 percent at the recession trough in November 2001. This measure of core inflation fell to 2.0 percent as of November 2002 and to only 1.1 percent as of November 2003. Other measures of core inflation, such as the one based on the chain price index for personal consumption expenditures, have displayed a similar pattern. Inflation is not simply low; for my taste, it is very nearly at the bottom of the acceptable range for (measured) inflation. In contrast, in previous episodes of recovery, inflation was above the range consistent with price stability, so that a tightening of monetary policy at an earlier stage of the expansion represented the prudent response to inflation risks. Because inflation is so low today, monetary policy can afford to be more patient to ensure that the recovery is self-sustaining. The second unusual aspect of the current situation relevant for monetary policy is the truly remarkable increase in labor productivity that firms and workers have achieved in recent years. Those productivity increases affect the inflation outlook in two related ways: first, by raising potential output and thus (for given growth in aggregate demand) the size of the output gap; and, second, by reducing the costs of production, which puts downward pressure on prices. I will first address the effect of productivity on costs, returning later to the link of productivity and the output gap. Labor costs account for the lion's share, about two-thirds, of the cost of producing goods and services. The labor cost of producing a unit of output depends, first, on the dollar cost per hour (including wages and benefits) of employing a worker and, second, on the quantity of output that each worker produces per hour. When the cost per hour of employing a worker rises more quickly than the worker's hourly productivity--the historically normal situation--then the dollar labor cost of producing each unit of output, the so-called unit labor cost, tends to rise. Recently, however, labor productivity has grown even more quickly than the costs of employing workers, with the result that unit labor costs have declined in each of the past three years. Indeed, in the second and third quarters of 2003, unit labor costs in the nonfarm business sector are currently estimated to have declined by a remarkable 3.2 and 5.8 percent, respectively, at annual rates. Again, because labor costs are such a large part of overall costs, and because capital costs have also been moderate, the business sector has enjoyed a net decline in total production costs. A decline in production costs must result in lower prices for final consumers, an increased price-cost markup for producers, or both. In practice, both have occurred in recent years: Firms have passed on part of the reduction in costs on to final consumers in the form of lower (or more slowly rising) prices, and price-cost markups (as best we can measure them) have risen well above their historical averages. The high level of markups is an important and perhaps insufficiently recognized feature of the current economic situation. To the extent that firms can maintain these markups, profits will continue to be high, supporting investment and equity values. To the extent that product-market competition erodes these markups, as is likely to occur over time, downward pressure will be exerted on the inflation rate, even if, as is likely, the recent declines in unit labor cost do not persist. The third unusual factor is the persistent softness of the labor market. As I already noted, fully two years after the official recession trough, we are only just beginning to see significant gains in employment. Of course, the unemployment rate, at about 6 percent of the labor force, is not exceptionally high by historical standards, and one can debate the degree to which structural change and other factors may have affected the level of employment that can be sustained without overheating the economy. Assessing the amount of slack in the labor market is very difficult and ultimately a matter of judgment. Reasonable people can certainly disagree. However, my sense is that, when one looks at the full range of information available, the labor market looks (if anything) weaker than a 6 percent unemployment rate suggests. For example, it appears that workers who have lost their jobs in the past couple of years have been more likely to withdraw from the labor force (rather than report themselves as unemployed) than were job losers in previous recessions. Indeed, the labor force participation rate fell sharply between 2000 and 2003, from a little over 67 percent to about 66-1/4 percent. Similarly, the ratio of employment to the working-age population, a statistic that reflects both those who become unemployed and those who leave the labor force, has fallen significantly, by 2.8 percentage points between its peak in April 2000 and its trough this past September. The tendency of recent job losers to leave the labor force likely masks some of the effects of job cuts on the unemployment rate, so that the current measured level of unemployment may understate the extent of job loss or the difficulty of finding new work. Of course, a labor market that is slack and improving only slowly is likely to produce continued slow growth in nominal wages, contributing to continued moderate growth in costs. Why has the labor market remained relatively weak, despite increasingly rapid growth in output? I addressed the causes of the "jobless recovery" in an earlier talk (Bernanke, 2003). Although many factors have affected the rate of job creation, I concluded in my earlier analysis that the rapid rate of productivity growth, already discussed in relation to unit labor costs, has also been an important reason for the slow pace of recovery in the labor market. All else equal, strong productivity gains allow firms to meet a given level of demand with fewer employees. Thus, for given growth in aggregate spending, a higher rate of productivity growth implies a slower rate of growth in employment. To summarize, then, the current economic situation has three unusual aspects, which together (in my view) rationalize the current stance of monetary policy. First, inflation is historically low, perhaps at the bottom of the acceptable range, and has recently continued its decline. Second, rapid productivity growth has led to actual declines in nominal production costs, which reduce current and future inflationary pressures. Finally, the labor market remains soft, reflecting the fact that growth in aggregate demand has been so far insufficient to absorb the increases in aggregate supply afforded by higher productivity. A soft labor market will keep a lid on the growth in the cost of employing workers. An accommodative monetary policy is needed, in my view, to support the ongoing recovery, particularly in the labor market. At the same time, the risks of policy accommodation seem low, as inflation is low and inflation pressures seem quite subdued. These arguments notwithstanding, I realize that some remain unconvinced that the FOMC is pursuing the right course. Citing factors such as the rise in commodity prices and the decline of the dollar, a number of observers have warned that the Federal Reserve's policies risk re-igniting inflation. I would like to address these concerns briefly. Naturally, I will try to show why these arguments are not of immediate concern, given the three points I made earlier in support of the current accommodative policy. Before I do that, though, I would like to emphasize to those uncomfortable with the Fed's policy stance that, speaking for myself at least, their views are being heard and taken seriously. Achieving price stability in the United States was an historic accomplishment, and preserving that legacy is crucially important. I say that not only because I think that price stability promotes long-run growth and efficiency, which I do, but also because I believe that low inflation and well-anchored inflation expectations are critical to maintaining economic stability in the short run. Price stability is of utmost importance to the nation's economic health, and I believe that the FOMC will do whatever is necessary to be sure that inflation remains well contained. With that preface, I will address briefly a few concerns of those who worry that inflation is poised to rise, beginning with the recent behavior of commodity prices. A number of commodity price indexes have indeed risen sharply over the past couple of years, including a large jump in the past several months. This acceleration has been broadly mirrored in the behavior of the core producer price indexes (PPIs) for crude and intermediate materials, probably the best and most comprehensive measures of prices at early stages of processing. Specifically, over the past two years, the twelve-month change in the core PPI for crude materials has risen rather dramatically, from -9.4 percent to 17.1 percent, and the twelve-month change in the core PPI for intermediate materials has risen from -1.3 percent to 1.8 percent. Do these developments imply a significant increase in inflation risk at the level of the final consumer? The answer is almost certainly not. Two points should be made. First, the recent movements in commodity prices are hardly surprising; they are in fact quite normal for this stage of the business cycle. The acceleration in the core PPI for crude materials that we have seen is about what should have been expected, given the increases that have occurred recently in both domestic and worldwide economic activity. The increase in the demand for commodities from China alone has been substantial; for example, that country's share of world copper consumption is estimated to have risen from less than 5 percent in 1990 to 20 percent in 2003. The much more moderate acceleration in intermediate goods prices can likewise be traced to the increase in economic activity, with some additional effect coming from the decline in the dollar and the indirect impact of increases in energy prices. Second, the direct effects of commodity price inflation on consumer inflation are empirically minuscule, both because raw materials costs are a small portion of total cost and because part of any increase in the cost of materials tends to be absorbed in the margins of final goods producers and distributors. Accelerations in commodity prices comparable to or larger than the most recent one occurred following the 1981-82 and 1990-91 recessions, as well as in 1986-87 and 1999, with no noticeable impact on inflation at the consumer level. A reasonable rule of thumb is that a permanent 10 percent increase in raw materials prices will lead to perhaps a 0.7 percent increase in the price of intermediate goods and to less than a 0.1 percent increase in consumer prices. Thus the recent acceleration in commodity prices, even if it were to persist (and futures prices suggest that it will not), would likely add only a tenth or two to the core inflation rate. In short, rising commodity prices are a better signal of strengthening economic activity than of inflation at the consumer level. Two specific commodity prices that often command attention are the prices of gold and crude petroleum. The price of gold has increased roughly 60 percent since its low in April 2001, from about $255 per ounce to about $410 per ounce. A portion of that increase simply reflects dollar depreciation, which I will discuss momentarily. Gold also represents a safe haven investment, however, and I agree that there have been periods in the past when the fear that drove investors into gold was the fear of inflation. But gold prices also respond to geopolitical tensions; these tensions have certainly heightened since 2001 and, in my view, can account for the bulk of the recent increase in the real price of gold. Oil prices are relatively high, in the range of $33/barrel, but they have been elevated for most of the past four years, despite a broadly disinflationary environment. According to futures markets, oil prices are expected to decline gradually over the next two years, despite accelerating economic activity, as new supplies are brought on line. Of course, there is considerable uncertainty about what the price of oil will do, given the possibility of supply disruptions. But if it follows the course projected by the futures market, the price of oil should have a modest disinflationary effect on overall consumer prices in the next couple of years. Let me turn now to the recent depreciation of the dollar and its implications for inflation. The dollar has fallen dramatically against some major currencies, notably the euro, against which the dollar has declined roughly 30 percent from its recent peak in the first quarter of 2002. However, looking at movements of the dollar against a single currency can be misleading about overall trends; broader measures of dollar strength show somewhat less of a decline. For example, an index of the dollar's real value against the currencies of important U.S. trading partners, weighted by trade shares, has fallen only about 12 percent from its peak in the first quarter of 2002. Notably, this broader index of dollar value remains about 7 percent above its average value in the 1990s and 17 percent above the low it reached in the second quarter of 1995. Moreover, the direct effects of dollar depreciation on inflation, like those of commodity price increases, appear to be relatively small. In part, the small effect reflects the modest weight of imports in the consumer's basket of goods and services. Perhaps more importantly, however, the evidence suggests that foreign producers tend to absorb most of the effect of changes in the value of the dollar rather than "passing through" these effects to the prices they charge U.S. consumers. A reasonable estimate of the portion of changes in the value of the dollar passed through to U.S. consumers is about 30 percent. The extent of passthrough also appears to have declined over time, suggesting that foreign producers also lack "pricing power" in the current low-inflation environment in the United States. Overall, on rough estimates, a 10 percent decline in the broad value of the dollar would be expected to add between one and three tenths to the level of core consumer prices (not the inflation rate), spread out over a period of time. I haven't said anything yet about the rate of growth of the money supply, another indicator that is sometimes cited by those concerned about inflation, largely because there is not too much to say. Growth in standard monetary measures such as the base and M2 has been moderate (and declining) in recent years, certainly well within expected ranges given the growth of nominal GDP and normal variation in velocity. For example, for 2003 as a whole, growth in both the monetary base and M2 should be about equal to growth in nominal GDP. Even should money growth rates accelerate, however, I would caution against making strong inferences about the likely behavior of inflation, except in the very long run. Money growth has not proven to be especially useful for predicting inflation in the short run, in part because various institutional factors unrelated to monetary policy often affect the growth rate of money. A striking example of the way special factors can affect money growth rates is the fact that M2 growth has actually been sharply negative, at about -5 percent at an annual rate, for the past three months for which data are available. Factors such as the falloff in mortgage refinancing activity and outflows from retail money market funds into equities and other investments are the proximate explanations for the decline in M2. Certainly, this short-term decline in broad money is not to be taken as evidence of tight monetary policy! To summarize, 2003 seems to have marked the turning point for the U. S. economy, and we have reason to be optimistic that 2004 will see even more growth and continued progress in reducing unemployment. The remarkable strength and resiliency of the American economy--an economy that has shown the capacity to grow and become more productive in the face of serious adverse shocks--deserve most of the credit for these developments. Highly stimulative monetary and fiscal policies have also played a role, of course. The Federal Reserve enters 2004 with monetary policy that is unusually accommodative in historical terms, relative to the stage of the business cycle. That accommodation is justified, I believe, by the current very low level of inflation, and by the productivity gains and the weakness in the labor market, both of which suggest that inflation is likely to remain subdued. In my view, weighing the relative costs of the upside and downside risks also favors accommodation; in particular, it is important that we ensure, as best we can, that the current expansion will become self-sustaining and that the inflation rate does not fall further. On the other side, as I have already noted, the achievement of price stability must not and will not be jeopardized. We at the Federal Reserve will closely monitor developments in prices and wages, as well as conditions in the labor market and the broader economy, for any sign of incipient inflation. We will also look at the information that can be drawn from surveys and financial markets about inflation expectations. For now, I believe that the Federal Reserve has the luxury of being patient. However, I am also confident that, when the time comes, the Fed will act to ensure that inflation remains firmly under control. REFERENCES Bernanke, Ben (2003). " ," At the Global Investment and Economic Outlook Conference, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, November 6. Kohn, Donald (2003). " ," At the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Monetary Seminar, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, September 24.. Footnotes Thanks are due to Sandy Struckmeyer and members of the Board staff for useful comments and assistance, but they are likewise not responsible for the views expressed here. As employment begins to pick up and the recovery matures, productivity growth is likely to decelerate, perhaps markedly. Nevertheless, slow growth in wages and the return to normal of price-cost markups should help keep inflation low. Of course, all else is not necessarily equal. In general, one would expect strong productivity growth to expand aggregate demand, for example, by stimulating capital formation. However, the stimulative effect of productivity growth on demand appears to have been weaker than normal in recent years (Kohn, 2003). Also, the conclusion that productivity growth has contributed to weak job growth in the short run is in no way inconsistent with the view that productivity growth raises wages and living standards in the long run, when full employment has been restored. A part of the increase in the core crude PPI also reflects indirect effects of energy prices (direct effects of energy prices are excluded from core inflation measures by construction). The depreciation of the dollar, discussed below, may also have played some role. Commodity prices are also well below previous peaks--indeed, about 15 percent or more below the peaks reached in 1977, 1980, 1989, and 1995, when weighted by U.S. import shares. The difficulties with using the monetary base as an inflation indicator are even greater than those with using M2. The base is nearly all (97 percent) currency, about half to two-thirds of which circulates outside the United States. Hence, to a significant degree, base growth is determined by the foreign demand for dollars, rather than by economic conditions in the United States.
Joint Press Release Office of the Comptroller of the Currency Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Office of Thrift Supervision For Immediate Release January 5, 2004 Policy Statement Issued on Financial Institutions Providing Financial Support to Advised Investment Funds The federal banking and thrift supervisory agencies issued a policy statement today alerting financial institutions to the safety and soundness and legal issues involved in providing financial support to investment funds advised by the institution or its subsidiaries or affiliates. Today's policy statement is prompted by recent market developments, including market volatility, the continued low interest rate environment, and operational and corporate governance weaknesses. It warns that investment advisory services can pose material risks to a financial institution's liquidity, earnings, capital and reputation and can harm investors, if the associated risks are not effectively controlled. To ensure safe and sound banking practices, today's policy statement makes clear that a financial institution should not inappropriately place its resources and reputation at risk for the benefit of the fund's investors and creditors. In addition, financial institutions should not violate the limits and requirements contained in applicable legal requirements or in any supervisory conditions imposed by the agencies, and should not create an expectation that they will prop up an advised fund. The statement sets forth the agencies' expectations regarding the nature of controls that financial institutions should have in place over investment advisory activities and further provides that financial institutions should notify and consult with their primary federal regulator prior to, or in the event of an emergency, immediately after, providing financial support to an advised fund. ### The federal banking and thrift supervisory agencies issued a policy statement today alerting financial institutions to the safety and soundness and legal issues involved in providing financial support to investment funds advised by the institution or its subsidiaries or affiliates. Today's policy statement is prompted by recent market developments, including market volatility, the continued low interest rate environment, and operational and corporate governance weaknesses. It warns that investment advisory services can pose material risks to a financial institution's liquidity, earnings, capital and reputation and can harm investors, if the associated risks are not effectively controlled. To ensure safe and sound banking practices, today's policy statement makes clear that a financial institution should not inappropriately place its resources and reputation at risk for the benefit of the fund's investors and creditors. In addition, financial institutions should not violate the limits and requirements contained in applicable legal requirements or in any supervisory conditions imposed by the agencies, and should not create an expectation that they will prop up an advised fund. The statement sets forth the agencies' expectations regarding the nature of controls that financial institutions should have in place over investment advisory activities and further provides that financial institutions should notify and consult with their primary federal regulator prior to, or in the event of an emergency, immediately after, providing financial support to an advised fund. ### Media Contacts : OCC Robert Garsson (202) 874-5770 Federal Reserve Andrew Williams (202) 452-2955 FDIC David Barr (202) 898-6992 OTS Chris Smith (202) 906-6677
No content found
Remarks by Governor Donald L. Kohn At the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta's Public Policy Dinner, Atlanta, Georgia January 7, 2004 The United States in the World Economy No public policy issues facing the United States today in the economic realm are more important or prominent than those that touch on our place in the world economy. The greater attention to global economic issues is partly just a natural byproduct of the increasing interdependencies of all national economies. But this focus has been accentuated of late by the potential effects of two trends that have intensified in recent years. One is the emergence of several developing countries--most prominently China and India--as global economic forces and the consequent reorganization of production processes and change in the nature and location of jobs here and abroad. The second is our burgeoning trade and current account deficits and the possibility that they cannot be sustained at these levels. Like most interesting policy issues, these are difficult and complex, and they therefore carry a considerable risk that policy prescriptions will be ineffective or even counterproductive. The two developments are related, but only to a limited and indirect extent. Importantly, they arise from very different underlying sources. Job reorganization results from the integration of China and other developing countries into the world economy. The increase in our current account deficit has numerous roots, including, most prominently, stronger growth here than in our trading partners. But trade and exchange rate relationships with emerging-market economies are a small part of the story. The deficit does mean that the United States has been spending more than we produce, and the rest of the world has done the opposite. Because they have different causes, these developments have different public policy implications. Their implications for Federal Reserve policy are indirect. We cannot affect the pace of job restructuring nor correct the current account deficit, and that limitation is important to understand. Nonetheless, how these phenomena evolve and how they are addressed are critical background factors for us as we conduct monetary policy. They can influence the balance of aggregate supply and demand and the functioning of the economy--its flexibility and resiliency and its capacity to advance standards of living. Let's look at these developments separately. Job Restructuring I think it is useful to look at job restructuring as the adaptation to a much larger development--a huge increase in global productive capacity. The major increase in global productivity has two main causes. The first is the spreading recognition in recent decades, reinforced by the collapse of the Soviet Union, that market economies work best--that responses to market signals by private parties trying to make profits and raise standards of living are far more effective and efficient than government-directed allocation of resources. Hence not only countries in Eastern Europe, where governments were overturned, but also China and India, where political stability has been maintained, have been shifting toward economic systems that place greater reliance on market transactions among private parties. This trend is unleashing huge productive potential. The shift to market-based systems has been interacting with a second force--a heightened pace of technological change, especially the declining cost of generating and transmitting information. We can see the effects of technological change here at home, where it has considerably boosted the growth rate of productivity since the mid-1990s. Globally, cheaper access to more information has eased the integration and coordination of geographically diverse production processes. This development has opened up opportunities to transfer production to locations in which the work can be accomplished less expensively, and the trend toward market-based economies has multiplied the number of feasible locations. This type of shifting has been occurring in manufacturing for a long time in response to technical innovation and economic development. But what seems to be different is that, because of the new applications of information technology and telecommunications, an increasing variety of services that used to be attached to a particular business location can be carried out anywhere in the world. For example, call centers have moved to India and elsewhere. Routine back office accounting work such as handling accounts receivable is also shifting overseas and becoming centralized for global corporations. Many types of routine programming can be carried out around the clock, handed off from time zone to time zone by e-mail. The interaction of these forces has led to a major restructuring of production processes--at home and abroad--and a redistribution of these processes and associated jobs geographically around the globe. It is a beneficial development that will raise standards of living everywhere. In the newly emerging economies, of course, hundreds of millions of people now have a chance to escape grinding poverty. But the benefits will be felt in the industrial world as well. Workers in the United States and other advanced economies will need to shift toward industries specializing in the types of goods and services we produce relatively more efficiently. Typically, production of these goods and services involve more complex processes, often those that are more rooted in the higher knowledge and skills of our workers. As workers shift to higher value-added employment, real wages will rise commensurately. In addition, U.S. residents are getting access to less costly goods produced abroad. As a consequence, more toys appeared under the Christmas tree, and we have a greater choice of inexpensive clothes. I would guess that the less well-off among us probably benefit disproportionately from the availability of many of the types of less-expensive goods coming in from abroad. They are better able to clothe and feed their families and have more income available for other necessities, such as housing and medical care. International trade is not a zero sum game in which one country's gains are another country's loss. By specializing in what they do best, workers in all countries can be winners. Even if one country can be more efficient at producing all goods and services than another, each will gain by specializing in what it does relatively better. This is the result of what economists call comparative advantage. Increased trade should redistribute jobs, but it should not create or destroy jobs in the aggregate over the long run. Long-run levels of employment are determined by the available supply of labor and the flexibility of the labor market. Keeping employment reasonably close to its long-term, sustainable level is the job of macroeconomic policy--especially monetary policy. To be sure, individuals do get hurt in the transition, but within a country gains should exceed losses over the longer run. Unfortunately, from a political perspective, the gains are often widely disbursed, accrue over time, and are hard to measure whereas the losses are concentrated and palpable. Those whose jobs are restructured face a difficult adjustment. Even if it is possible, climbing the value-added chain may not be easy, and the dislocations are costly for those involved. People often are unemployed for a considerable time, and a significant portion end up settling for jobs that pay less than the one they left. Trying to protect those particular jobs through tariffs or quotas on imported goods may help those workers who face loss, but that protection will likely prove temporary and will reduce the standard of living for the country as a whole. When considering public policy responses to job restructuring, we must keep the pace of change in perspective and remember the flexibility and resiliency of our labor and product markets. Indeed, economists cannot even agree on whether job restructuring has accelerated. One study finds that, since the early 1980s, job loss has had a much larger structural component; another study fails to find any such trend. Manufacturing employment has been in a long-term downtrend for decades, likely because of the substantial advances in productivity as well as the rising preference for services in an increasingly wealthy country. We should also recall that the shifting of some jobs to Japan in the 1980s and to East Asia and Mexico in the 1990s aroused considerable concern. These developments did not prevent a drop in the unemployment rate to a thirty-year low in the late 1990s. Moreover, the new jobs have not been lower paying. Higher productivity growth has meant that, on average, real wages and compensation rose substantially in the second half of the 1990s and have continued to increase in the past few years, albeit more slowly, despite the recent recession and jobless recovery. One difficulty of assessing trends in job restructuring in recent years has been the weak cyclical position of the economy. We must not confuse nor conflate cyclical and structural issues, especially when thinking about policy implications. A lot of today's pain in manufacturing and in the overall economy is cyclical--a consequence of inadequate demand, not of a shift of jobs to other countries. Because this business cycle was led by capital goods both in its boom and bust stages, manufacturing has been especially hard hit over the last few years. In fact, until the economy comes much closer to full employment, we will not be able to isolate the structural issues with any confidence. Authorities here and abroad have the tools to get economies back to high levels of employment and production, even as we adjust to higher productivity growth and shifting production processes. Getting economies on track seems to be requiring unusually accommodative fiscal and monetary policies--but these policies finally appear to be bearing fruit. Indeed, over time, high productivity growth here and rising productive capacity abroad can increase demand for goods and services even more than they increase supply. We saw considerable strength in demand in the United States in the 1990s, when productivity accelerated, and we are beginning to see it in China, where rising demand for imports is eroding the country's large trade surplus and boosting the economies of some of its trading partners. People experiencing much brighter economic prospects will want much more in the way of consumer goods. Businesses here and in China will need capital equipment to expand, and no country does a better job of producing sophisticated capital equipment than does the United States. The key to easing adjustment for the individuals affected is training and education. We must do a better job of giving our current workers and the next generations the skills needed to grab the highly productive, knowledge-based jobs to which demand will continue to shift. I cannot tell you exactly in what sectors or industries these jobs will be; government is not good at picking winners and losers. The market system will sort that out and, in the process, will signal our workers as to which skills are becoming more highly valued. Government needs to make sure that the opportunities and resources are available for obtaining those skills. I recognize that, unfortunately, not every country always plays by the rules. Some job restructuring occurs not because of relative efficiencies but because of subsidies of certain industries or discrimination against foreign goods. We need to work together with all countries to eliminate impediments, wherever they might be, to realizing the benefits of the global increase in productive capacity. It would be counterproductive to increase protectionist measures, which in effect would reduce the flexibility of our economy, lock people into inferior jobs, and end up raising costs for consumers--especially those among us who can least afford to pay more. The Trade and Current Account Deficits Our current account deficit has been growing both in dollar terms and relative to the size of our economy, reaching 5 percent of GDP last year. This is a record for us; when the deficit approached this magnitude in the past, markets had generally already begun to adjust to reduce it. The deficit reflects the fact that spending in the United States exceeds what we produce. We meet the extra demand by importing more than we export. We pay for the added imports by using the savings of people in other countries--that is, they lend us money to buy their goods and services. Using more goods and services than one produces is not a bad deal. We could do so indefinitely, provided that foreigners were willing to continue increasing their loans and investments in the United States. Even then, of course, we would have ever-rising debts to service, and foreigners would own a growing proportion of our capital stock. We have indeed become a large net debtor in global capital markets, but so far, the net servicing of the debt has been very small. For quite a while, global investors seemed willing to increase the proportion of the total assets they hold as claims on the United States, denominated in dollars. Through the 1990s and into the early 2000s foreigners expected returns here to be so high that they willingly sent us larger and larger amounts of savings--in effect, financing a goodly part of our investment boom. The strong demand for dollar assets was evidenced by a rising exchange rate, which in turn fed the increase in the current account and trade deficits. This point is important to keep in mind. We did not seek to run a current account deficit, nor did we make policy mistakes that brought it on. The current account and trade deficits became so large mostly because we had a more-dynamic, faster-growing economy than everyone else had--one with a higher expected return on investment, which induced a rising demand for dollar claims on our increasingly productive capital stock. But although the U.S. economy continues to be far more vigorous than most others, foreign investors may be becoming less willing to finance the gap between what we spend and what we produce. With the current account deficit climbing, that gap is growing fast--evidently faster than the appetite for U.S. assets. Private capital flows into the United States have ceased expanding rapidly. Governments--especially those of Japan and China--have taken up the slack by purchasing U.S. assets, but the shortfall in the desire to supply savings to fund our deficit has been reflected in a significant drop in the dollar on foreign exchange markets since early 2002. It is to be expected, at least for economies with exchange rates that truly float, that a shortfall of demand for a country's assets will be reflected at first primarily in the exchange rate. The lower exchange rate in turn stimulates exports and damps imports, and so the current account deficit and the associated need for foreign capital are also reduced, matching the lower appetite of foreign investors. To date, this adjustment process has not been a problem for the United States. Because we are operating with spare capacity in our factories and labor markets, higher exports and lower imports are fine. They help boost U.S. production to more fully utilize labor and capital and should not add to sustained inflation pressures, even with import prices moving a little higher and competitive pressure on import-competing industries easing a bit. Some have feared that lagging demand for our assets would show up in lower prices for the assets themselves--that is, in increases in bond yields and declines in equity prices--as well as in lower exchange rates. However, for the most part, these assets are traded in highly liquid markets, where even large decreases in demand can be accommodated with very small changes in prices. In such markets, interest rates and equity prices tend to reflect investors' perceptions of fundamentals such as expected inflation, profits, risk, and real growth. In fact, over recent months, as the dollar has continued to drop, equity prices have risen, and yields on corporate bonds are unchanged to a little lower. To be sure, foreign authorities have acquired a large quantity of dollar assets, but their purchases tend to be concentrated in Treasury and agency securities, not in privately issued equity or debt. The global economy does face a potential longer-term structural issue. If investors are reaching a point at which assets denominated in U.S. dollars are becoming as large a share of their portfolios as they see appropriate, our trade deficit will need to shrink. We will not be able to call so much on an increasing share of world saving to finance our spending, and that spending will need to match our production much more closely. At the Federal Reserve we will continue to work to foster a full employment level of production, one as high as the economy can generate on a sustainable, noninflationary basis. Relative to that level of production, demand or spending in the United States will need to be considerably more restrained on both domestic and foreign goods, and more U.S. production will need to be exported abroad. This fact--this implication of the simple arithmetic of smaller trade and current account deficits--raises important policy questions for both the United States and the rest of the world. In the United States the tough questions are just what kind of spending will feel the brunt of the restraint and to what extent will production have to shift to accommodate a new mix of spending. In particular, without added doses of foreign saving, we are going to need to generate more of our own if we wish to fund high levels of business investment in capital goods and household purchases of new houses and durable goods. If we do not increase our saving, investment will have to be cut back. We can get that savings from the private sector by decreasing consumption relative to income or from the public sector by decreasing spending relative to taxes. In that context, the prospect of large federal government deficits stretching out into the future looks worrisome. In the second half of the 1990s, we had both foreign and government savings to finance investment; a few years from now we may have less of the former and none of the latter--indeed, the government sector is projected to be a net user of savings not a net supplier. The fiscal stimulus of the past few years has been quite helpful in promoting recovery, but we do need to consider the longer-term implications of the policies put in place. If the fiscal path does not change, unless private savings rise considerably to compensate, interest rates will be higher than they otherwise would be to ration the scarcer savings, and we will have slower growth in the capital stock and in the number of houses and autos. Slower growth in the capital stock means slower growth in productivity and in our economic potential. Constraints on trend growth would be a concern at any time, but they are especially so over the coming years. We are on the cusp of a wave of retirements, which will leave a smaller workforce to generate the goods and services those of us looking forward to retirement will consume even as we contribute less and less to their production. We need to be saving and investing to build our economic potential and to alleviate the burden on our children and grandchildren. This is not a task for monetary policy. In the long run, monetary policy cannot do anything about the current account deficit or about the lack of savings from government policy or private choices. Our manipulation of the overnight interest rate helps to keep the overall economy in balance--promoting price stability and production at the economy's potential. But on the Federal Open Market Committee Jack and I can do nothing to promote savings other than to provide a stable backdrop for private decisions. Promoting savings is a job for fiscal and tax policy. If our trade and current account deficits move toward balance, foreign economies will face the questions of how to replace the demand that will no longer be coming from the United States and to reallocate production to a new mix of spending. The U. S. current account will not correct in isolation. The United States has been, in effect, exporting its demand overseas, supporting economic activity in foreign economies by importing more goods and services than we export. If our imports fall and exports rise, just the opposite will occur in the rest of the world. As our domestic demand is restrained relative to production, demand elsewhere will have to increase to foster global high employment. How that is to be achieved is an open question: Structural reforms that improve the flexibility of the labor force and production and that foster growth abroad are a desirable way to contribute to better global balance, but macroeconomic policy adjustments to promote more domestic demand may also be required. It is simply not possible for all countries to enjoy stimulus from net exports; some countries will need to be net importers, especially if the United States no longer fills that role. And so my two issues become related. The development strategies of countries such as China and other Asian nations, to be successful, must be compatible with the pattern of adjustment in global demand that is required by the consumption, saving, and investment decisions made by market participants everywhere. Conclusion The global economy seems to be facing major adjustments in several dimensions simultaneously. Successful adaptation to changing circumstances will require flexibility on several fronts. No one can anticipate how events will unfold--the evolving geography and technology of the production of goods and services, the shifting balances between spending and producing as current accounts change. My fear is that poorly formed diagnoses and incorrect policy prescriptions will have unintended adverse consequences for our economy. Any elements of rigidity--in exchange rates, in labor and product markets, in quotas and tariffs on international trade--limit the channels through which the adjustment process can work. Rigidity concentrates stresses, increases the risk of market disruptions, impedes economic resiliency, and limits the world's ability to realize the full potential of the rise in global productivity to lift standards of living. Footnotes The views are my own and do not necessarily represent the views of other members of the Federal Open Market Committee or the Board. Erica L. Groshen and Simon Potter, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Current Issues in Economics and Finance , vol. 9, no. 8, August 2003. On the Federal Reserve Bank of New York web site. Ellen R. Rissman, (680KB PDF) Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Chicago Fed Letter: Essays on Issues, no. 197, December 2003. On the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago web site. Caroline Freund, "Current Account Adjustment in Industrialized Countries," Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, International Finance Discussion Paper No. 692, December 2000. As Chairman Greenspan has argued, increased liquidity in financial markets, greater willingness of investors to look at opportunities outside their home countries, and enhanced flexibility of economies all suggest less pressure than in the past to correct large current account deficits in a short period and greater likelihood that any such adjustment will be smooth. See Alan Greenspan, at the Twenty-first Annual Monetary Conference, cosponsored by the Cato Institute and The Economist , Washington, D.C., November 20, 2003.
No content found
No content found
No content found
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan Before the Bundesbank Lecture 2004, Berlin, Germany January 13, 2004 Globalization has altered the economic frameworks of both developed and developing nations in ways that are difficult to fully comprehend. Nonetheless, the largely unregulated global markets do clear and, with rare exceptions, appear to move effortlessly from one state of equilibrium to another. It is as though an international version of Adam Smith's "invisible hand" is at work. One key aspect of the recent globalization process is the apparent persistent rise in the dispersion of current account balances. Although for the world as a whole the sum of surpluses must always match the sum of deficits, the combined size of both, relative to global gross domestic product (GDP), has grown markedly since the end of World War II. This trend is inherently sustainable unless some countries build up deficits that are no longer capable of being financed. Many argue that this has become the case for America's large current account deficit. There is no simple measure by which to judge the sustainability of either a string of current account deficits or their consequence, a significant buildup in external claims that need to be serviced. In the end, the restraint on the size of tolerable U.S. imbalances in the global arena will likely be the reluctance of foreign country residents to accumulate additional debt and equity claims against U.S. residents. By the end of 2003, net external claims on U.S. residents had risen to approximately 25 percent of a year's GDP, still far less than net claims on many of our trading partners but rising at the equivalent of 5 percentage points of GDP annually. However, without some notion of America's capacity for raising cross-border debt, the sustainability of the current account deficit is difficult to estimate. That capacity is evidently, in part, a function of globalization since the apparent increase in our debt-raising capacity appears to be related to the reduced cost and increasing reach of international financial intermediation. The significant reduction in global trade barriers over the past half century has contributed to a marked rise in the ratio of world trade to GDP and, accordingly, a rise in the ratio of imports to domestic demand. But also evident is that the funding of trade has required, or at least has been associated with, an even faster rise in external finance. Between 1980 and 2002, for example, the nominal dollar value of world imports rose 5-1/2 percent annually, while gross external liabilities, largely financial claims also expressed in dollars, apparently rose nearly twice as fast. This observation does not reflect solely the sharp rise in the external liabilities of the United States that has occurred since 1995. Excluding the United States, world imports rose about 2-3/4 percent annually from 1995 to 2002; external liabilities increased approximately 8 percent. Less-comprehensive data suggest that the ratio of global debt and equity claims to trade has been rising since at least the beginning of the post-World War II period, though apparently at a more modest pace than in recent years. From an accounting perspective, part of the increase in the ratio of world gross claims to trade in recent years reflects the continued marked rise in tradable foreign currencies held by private firms as well as a very significant buildup of international currency reserves of monetary authorities. Rising global wealth apparently has led to increased demand for diversification of portfolios by including greater shares of assets denominated in foreign currencies. More generally, technological advance and the spread of global financial deregulation has fostered a broadening array of specialized financial products and institutions. The associated increased layers of intermediation in our financial systems make it easier to diversify and manage risk, thereby facilitating an ever-rising ratio of both domestic liabilities and assets to GDP and gross external liabilities to trade. These trends seem unlikely to reverse, or even to slow materially, short of an improbable end to the expansion of financial intermediation that is being driven by cost-reducing technology. Uptrends in the ratios of external liabilities or assets to trade, and therefore to GDP, can be shown to have been associated with the widening dispersion in countries' ratios of trade and current account balances to GDP to which I alluded earlier. A measure of that dispersion, the sum of the absolute values of the current account balances estimated from each country's gross domestic saving less gross domestic investment (the current account's algebraic equivalent), has been rising as a ratio to aggregate GDP at an average annual rate of about 2 percent since 1970 for the OECD countries, which constitute four-fifths of world GDP. The long-term increase in intermediation, by facilitating the financing of ever-wider current account deficits and surpluses, has created an ever-larger class of investors who might be willing to hold cross-border claims. To create liabilities, of course, implies a willingness of some private investors and governments to hold the equivalent increase in claims at market-determined asset prices. Indeed, were it otherwise, the funding of liabilities would not be possible. With the seeming willingness of foreigners to hold progressively greater amounts of cross-border claims against U.S. residents, at what point do net claims (that is, gross claims less gross liabilities) against the United States become unsustainable and deficits decline? Presumably, a U.S. current account deficit of 5 percent or more of GDP would not have been readily fundable a half-century ago or perhaps even a couple of decades ago. The ability to move that much of world saving to the United States in response to relative rates of return would have been hindered by a far lower degree of international financial intermediation. Endeavoring to transfer the equivalent of 5 percent of U.S. GDP from foreign financial institutions and persons to the United States would presumably have induced changes in the prices of assets that would have proved inhibiting. * * * There is, for the moment, little evidence of stress in funding U.S. current account deficits. To be sure, the real exchange rate for the dollar has, on balance, declined about 15 percent broadly and roughly 25 percent against the major foreign currencies since early 2002. Yet inflation, the typical symptom of a weak currency, appears quiescent. Indeed, inflation premiums embedded in long-term interest rates apparently have fluctuated in a relatively narrow range since early 2002. More generally, the vast savings transfer has occurred without measurable disruption to the balance of international finance. Certainly, euro area exporters have been under considerable pressure, but in recent months credit risk spreads have fallen, and equity prices have risen, throughout much of the global economy. * * * To date, the widening to record levels of the U.S. ratio of current account deficit to GDP has been, with the exception of the dollar's exchange rate, seemingly uneventful. But I have little doubt that, should the rise in the deficit continue, at some point in the future further adjustments will be set in motion that will eventually slow and presumably reverse the rate of accumulation of net claims on U.S. residents. How much further can international financial intermediation stretch the capacity of world finance to move national savings across borders? A major inhibitor appears to be what economists call "home bias." Virtually all our trading partners share our inclination to invest a disproportionate percentage of domestic savings in domestic capital assets, irrespective of the differential rates of return. People seem to prefer to invest in familiar local businesses even where currency and country risks do not exist. For the United States, studies have shown that individual investors and even professional money managers have a slight preference for investments in their own communities and states. Trust, so crucial an aspect of investing, is most likely to be fostered by the familiarity of local communities. As a consequence, home bias will likely continue to constrain the movement of world savings into its optimum use as capital investment, thus limiting the internationalization of financial intermediation and hence the growth of external assets and liabilities. Nonetheless, during the past decade, home bias has apparently declined significantly. For most of the earlier postwar era, the correlation between domestic saving rates and domestic investment rates across the world's major trading partners, a conventional measure of home bias, was exceptionally high. For OECD countries, the GDP-weighted correlation coefficient was 0.97 in 1970. However, it fell from the still elevated 0.96 in 1992 to less than 0.8 in 2002. For OECD countries excluding the United States, the recent decline is even more pronounced. These declines, not surprisingly, mirror the rise in the differences between saving and investment or, equivalently, of the dispersion of current account balances over the same years. The decline in home bias doubtless reflects, in part, vast improvements in information and communication technologies that have broadened investors' scope to the point that foreign investment appears less exotic and risky. Moreover, there has been an increased international tendency for financial systems to be more transparent, open, and supportive of strong investor protection. Accordingly, the trend of declining home bias and expanding international financial intermediation will likely continue as globalization proceeds. * * * It is unclear at what point the rising weight of U.S. assets in global portfolios will impose restraint on world current account dispersion. When that point arrives, what do we know about whether the process of reining in our current account deficit will be benign to the economies of the United States and the world? According to a Federal Reserve staff study, current account deficits that emerged among developed countries since 1980 have risen as high as double-digit percentages of GDP before markets enforced a reversal. The median high has been about 5 percent of GDP. Complicating the evaluation of the timing of a turnaround is that deficit countries, both developed and emerging, borrow in international markets largely in dollars rather than in their domestic currency. The United States has been rare in its ability to finance its external deficit in a reserve currency. This ability has presumably enlarged the capability of the United States relative to most of our trading partners to incur foreign debt. * * * Besides experiences with the current account deficits of other countries, there are few useful guideposts of how high America's net foreign liabilities can mount. The foreign accumulation of U.S. assets would likely slow if dollar assets, irrespective of their competitive return, came to occupy too large a share of the world's portfolio of store of value assets. In these circumstances, investors would seek greater diversification into nondollar assets. At the end of 2002, U.S. dollars accounted for about 65 percent of central bank foreign exchange reserves, with the euro second at 19 percent. Approximately half of the much larger private cross-border holdings were denominated in dollars, with one-third in euros. More important than the way that the adjustment of the U.S. current account deficit will be initiated is the effect of the adjustment on both the U.S. economy and the economies of our trading partners. The history of such adjustments has been mixed. According to the aforementioned Federal Reserve study of current account corrections in developed countries, although the large majority of episodes were characterized by some significant slowing of economic growth, most economies managed the adjustment without crisis. The institutional strengths of many of these developed economies--rule of law, transparency, and investor and property protection--likely helped to minimize disruptions associated with current account adjustments. The United Kingdom, however, had significant adjustment difficulties in its early postwar years, as did, more recently, Mexico, Thailand, Korea, Russia, Brazil, and Argentina, to name just a few. Can market forces incrementally defuse a worrisome buildup in a nation's current account deficit and net external debt before a crisis more abruptly does so? The answer seems to lie with the degree of flexibility in both domestic and international markets. By flexibility I mean the ability of an economy to absorb shocks, stabilize, and recover. In domestic economies that approach full flexibility, imbalances are likely to be adjusted well before they become potentially destabilizing. In a similarly flexible world economy, as debt projections rise, product and equity prices, interest rates, and exchange rates could change, presumably to reestablish global balance. The experience over the past two centuries of trade and finance among the individual states that make up the United States comes close to that paradigm of flexibility, especially given the fact that exchange rates among the states have been fixed and, hence, could not be part of an adjustment process. Although we have scant data on cross-border transactions among the separate states, anecdotal evidence suggests that over the decades significant apparent imbalances have been resolved without precipitating interstate balance-of-payments crises. The dispersion of unemployment rates among the states, one measure of imbalances, spikes during periods of economic stress but rapidly returns to modest levels, reflecting a high degree of adjustment flexibility. That flexibility is even more apparent in regional money markets, where interest rates that presumably reflect differential imbalances in states' current accounts and hence cross-border borrowing requirements have, in recent years, exhibited very little interstate dispersion. This observation suggests either negligible cross-state-border imbalances, an unlikely occurrence given the pattern of state unemployment dispersion, or more likely very rapid financial adjustments. * * * We may not be able to usefully determine at what point foreign accumulation of net claims on the United States will slow or even reverse, but it is evident that the greater the degree of international flexibility, the less the risk of a crisis. The experience of the United States over the past three years is illustrative. The apparent ability of our economy to withstand a number of severe shocks since mid-2000, with only a small, temporary decline in real GDP, attests to the marked increase in our economy's flexibility over the past quarter century. In evaluating the nature of the adjustment process, we need to ask whether there is something special in the dollar's being the world's primary reserve currency. With so few historical examples of dominant world reserve currencies, we are understandably inclined to look to the experiences of the dollar's immediate predecessor. At the height of sterling's role as the world's currency more than a century ago, Great Britain had net external assets amounting to some 150 percent of its annual GDP, most of which were lost in World Wars I and II. Early post-World War II Britain was hobbled with periodic sterling crises, as much of the remnants of Empire endeavored to disengage themselves from heavy reliance on holding sterling assets as central bank reserves and private stores of value. The experience of Britain's then extensively regulated economy, harboring many wartime controls well beyond the end of hostilities, testifies to the costs of structural rigidity in times of crisis. * * * Should globalization be allowed to proceed and thereby create an ever more flexible international financial system, history suggests that current imbalances will be defused with little disruption. And if other currencies, such as the euro, emerge to share the dollar's role as a global reserve currency, that process, too, is likely to be benign. I say this with one major caveat. Some clouds of emerging protectionism have become increasingly visible on today's horizon. Over the years, protected interests have often endeavored to stop in its tracks the process of unsettling economic change. Pitted against the powerful forces of market competition, virtually all such efforts have failed. The costs of any new protectionist initiatives, in the context of wide current account imbalances, could significantly erode the flexibility of the global economy. Consequently, it is imperative that creeping protectionism be thwarted and reversed. The question of whether globalization will be allowed to proceed rests largely on the judgment of whether greater economic freedom, and the often frenetic competition it encourages, is deemed by leaders in societies to enhance the interests, one hopes the long-term interests, of their populations. Such broad judgments in the end determine how societies are governed. The reasons that some economies prosper and others sink into long-term stagnation consequently has been the object of intense interest in recent decades. Agreement is growing among economic analysts and policymakers that those economies that have been open to cross-border trade have, in general, prospered. Those economies that chose to eschew such trade have done poorly. Most economists have long stipulated that, for a society based on a division of labor to prosper, the exchange of goods and services must be subject to a rule of law--specifically, to laws protecting the rights of minorities and property. Presumably to be effective such arrangements must be perceived as just by an overwhelming majority of a society. Thus, a rule of law arguably requires democracy. Clearly, ideas shape societies and economies. Indeed, I have maintained over the years that the most profoundly important debate between conflicting theories of optimum economic organization during the twentieth century was settled, presumably definitively, here more than a decade ago in the aftermath of the dismantling of the Berlin Wall. Aside from the Soviet Union itself, the economies of the Soviet bloc had been, in the prewar period, similar in many relevant respects to the market-based economies of the west. Over the first four decades of postwar Europe, both types of economies developed side by side with limited interaction. It was as close to a controlled experiment in the viability of economic systems as could ever be implemented. The results, evident with the dismantling of the Wall, were unequivocally in favor of market economies. The consequences were far-reaching. The long-standing debate between the virtues of economies organized around free markets and those governed by centrally planned socialism, one must assume, is essentially at an end. To be sure, a few still support an old fashioned socialism. But for the vast majority of previous adherents it is now a highly diluted socialism, an amalgam of social equity and market efficiency, often called market socialism. The verdict on rigid central planning has been rendered, and it is generally appreciated to have been unqualifiedly negative. There was no eulogy for central planning; it just ceased to be mentioned, and a large majority of developing nations quietly shifted from socialism to more market-oriented economies. Europe has accepted market capitalism in large part as the most effective means for creating material affluence. It does so, however, with residual misgivings. The differences between the United States and continental Europe were captured most clearly for me in a soliloquy attributed to a prominent European leader several years ago. He asked, "What is the market? It is the law of the jungle, the law of nature. And what is civilization? It is the struggle against nature." While acknowledging the ability of competition to promote growth, many such observers, nonetheless, remain concerned that economic actors, to achieve that growth, are required to behave in a manner governed by the law of the jungle and are hence driven to an excess of materialism. In contrast to these skeptics, others, especially in the United States, believe the gains in material wealth resulting from market-driven outcomes facilitate the pursuit of broader values. They support a system based on voluntary choice in a free marketplace. The crux of the largely laissez-faire argument is that, because unencumbered competitive markets reflect the value preferences of consumers, the resulting price signals direct a nation's savings into those capital assets that maximize the production of goods and services most valued by consumers. Incomes earned from that production are determined, for the most part, by how successfully the participants in an economy contribute to the welfare of consumers, the presumed purpose of a society's economy. Clearly, not all activities undertaken in markets are civil. Many, though legal, are decidedly unsavory. Violation of law and breaches of trust do undermine the efficiency of markets. But the legal foundations and the discipline of the marketplace are sufficiently rooted in a rule of law to limit these aberrations. It is instructive that despite the egregious breaches of trust in recent years by a number of America's business and financial leaders, productivity, an important metric of corporate efficiency, has accelerated. * * * On net, most economists would agree that vigorous economic competition over the years has produced a significant rise in the quality of life for the vast majority of the population in market-oriented economies, including those at the bottom of the income distribution. The highly competitive free market paradigm, however, is viewed by many at the other end of the philosophical spectrum, especially among some here in Europe, as obsessively materialistic and largely lacking in meaningful cultural values. Those that still harbor a visceral distaste for highly competitive market capitalism doubtless gained adherents with the recent uncovering of much scandalous business behavior during the boom years of the 1990s. But is there a simple tradeoff between civil conduct, as defined by those who find raw competitive behavior demeaning, and the quality of material life they, nonetheless, seek? It is not obvious from a longer-term perspective that such a tradeoff exists in any meaningful sense. During the past century, for example, economic growth created resources far in excess of those required to maintain subsistence. That surplus, even in the most aggressively competitive economies, has been in large measure employed to improve the quality of life along many dimensions. To cite a short list: (1) greater longevity, owing first to the widespread development of clean, potable water and later to rapid advances in medical technology; (2) a universal system of education that enabled greatly increased social mobility; (3) vastly improved conditions of work; and (4) the ability to enhance our environment by setting aside natural resources rather than having to employ them to sustain a minimum level of subsistence. At a fundamental level, Americans, for example, have used the substantial increases in wealth generated by our market-driven economy to purchase what many would view as greater civility. * * * The collapse of the Soviet empire, and with it central planning, has left market capitalism as the principal, but not universally revered, model of economic organization. Nevertheless, the vigorous debate on how economies should be organized in our increasingly globalized society and what rules should govern individuals' trading appears destined to continue. Footnotes Gross liabilities include both debt and equity claims. Data on the levels of gross liabilities have to be interpreted carefully because they reflect the degree of consolidation of the economic entities they cover. Were each of our fifty states considered as a separate economy, for example, interstate claims would add to both U.S. and world totals without affecting U.S. or world GDP. Accordingly, it is the change in the gross liabilities ratios that is the more economically meaningful concept. For the United States, for example, the ratio of external liabilities to imports of goods and services rose from nearly 1-1/2 in 1948 to close to 2 in 1980. The comparable ratios for the United Kingdom can be estimated to have been in the neighborhood of 2-1/2 or lower in 1948 and about 3-3/4 in 1980. For the United States, for example, even excluding mortgage pools, the ratio of domestic liabilities to GDP rose at an annual rate of 2 percent between 1965 and 2002. For the United Kingdom, the ratio of domestic liabilities to GDP increased 4 percent at an annual rate during the 1987-2002 period. If the rate of growth of external assets (and liabilities) exceeds, on average, the growth rate of world GDP, under a broad range of circumstances the dispersion of the change in net external claims of trading countries must increase as a percentage of world GDP. But the change in net claims on a country, excluding currency valuation changes and capital gains and losses, is essentially the current account balance. Of necessity, of course, the consolidated world current account balance remains at zero. Theoretically, if external assets and liabilities were always equal, implying a current account in balance, the ratio of liabilities to GDP could grow without limit. But in the complexities of the real world, if external assets fall short of liabilities for some countries, net external liabilities will grow until they can no longer be effectively serviced. Well short of that point, market prices, interest rates, and exchange rates will slow, and then end, the funding of liability growth. It is true that estimates of the ratios of the current account to GDP for many countries in the nineteenth century are estimated to have been as large as, or larger , than we have experienced in recent years. However, the substantial net flows of capital financing for those earlier deficits were likely motivated in large part by specific major development projects (for example, railroads) bearing high expected rates of return. By contrast, diversification appears to be a more salient motivation for today's large net capital flows. Moreover, gross capital flows are believed to be considerably greater relative to GDP in recent years than in the nineteenth century. (See Alan M. Taylor, "A Century of Current Account Dynamics," Journal of International Money and Finance , 2002, 725-48, and Maurice Obstfeld and Alan Taylor, "Globalization and Capital Markets," NBER Working Paper 8846, March 2002.) Without home bias, the dispersion of world current account balances would likely be substantially greater. See Martin Feldstein and Charles Horioka, "Domestic Saving and International Capital Flows," The Economic Journal , June 1980, 314-29. Research indicates that home bias in investment toward a foreign country is likely to be diminished to the extent that the country's financial system offers transparency, accessibility, and investor safeguards. See Alan Ahearne, William Griever, and Frank Warnock, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, International Finance Discussion Paper No. 691, December 2000. Caroline Freund, ," Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, International Finance Discussion Paper No. 692, December 2000. Less than 10 percent of aggregate U.S. foreign liabilities are currently denominated in nondollar currencies. To have your currency chosen as a store of value is both a blessing and a curse. Presumably, the buildup of dollar holdings by foreigners has provided Americans with lower interest rates as a consequence. But as Great Britain learned, the liquidation of sterling balances after World War II exerted severe pressure on its domestic economy. Although increased flexibility apparently promotes resolution of current account imbalances without significant disruption, it may also allow larger deficits to emerge before markets are required to address them. See Alan Greenspan, before a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 30, 2002.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the approval of an application by Gjensidige NOR Sparebank ASA, Oslo, Norway, to establish a branch in New York, New York. Attached is the Order relating to this action.
No content found
No content found
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced its approval of the notice under section 4 of the Bank Holding Company Act by UBS AG, Zurich, Switzerland, to engage in physical commodity trading activities on a limited basis as an activity that is complementary to the financial activity of engaging regularly as principal in commodity derivatives. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
No content found
No content found