For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday the execution of a Written Agreement by and between CIB Marine Bancshares, Inc., Pewaukee, Wisconsin and the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Utah Bancshares, Ephraim, Utah; the Bank of Ephraim, Ephraim, Utah; the Utah State Department of Financial Institutions, Salt Lake City, Utah; and the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
Written statement by Governor Susan Schmidt Bies IASB reform At the International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation Meeting, New York, New York June 3, 2004 Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the opportunity to speak today on matters relating to the review of the constitution of the International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation (IASCF) and the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB). I would like to focus my remarks on several issues the Trustees' Constitution Committee has identified for further consideration. These issues were posted to the on March 22, 2004. The IASCF selected these issues after reviewing the comments it received following the publication of its November 2003 consultation document Identifying Issues for the IASC Foundation Constitution Review . The Federal Reserve has been working to promote common high-quality accounting standards around the world, with a focus on the global standards-setting activities of the IASB. The goal of common global accounting standards will require a high degree of convergence between U.S. and international standards, and efforts toward full commonality are well under way. The potential financial stability benefits are significant--high-quality global accounting standards can lead to enhanced transparency, which will, in turn, improve market discipline and foster stable financial markets. I believe that your efforts and this constitutional review are very important because they will lead to more effective oversight and expert advisory arrangements that will help ensure that high-quality international standards will be developed based on sound principles and appropriate due process, and in a manner consistent with the public interest. Addressing The Challenges Facing Small- and Medium-Sized Entities The first question raised by the Trustees' Constitution Committee's document was whether the objectives of the IASC Foundation should expressly refer to the challenges facing small- and medium-sized entities (SMEs). The committee has been considering some specific mention in the constitution of the special needs of SMEs and emerging economies. A specific objective of this nature would help to ensure that appropriate attention is given to the implementation of international standards by SMEs and emerging-market economies. In addition, I encourage an appropriate involvement of people with such backgrounds in the advisory groups and organization of the IASCF and IASB. The committee has also indicated that it recognizes that educational activities could play a role in reinforcing these objectives and that special mention of the organization's educational efforts could be included in the constitution. I support the inclusion of such language directly into the constitution since this would highlight the IASCF's recognition and commitment to more comprehensively address the implementation needs of important constituents. Number of Trustees and Their Geographical and Professional Distribution Another issue raised for this review was the number of trustees and their geographical and professional distribution. The committee is considering changing the geographical-distribution term Asia/Pacific to Asia/Oceania to reflect the fact that North American countries on the Pacific Ocean were not meant to be considered as part of this grouping. In addition, the committee is considering expanding the number of trustees to provide more representation from the Asia/Oceania region and emerging-market economies. The committee is considering expanding the number of trustees from nineteen to twenty-two, with six trustees each being appointed from North America, Europe, and the Asia/Oceania region and four trustees being appointed from any area, subject to an established overall geographical balance. I support the clarity provided by the new term Asia/Oceania , and I strongly encourage a balanced distribution of trustees between all geographic regions. I also support the appointment of trustees from emerging-market economies because such appointments would give these economies a voice and strengthen their commitment to high-quality accounting standards. However, I do have concerns about the continued effectiveness of the trustees if their numbers are unduly expanded. Therefore, although some limited expansion could always be considered, on balance I would prefer to see a reallocation within the existing numbers, over time, as the existing trustees' terms of office come to an end. The committee believes that the trustees should remain responsible for the selection of new trustees when vacancies arise, and the committee notes that the trustees have advertised the need for applicants for all vacant positions. It has been pointed out that the trustees have consulted with the relevant organizations in the region where the vacancies arose in order to achieve an appropriate balance of professional backgrounds. In addition, the committee suggests that the requirements regarding professional backgrounds should be relaxed and that the following language should be added to the constitution: The Trustees shall be comprised of individuals that as a group provide an appropriate balance of professional backgrounds, including auditors, preparers, users, academics, and other officials serving the public interest. To achieve such a balance, Trustees should be selected after consultation with international organizations of auditors, preparers, users and academics. Organizations consulted shall include the International Federation of Accountants and national and international bodies representing preparers, users, and academics. The Trustees shall establish procedures for inviting suggestions for appointments from these relevant organizations and for allowing individuals to put forward their own names, including advertising vacant positions. I support the broad thrust of this revision. Typically, international organizations representing preparers, users, and academics should be consulted to ensure representation from these groups. The same principle should apply in order to ensure appropriate representation from the accounting profession (with International Federation of Accountants (IFAC) and other relevant bodies being consulted). However, I believe that this language should also include references to international regulatory organizations such as the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) and the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (Basel Committee). This is important because these international organizations also represent the public interest, strongly support high-quality international accounting standards, and have extensive experience in addressing accounting issues and practices. Oversight Role of the Trustees The committee suggests a strengthening of the language of the constitution to emphasize both the trustees' oversight role and the organization's responsibilities in providing educational services. There is a need for more active ongoing public interest oversight of the IASB's work than is currently exercised by the trustees. This oversight should include regular reviews of matters such as major strategic decisions and liaison activities, the observance of due process in the standards-setting process, and the overall performance of the IASB. In addition, continual review is needed to ensure the adequacy of the range of resources available to the IASB to properly address the demands placed upon it. I support the language suggested by the committee that would emphasize the trustees' responsibility for its oversight role. In addition, I encourage trustees to have an in-depth, confidential meeting with the Standards Advisory Council (SAC)--that is, without the IASB in attendance--at least annually to learn the SAC's views about the IASB and its agenda, proposals, and standards. Perhaps a committee of the trustees could also periodically obtain major constituents' views about the IASB's activities and practices. Funding of the IASC Foundation The trustees have established a long-term funding committee to examine various options, including a fee-based system similar to the one created in the United States. I encourage the committee to explore possible new funding arrangements but to continue to be mindful that any final funding arrangements should not undermine the independence, or the perceived independence, of the standards-setting process. Composition of the IASB The committee believes that the size of the IASB should remain at fourteen members. Moreover, the committee is suggesting that the constitution provide some flexibility regarding the number of part-time members. One possibility is to require no fewer than two part-time members and no more than four part-time members. In addition, the committee is suggesting amending the criteria for selecting IASB members in a manner that might provide for more flexibility in determining the number of full-time and part-time members of the IASB. Under the committee's suggested approach, the foremost qualification for membership would be professional competence and practical experience. I strongly support these types of revisions to the criteria for Board member selection. It is difficult to determine the appropriate number of part-time board members. There are advantages and disadvantages associated with having part-time board members as well as full-time members. One advantage is that part-time members may bring a useful appreciation for and direct contact with the application of the standards in practice. On the other hand, this could detract from the perceived independence of the board. Trustees need to weigh carefully, in light of experience with the existing part-time positions, whether or not the overall effectiveness and balanced perspective of the board is likely to be enhanced by continuing to appoint some part-time members. If the conclusion is that some part-time positions should be retained, consideration should be given to allowing the trustees some flexibility in deciding how many part-time members should be appointed at any one time. The committee is also suggesting a modification to the constitution that would relax the requirements regarding specific professional backgrounds. Instead, the constitution would require that the board reflect an appropriate mix of practical experience among auditors, preparers, users, and academics, and that at least one IASB member have recent experience in each of these fields. I support this suggested modification. However, I hope that the trustees will explicitly recognize that central banks and banking supervisors are extensive users of financial statements, including those prepared in accordance with IASB standards. In my view, the trustees need to ensure a proper mix on the board in terms of the balance among both different accounting traditions and different professional backgrounds. A lack of balance is not conducive to building widespread support and acceptance for the IASB's standards. In particular, I recommend that the IASB have a larger percentage of members with professional experience in implementing accounting policies and procedures for financial instruments and related risk disclosures including, for example, an understanding of the problems and practical issues associated with fair-value accounting. Furthermore, the trustees should be responsible for ensuring that the board, as a whole, has the necessary diversity of expertise, skills, and professional backgrounds. Although the trustees need to ensure that a variety of professional backgrounds are represented on the board, it is not necessary or desirable for the constitution to specify precise quotas for particular backgrounds. For this reason, the committee's suggested flexible approach seems reasonable. It should be noted that even if the board's skill base is strengthened, appropriate consultation and collaboration with external experts (for example, the Standards Advisory Council and other advisory groups) should remain an important part of the IASB's due process. Appropriateness of the IASB's Existing Formal Liaison Relationships Another issue the committee has highlighted for discussion is the current liaison relationships of the IASB. The committee believes that liaison activities remain important, and there is an increased recognition that the IASB should liaise with a broad range of national standards setters. The committee is suggesting revising the constitution to give the IASB greater flexibility to liaise with a broader range of standards setters than those currently recognized by the constitution. I support this revision. In most jurisdictions there are a number of other organizations with a major interest in the quality of the accounting standards and the standards-setting process that should also be included (for example, banking and insurance regulators, securities regulators, authorities responsible for enforcing compliance with accounting standards, and auditor oversight authorities). The constitution refers to developing accounting standards that require high-quality, transparent, and comparable information in financial statements to help participants in the capital markets and other users make economic decisions. Although it is acknowledged that the needs of investors are a key consideration in setting accounting standards, the needs of other users also should be given appropriate weight. The IASB should always seek to develop standards that meet the needs of both investors and other user groups. Central bankers, banking supervisors, and other prudential regulators are all major users of general-purpose financial statements, and this is reflected in the significant resources the Federal Reserve, the Basel Committee, and others devote to analyzing and commenting on the IASB's proposals and providing technical advice to the IASB. In addition, banks themselves and other financial-services institutions make extensive use of financial statements in making lending and other decisions. The IASCF needs to focus on securing the involvement of users in this wider sense rather than merely focusing on investors and analysts. Consultative Arrangements of the IASB The committee recognizes the importance of due process and consultative arrangements. However, it indicated that it does not want to enshrine additional details in the constitution related to due process because issues related to the IASB's due process are covered as part of the trustees' duties and responsibilities. The observance of due process and transparency are essential elements of the standards-setting process and I urge the trustees to consider how to achieve improvements in both areas. The IASB has already made efforts to act transparently--for example, by publishing summaries of its discussions on its web site and in monthly updates--but more can be done in this area. Lessons can be learned from the protracted debates over the revision of IAS 39 in terms of how to demonstrate to stakeholders that the IASB fully understands and has properly considered all their views. One lesson is the potential value of public hearings on controversial issues. The IASB should be accountable to the trustees for how it exercises its discretion in this respect. The length of time that elapsed between the publication of the IAS 39 Exposure Draft in June 2002 and the publication in December 2003 of a "final" text has highlighted the need for the IASB to give greater attention to the issue of transparency in its process for finalizing standards once public consultation has ended. The Board could, for example, consider making some of the current working text of a proposed standard public before the standard as a whole has finally been agreed on. The value of opening board meetings to the public is reduced if observers are denied access to the papers needed to properly follow the board's discussions. I am very pleased to learn that consideration is now being given to making IASB papers available to observers. In my view, this would be a major step forward. The process followed by the IASB in developing new standards allows for public comment on published exposure drafts. The IASB provides feedback on major points made by commenters by explaining its reasons for accepting or rejecting them. The regular board meetings are public and information about IASB's decisions is provided regularly through various periodic publications. In addition, each exposure draft and final standard is accompanied by a "Basis for Conclusions" to help readers understand the reasons for the board's decisions and the main alternatives the board considered. In theory, these procedures should help ensure that due process is followed in the standards-setting process. In practice, however, the process would run more smoothly and achieve greater consensus if there were more opportunity for input at an earlier stage. I have heard concerns from some constituents that the IASB seems to have already carefully examined the significant accounting issues involved in a project and have sometimes developed a predetermined mindset or bias--before the start of public consultation. To improve the due process and the efficiency of the consultations it would be highly desirable if public consultation were initiated at an earlier stage of the discussions. The IASB has the capability to publish, and invite comments on, discussion papers at an earlier stage in the standards-setting process, but this is not required. The IASB should make more use of such discussion papers and be required to specifically consider their use in relation to all of its projects. I believe that the public roundtables held in 2003 on IAS 32 and IAS 39 helped the board reach a better understanding of a number of the issues and concerns raised by commenters. The IASB should consider making greater use of such public hearings in the future. I also believe that the IASCF could consult more with the Standards Advisory Council as it seeks to address issues associated with the technical agenda of the IASB. Voting Procedures of the IASB The constitution currently requires eight members to approve an international accounting standard, and the committee is considering whether to retain this requirement or require nine votes for the approval of exposure drafts, international accounting standards, international financial-reporting standards, or final interpretations of the International Financial Reporting Interpretations Committee (IFRIC). It has been pointed out that many commenters have suggested that the trustees consider requiring a supermajority of two-thirds for approval of final decisions. I do not believe that requiring a two-thirds supermajority vote would necessarily lead to effective and timely decisionmaking, and such procedures could ultimately stymie the efforts of the IASB to issue high-quality standards within reasonable time frames. I believe that retaining the simple majority vote or moving to a nine-vote requirement, as mentioned in the committee's paper, could be an appropriate approach for all matters before the IASB involving exposure drafts, standards, or final interpretations. Resources and Effectiveness of the IFRIC Although the IASCF did not ask extensive questions about the IFRIC in the first part of the constitutional review, many commenters raised questions about operational issues. The committee points out that the trustees are examining many of the questions raised. The IFRIC is also conducting an internal review of its procedures, and will make recommendations to the trustees. In the context of the implementation of international accounting standards in a number of countries in the near future, many questions about interpretation are likely to arise. I share the concerns of many commenters that IFRIC may not be able to address all these questions in a timely manner. I am therefore encouraged to hear that a review is underway of the working practices of IFRIC and the resources available to it to meet its important responsibilities. Composition, role, and effectiveness of the SAC The trustees are aware of the important role of the SAC and of its input into the IASB's deliberations. The committee is suggesting that the constitution be modified to state that the trustees will select the chairman of the SAC and that the SAC chairman may not be a member of the IASB or IASB staff. In addition, the constitution should make specific mention of the requirement for regular liaison between the trustees and the SAC. As you know, our chief accountant serves on the SAC. I strongly support the changes suggested by the committee. I believe that the SAC should select its own chair, rather than the IASB chair continuing in the role, because the SAC needs to be seen as independent of the IASB. In addition, as mentioned previously, I recommend that the trustees should have, at least annually, an in-depth confidential meeting with the SAC--that is, without the IASB being present--to obtain the SAC's candid views and advice on the IASB's agenda, proposals, and standards, as well as on its actual due-process practices. I am encouraged to see that the trustees are seeking feedback from SAC members on how the SAC can more effectively meet its stated objectives in the future. The SAC could operate more effectively by ensuring that sufficient time is given to key topics, such as financial-instruments accounting and risk disclosure. This would allow for better discussions at SAC meetings and the opportunity for the SAC to give clearer advice to the IASB. Moreover, the use of new discussion techniques (for example, smaller discussion groups of SAC members) should be considered as a means of improving the functioning of the SAC. Conclusion Thank you for the opportunity to share my views at this hearing. Please understand that the Federal Reserve strongly supports your efforts to enhance the oversight activities of the IASCF and the standards-setting processes of the IASB. Such enhancements should help ensure that the IASB will continue to develop high-quality international standards based on sound principles and appropriate due process, and in a manner consistent with the public interest.
No content found
No content found
Remarks by Governor Donald L. Kohn National Economists Club luncheon meeting, Washington, D.C. June 4, 2004 The Outlook for Inflation Inflation has picked up this year, and by enough to raise questions in the minds of some about whether it might be on a rising trend that poses a risk to price stability. Total consumer price inflation as measured by the chain price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) has risen from 1.4 percent over the twelve months of last year to an annual rate of 3.0 percent over the first four months of 2004. Of course, a portion of this acceleration is due to the faster increase in energy prices this year. But the strengthening in price increases has not been confined to energy markets. PCE prices excluding food and energy have risen at an annual rate of 1.7 percent this year, up from 0.8 percent last year. The consumer price index has shown a similar pattern of acceleration. The recent shift up in inflation can be seen not just in the price indexes but also in attitudes, anecdotes, and expectations. Businesses report that the prices of many inputs to the production process are increasing, and they also sense a return of "pricing power" that has allowed them to pass on at least some of these cost increases to their customers; my impression is that of late a greater number of stories in general-circulation newspapers have focused on rising prices and their effect on households; and expectations by economists and households of near-term inflation have moved higher. The commitment of the Federal Reserve to maintaining price stability remains strong and unaltered. Price stability is our responsibility, and the record of the past thirty-five years demonstrates how important it is that we meet it. Allowing businesses and households to plan and operate without worrying about increases in the general price level over the long run is how we contribute best to fostering economic efficiency and rising standards of living. A number of members of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), myself included, have been quite explicit in noting that the current level of the federal funds rate will not be consistent, over time, with the objective of preserving price stability. The question is what path of tightening is likely to be necessary to accomplish that objective, and the answer to that question will depend critically on the behavior of inflation. Although inflation is ultimately a monetary phenomenon, the stance of policy--measured either by interest rates or liquidity provision--is not connected in a direct and simple way to the rate of inflation. Individual prices are determined by supply and demand in the markets for goods and services, and the average of those prices by relationships of aggregate supply and demand. Monetary policy acts on inflation indirectly by altering the balance among the multiplicity of factors that affect supply and demand. To make well-informed policy decisions, we need to analyze the elements behind the recent increase in inflation and form some judgment about its likely future course. Like many economists, I believe the inflation process is influenced by a number of factors, chief among which are: the degree to which the productive capacity in the economy is being utilized; one-time shifts in product prices resulting from shocks to important supply and demand curves; changes in productivity growth; and inflation expectations. This basic model is a rough approximation of a complex and constantly evolving mechanism of price determination, and its track record can hardly be considered flawless. But it does offer a useful framework for the analysis of inflation, and I am going to use it for that purpose here. I want to emphasize that I am speaking for myself today. The analysis and views are my own, and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the FOMC. The Data Before beginning to examine the determinants of inflation, we need to remind ourselves of the inherently noisy nature of the price data. They are highly variable month-to-month and quarter-to-quarter, and they are imperfect proxies for the true change in general prices. As a consequence, discerning the underlying trend of inflation is no easy task. Had I been speaking to you just a year ago, you would have expected me to address the possibility of deflation and what the Federal Reserve might do either to head it off or to deal with it once interest rates had reached zero. In newspapers and in market reports, you would have read that the integration of China and India into the global trading system meant persistent excess supply of labor and products that would place downward pressure on wages and prices in the developed world for years to come. Now the concern has shifted to whether inflation is rising, and those earlier stories are frequently being turned on their heads. It is increasingly common to hear that strong demand for energy and other basic materials, importantly including demand from Asia, has been boosting inflation here. To be sure, the underlying economic situation has changed over the past year--most particularly, growth has picked up in the United States and elsewhere around the world. But actual circumstances probably have not shifted as dramatically as the commentary, which serves as a warning about how important it is to try to gauge the fundamental forces bearing on inflation so as to reduce the chances of being misled by noisy data. In that regard, although a weak economy, associated slack in resource utilization, and rapid increases in productivity were undoubtedly reducing inflation last year, core inflation--especially as measured by the core CPI--seems to have fallen by more, and to a lower level, in 2003 than these fundamentals can explain. Typically, such departures from historically normal behavior do not persist, and inflation tends to return to a level more in line with its fundamental determinants. Indeed, the step-up in inflation this year from last year's pace may partly reflect such a return. Within the CPI, the component called owners' equivalent rent, which accounts for nearly a quarter of the overall index, seems to have been an important factor in the surprising decline in inflation last year. That series uses movements in home rents as a proxy for changes in the cost of home ownership. Owners' equivalent rent rose only 2 percent in 2003, down from 3-1/4 percent in 2002. Some deceleration in rents is to be expected when low interest rates hold down the user cost of owning a home, favoring home ownership over renting. However, owners' equivalent rent softened more than one would have predicted from historical relationships between rents and interest rates. So far this year, owners' equivalent rent has risen at an annual rate of 3 percent, returning to a more typical relationship with interest rates and contributing to the pickup in core inflation. Of course, even if some of the rebound in core consumer price inflation represents simply a reversal of some of the factors that kept inflation unusually low last year, other influences might be at work that would cause inflation to continue to rise. To get a sense of whether we are on the cusp of worsening inflation, we must examine what might be affecting the supply and demand for goods and services. Determinants of Inflation Economic slack. Judgments about the source of the recent increase in inflation and the likely course of prices over the next year or so rest in part on an assessment of how close the economy is to producing at its long-run potential. History indicates that when capital and labor are not fully employed, competition for market share and for jobs tends to push down the rate of inflation. Using measures of potential output and economic slack in real-time forecasting and policymaking presents daunting challenges. That is because potential output is not something that can ever be observed and directly verified; we infer it from the behavior of other variables, including prices themselves, that we do observe. Estimating potential output and slack also is complicated by changes over time in labor and product markets that alter the degree of resource utilization that is consistent with stable inflation. That said, most indicators we have suggest that the economy continues to operate with an appreciable--albeit diminishing--margin of slack. For about the past six months, the unemployment rate has averaged a little less than 5-3/4 percent. This rate is down from its peak of about 6-1/4 percent in the middle of last year, but it is still somewhat above a level that, on the basis of the experience of the last decade or so, appears to be consistent with stable inflation. Capacity utilization in manufacturing has recovered to a little more than 75 percent in recent months. But that level remains well below its long-run average of 80 percent. A number of observers have argued lately that a pickup in the pace of technological change and a more rapid evolution in the character of global competition have increased the speed at which capital equipment is becoming obsolete and at which workers' skills are becoming poorly matched with job requirements. If these effects are important, current consensus estimates of the natural rate of unemployment as well as of the "natural rate of capacity utilization" could overstate the degree of effective slack. I am skeptical of these arguments for a couple of reasons. In the labor market, the behavior of compensation in recent years has been consistent with standard models of wage dynamics incorporating a natural rate still somewhat below the current unemployment rate. Moreover, one of the surprising developments of the current cycle has been the extent of the decline in labor-force participation. Many analysts have adopted the working hypothesis that this decline reflects a type of "discouraged worker" effect, albeit one that is not captured in the standard statistical series attempting to measure that phenomenon. Presumably, many of the people who exited the workforce in the face of poor employment prospects now stand ready to resume competing for jobs as the market improves. If that is correct, then the current level of the unemployment rate relative to estimates of the natural rate, may, if anything, understate the availability of labor resources. In addition, I do not believe that the relationship of the Federal Reserve's measure of capacity utilization to available slack in the manufacturing sector has changed materially of late. This measure is, for the most part, benchmarked to utilization rates from a large survey of individual plant managers who would be aware of, and take into account, the technological obsolescence of the equipment in their own factories. These survey data, as well as data on capacity from various trade sources, should fully reflect permanent plant closings within, at most, a year or so. Most measures of resource utilization have not changed very much from a year and more ago, when inflation was falling. The unemployment rate hovered near 5-3/4 percent through much of 2002 and the first quarter of 2003; capacity utilization has recovered only a fraction from its lowest level since the very deep recession of the early 1980s. The structure and functioning of markets and the pace of obsolescence simply do not change enough over a year to alter materially the implications of a given reading on these particular indicators. The net decline in core measures of inflation over the past few years--even after taking account of possible understatement of inflation last year--is consistent with a noticeable gap in resource utilization still existing today. Going forward, I anticipate continued strong growth in demand but, given persistent solid gains in productivity and potential output, only a gradual closing of the output gap. Under these circumstances, ongoing competitive pressures in labor and product markets should help to contain cost and price increases. The downward pressure will probably diminish over time, but at least for a while, economic slack should continue to operate as a restraining force on the overall trend in inflation. Of course, I may be wrong in this assessment of slack in the economy. As central bankers, we need to be cognizant of the uncertainties associated with our estimates of potential output and adjust policies if events prove us wrong. But for now, I believe the balance of the evidence points to the conclusion that the recent rise in inflation probably does not signal that the economy has been producing beyond its sustainable potential, but rather that other causes have been at work. I now turn to these other causes. Price shocks. Quite a few prices have been pushed higher in recent quarters by special influences on the supply and demand for the specific products involved. Such increases are probably contributing to the broad pickup in inflation that we have seen this year, but most likely they are not going to be a source of continuing upward pressure on prices. It is not surprising that the substantial strengthening of aggregate demand here and abroad has boosted prices for inputs into the production process, with the most noticeable effects on products for which the short-run supply is relatively price-inelastic. Increases in commodity prices are typical as an expansion gathers momentum, but they have been unusually large in the current episode because of the synchronous strengthening here and overseas, especially in Asia. Petroleum prices have been under particular pressure, reflecting not only stronger demand but also risks that supplies could be constrained by terrorism or political disruption. The decline in the foreign exchange value of the dollar over the past year or so has contributed to the rise in the price of imports in the United States. The prices of core non-energy imports began to increase more rapidly than the general level of core consumer prices in 2003, and the difference widened in the first quarter of this year, adding to general price increases. In addition, the dollar's decline has reduced the intensity of foreign competition felt by U.S. producers, which may be one source of the sense among domestic producers that their pricing power has returned. Commodities and imports are only a small part of what we consume, and changes in their prices as well as in the price of energy usually do not affect measured core consumer inflation very much. But the recent situation has been notable for the size and number of price shocks going in the same direction, so that even with limited pass-though of individual price movements, the total effect probably has been significant. Judging from the results of statistical models incorporating the factors we have been examining, increases in commodity, energy and import prices together might have boosted core consumer inflation on the order of roughly 1/4 to 1/2 percentage point over the past four quarters. But we are already seeing evidence of the limited nature of these types of price-level adjustments. The prices of many non-energy commodities have come down from their peaks lately, perhaps reflecting an actual or expected moderation of growth in Asia and ongoing demand and supply responses to higher prices. In addition, the dollar has stabilized as optimism has increased about the strength and durability of the expansion in the United States. Energy prices have continued to climb, but futures markets see some moderation of these prices getting under way before long. If these circumstances prevail, shocks to commodity, energy, and import prices should no longer be adding as much to inflation. Of course, over the longer haul, whether or not these one-off shifts in the price level lead to ongoing price inflation will be determined by their effects on inflation expectations and the response of monetary policy, an issue I will refer to shortly. Productivity. The rate of increase in productivity also can have important effects on inflation pressures. In the past few years, for example, the juxtaposition of very rapid productivity growth and weak aggregate demand has resulted in the slack in resource utilization I talked about earlier, which contributed to the decrease in inflation. But productivity growth also influences inflation through its effects on labor compensation and profit margins. Over the long run, real labor compensation tends to track labor productivity. This implies that when productivity accelerates, compensation eventually will as well. The record of the post-World War II period suggests, however, that changes in compensation tend to lag well behind changes in productivity trends. Thus, when underlying productivity growth picks up, firms tend to enjoy a wider profit margin for a time because unit labor costs tend initially to decelerate. The economy can enjoy the fruits of more rapid productivity growth for a while in the form of unusually high levels of production without added inflation or in the form of lower inflation. We realized some of each in the last half of the 1990s after productivity growth picked up. Over time, as compensation catches up to productivity, profit margins tend to come back toward more normal levels, and output must return to its long-run potential if inflation is to be avoided. Productivity increased especially rapidly through the recent downturn and the initial stages of the subsequent expansion. We will not know for some time with any degree of confidence whether this increase marked a further pickup in structural productivity growth--that is, over and above the already rapid rate of increase of the late 1990s. We can be reasonably certain that a portion of the extraordinary increase in productivity over the past few years was a response to the particular circumstances that were prevailing. These included the pressures on the profits and finances of firms when the economy was sluggish and the availability of efficiency gains as businesses continued to find better ways to utilize the large amounts of new technology and capital that became available in the 1990s. The extraordinary increase in productivity in recent years reduced unit labor costs and elevated profit margins to near record levels, even as inflation continued to decline. I think we can anticipate that productivity growth will remain strong on a sustained basis, even if it is unlikely to match the outsized gains of the past few years. Meanwhile, compensation growth should strengthen as labor markets tighten and businesses bid harder for labor to take advantage of profit opportunities. Nonetheless, the high level of business profit margins suggests that, even if unit labor costs begin to rise more quickly than prices, the effect on inflation could be muted for a time because firms would have room to absorb some of the cost increases in the form of reduced profit margins. Such was the experience in the late 1990s. The initial surge in productivity showed up mostly in higher profit margins in 1996 and 1997. From 1998 through 2000, as compensation caught up to productivity, unit labor costs rose more rapidly than prices without placing inflation under significant upward pressure. To be sure, margins cannot shrink forever--just as they cannot grow to the sky. But elevated margins provide some cushion against cost pressures being passed through to prices--so long as the central bank does not allow excess demand to develop in product markets. Inflation expectations. Inflation expectations play a key role in price determination. Among other effects, a rise in inflation expectations tends to become self-fulfilling as people seek to protect themselves in the process of setting wages and prices. Expectations of price increases over the near-term--specifically, over the next year--have, in fact, risen noticeably on the heels of the actual increase in inflation. But, as I have discussed, some of the price shocks giving rise to the increase in inflation in the past few months look as though they are unlikely to be repeated and may already be in the process of partially reversing, and expectations should subside with actual inflation. Moreover, available surveys suggest that the recent uptick in total and core inflation has not materially affected expectations of inflation over the longer term. This stability of long-term inflation expectations is evident in the Survey of Professional Forecasters, conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, and in the median expectations of households responding to the University of Michigan survey. However, the pattern of inflation compensation in Treasury securities markets has been less reassuring. A widening of the spread between the ten-year nominal and ten-year indexed securities is not itself surprising; part of that widening is accounted for by the increase in short-term inflation expectations. But part could be read also as signaling investor concerns about inflation over a more distant horizon. The spread of the forward rates embedded in the nominal yield curve from five to ten years out over the forward rates derived from the indexed yield curve has widened more than 50 basis points since late March. Changes in this spread can be a misleading indicator of inflation expectations. It is affected by idiosyncratic movements in either nominal or indexed yields, and it reflects changing liquidity in these markets and compensation for inflation risk as well as for inflation itself. But it could be a warning sign. Long-term inflation expectations firmly anchored at price stability make the task of keeping inflation low much easier. The Federal Reserve has made plain its commitment to preserving price stability, and I am confident that we would act decisively to counter any deterioration in longer-run inflation expectations that threatened that objective. Summary and Policy Implications The evidence and analysis I have just reviewed suggest that the recent pickup in price increases probably does not represent the leading edge of steadily worsening inflation. Much of the acceleration in the early months of this year likely reflects a rebound from unexplainably low inflation last year and the feed-through of increases in commodity, energy, and import prices. The best indications are that some economic slack persists and that long-term inflation expectations are stable, which bolsters the inference that the economy has not entered a situation of steadily rising inflation. Most economic forecasts point to a gradual approach toward full utilization of the productive capacity of the economy. Commodity, energy, and import prices are unlikely to continue moving up at the speed of recent quarters. Productivity growth is still strong. And elevated profit margins are available to absorb increases in unit labor costs for a while. As a result, inflation is most likely to remain at levels consistent with a continuation of effective price stability. That said, the federal funds rate cannot be held at its current level indefinitely if price stability is to be preserved. The very accommodative stance of policy--including both the low level of the funds rate and the FOMC's indications that it was intending to hold it at that level for a while--was put in place to counter unusually weak demand and declining inflation. Circumstances have changed and policy will respond. The challenge we face is to remove the accommodation in such a way as to foster both the return to full employment and the maintenance of price stability. Because I believe that the rise in inflation will be limited and because I agree that growth of output is likely to only moderately exceed the growth of the economy's potential, I supported the FOMC's assessment at its last meeting that accommodation likely can be removed at a pace that is likely to be measured. But experience counsels caution. There is much about the inflation process that we do not understand, and I have been surprised at the extent of the pickup in core inflation this year. Moreover, measures of inflation expectations will require careful scrutiny as we move forward. An examination of the variables believed to proxy for aggregate demand and potential supply can help to explain inflation and to forecast future price developments, and the concepts are integral to making monetary policy. But given our limited understanding of price determination, we must also keep a close watch on actual inflation outcomes. It took about twenty years to undo the effects on economic behavior of the inflationary episode of the 1970s. We must preserve those gains if we are to meet our responsibilities for fostering economic growth and stability. Footnotes In simulations of the FRB/US model, which uses such a framework, the 70 percent confidence interval around the four-quarter forecast of core PCE inflation is 1-1/4 percentage points wide. David Wilcox, John Roberts, Jeremy Rudd, and Peter Tulip of the Federal Reserve Board's staff provided valuable assistance. We need to be careful not to overstate the importance of slack for determining the future course of inflation, however. In most econometric models, measures of slack account for only about one-fourth or less of the year-ahead fluctuations in core consumer price inflation. In the view of some observers, the argument that the Federal Reserve's capacity measures overstate available slack has been lent some credibility recently by the much higher capacity utilization numbers published by the Institute of Supply Management (ISM). The differences between the ISM and Federal Reserve's estimates of operating rates likely lie in the definitions of capacity. The Federal Reserve's measure assumes the availability of additional labor, if needed. The ISM measures the capacity of plants to produce with their current labor force. In the wake of a significant cyclical contraction in manufacturing employment, such as we have experienced in recent years, a definition of capacity that relies on workers in place will indicate much less slack than a definition that does not include current labor as a limiting factor. Since labor can be added relatively quickly, the Federal Reserve's definition of capacity utilization seems more relevant for assessing effective slack in the manufacturing sector.
For immediate release
Joint Press Release Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Office of the Comptroller of the Currency Office of Thrift Supervision For Immediate Release June 8, 2004 Agencies Propose Rules on Disposal of Consumer Information The federal bank and thrift regulatory agencies today on an interagency proposal to require financial institutions to adopt measures for properly disposing of consumer information derived from credit reports. Current law requires financial institutions to protect customer information by implementing information security programs. The proposed rules would require institutions to make adjustments to their information security programs to properly dispose of the types of consumer information that are not already protected. This would include information from credit reports about a financial institution's employee or about an individual whose application for a product or service is denied. The agencies' proposal implements section 216 of the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act of 2003 (FACT Act). While not imposing significant additional burden, the proposed rules would make amendments to include this new statutory requirement in the Interagency Guidelines Establishing Standards for Safeguarding Customer Information , which were adopted in 2001. The agencies' proposed rules add a new definition of "consumer information" and a provision to require financial institutions to implement appropriate measures to properly dispose of consumer information. The proposal would take effect three months after a final rule is adopted. Comments on the proposed guidance are requested within 45 days of its publication in the Federal Register, which is expected shortly. The Federal Register notice is attached. # # # Federal Reserve Susan Stawick (202) 452-2955 FDIC David Barr (202) 898-6993 OCC Dean DeBuck (202) 874-5770 OTS Erin Hickman (202) 906-6677
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan Central Bank panel discussion: economic developments At the International Monetary Conference, London, England (via satellite) June 8, 2004 One of the defining characteristics of the recent business expansion in the United States has been the evident reluctance of corporate managers to expand spending and hiring aggressively in response to and in anticipation of continued cyclical growth. A substantial rebound in business spending had been a hallmark of most past economic expansions. Judging by the pickup in capital spending in recent quarters, businesses are becoming more confident in the strength and durability of the cyclical upturn. Still, over the four quarters ending in March, corporate investment in capital and inventories likely fell short of rapidly rising cash flow for the first time, over a comparable period, since the mid-1970s. Corporate debt expansion has accordingly been tepid. Indeed, corporate net bond issuance was negative in May. The exceptional reluctance to expand payrolls also appears to have waned this year, and businesses are once again hiring with some vigor. But for nearly three years prior, managers sought every avenue to forestall new hiring despite rising business sales. Their ability to boost output without adding appreciably to their workforces, appears to have reflected a backlog of unexploited capabilities to enhance productivity with minimal capital investment, a delayed effect of the capital goods boom of the 1990s. Even now, the proportion of increases in temporary workers relative to total employment gains has been unusually large, suggesting that business caution remains a feature of the economic landscape. This hesitancy on the part of businesses to expand risk-taking, as I have noted in the past, is an apparent consequence of scandals surrounding corporate accounting and governance, an aftermath of the stock market surge. Although there is no compelling evidence that corporate governance risk has fully subsided, with time, it should. An increased willingness to borrow, and ample liquid assets, should provide a further lift to capital investment and, with it, economic activity. * * * With concerns of deflation now presumably safely behind us, developments ahead are likely to be dominated by the paths of productivity growth and profit margins--assuming, of course, the always latent danger of terrorism in the United States remains in check. Profits of nonfinancial corporations as a share of sector output, after falling to 7 percent in the third quarter of 2001, rebounded to 12 percent in the first quarter of 2004, a pace of advance not experienced since 1983. This sharp recovery in profits reflects, at least in part, the dramatic swing over the past couple of years from relatively heavy business price discounting to the restoration of a significant degree of pricing power. The most visible manifestation of the return to pricing power can be seen in the recent acceleration of core consumer prices. The twelve-month percent change in the core PCE price index, which stood at just above 0.8 percent in December of last year, was at 1.4 percent in April. To better understand recent developments, it is helpful to view prices from the perspective of consolidated costs and profit margins. From the first quarter of 2003 to the first quarter of 2004, consolidated unit costs for the nonfinancial corporate business sector declined. Hence, at least from an accounting perspective, all of the 1.1 percent increase in the prices of final goods and services produced in that sector during that period was the consequence of a rise in profit margins. The 6.4 percent increase in nonfinancial corporate business productivity over those four quarters accounts for much of the decline in unit costs. The remainder of the decline is accounted for by the effects of accelerating output in reducing nonlabor fixed costs per unit of output. Productivity in the nonfinancial corporate sector evidently decelerated somewhat this year. Moreover, as best we can judge, the growth of compensation per hour has stepped up in recent months. With gains in hourly compensation now apparently outstripping advances in productivity, unit labor costs have moved up. Moreover, the increase in overall operating expenses over the last couple of months has also reflected higher energy costs and rising prices of imported non-oil inputs. It seems unlikely, however, that a further rise in profit margins will contribute to significantly higher prices of final goods and services. In an endeavor to exploit current high margins, businesses are being driven to expand their use of capital and labor resources. If history is any guide, this will tend to increase both real wages and interest rates. Fears of losing market share should dissuade businesses from passing these high costs fully through to prices. Accordingly, the forces of competition should cap the rise in profit margins and ultimately return them to more normal levels. To date, the aforementioned cost pressures have been relatively subdued. Nonetheless, the persistence of the rise in energy prices is a worrisome element in the cost picture. Fears for the long-term security of oil production in the Middle East, along with increased concerns about prospects in other oil-producing countries, are doubtless key factors behind the nearly $9 per barrel rise in distant crude oil futures since 2000. This run-up presumably reflects a broadening of demand for claims on oil inventories beyond traditional commercial buyers and sellers of crude oil and petroleum products. The marked rise in the net long positions of non-commercial investors in oil futures and options since May 2003 has increased net claims on an already diminished global level of commercial crude and product inventories. Oil prices accordingly have surged. At some point, however, investors will have achieved the level of claims on oil that they seek. When that occurs, their demand will presumably stop rising, thus removing some of the current upward pressure on prices. Nonetheless, the increased value of oil imports has been a net drain on purchasing power, spending, and production in the United States. Moreover, higher oil prices, if they persist, are likely to boost core consumer prices, as well as the total price level, in this country. The recent modest declines in oil and natural gas prices may or may not signal a trend but are nonetheless welcome. * * * The end of deflationary fears and the onset of modest upward pressure on costs, coupled with a strengthening economic outlook in the United States, have driven long-term interest rates higher, which has spurred a marked shift in credit flows and has prompted many firms to focus on the possibility of further interest rate increases in developing their hedging strategies. The rise in rates, for example, has induced a dramatic fall in mortgage refinancing and, hence, has produced a pronounced rise in the duration of mortgage-backed securities (MBS). Owing to the volume of the earlier wave of mortgage refinancing, there is now a paucity of existing mortgages at rates appreciably above current levels, implying that the extent of further duration hedging is likely to be quite modest. As a consequence of record levels of refinancing in the second half of 2002 and the first half of 2003--which, by our estimates, encompassed roughly 45 percent of the total value of home mortgages outstanding--MBS duration fell to exceptionally low levels. As mortgage and other long-term rates rebounded last summer, a consequence of rapidly improving economic conditions and the fading of deflationary concerns, refinancing fell sharply, removing most downward pressure on duration. Holders of MBS endeavoring to hedge developing interest rate gaps rapidly shed receive-fixed swaps and Treasuries, and these actions markedly aggravated last summer's long-term interest rate upturn. In recent months, mortgage rates have risen further, suppressing much of what is left of incentives to refinance, thereby increasing mortgage duration to its current elevated level. This suggests that the vast secondary market for home mortgages has largely adjusted to the recent increases in mortgage rates. Moreover, the expectation of Federal Reserve tightening has apparently already induced other significant balance sheet adjustments as well. An unwinding of carry trades is notably under way at least judging from the shift in the trading portfolios of primary dealers. In addition, a swing toward a net short position on ten-year Treasury note futures among investors has been the largest since the inception of the contract in the 1980s. * * * Economic developments going forward will determine the level and term structure of interest rates. Federal funds futures prices already reflect expectations of a substantial firming of policy by the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Unlike 1994, there has been an appreciable increase of market rates in anticipation of policy tightening, though history cautions that investors' anticipations of the cumulative magnitude of policy actions and their timing under such circumstances are far from perfect. Lastly, let me emphasize that recent financial indicators, including rapid growth of the money supply, underscore that the FOMC has provided ample liquidity to the financial system that will become increasingly unnecessary over time. The Committee is of the view, as you know, that monetary policy accommodation can be removed at a pace that is likely to be measured. That conclusion is based on our current best judgment of how economic and financial forces will evolve in the months and quarters ahead. Should that judgment prove misplaced, however, the FOMC is prepared to do what is required to fulfill our obligations to achieve the maintenance of price stability so as to ensure maximum sustainable economic growth.
No content found
Remarks by Governor Mark W. Olson At the Bank Insurance and Securities Association Legislative, Regulatory, and Compliance Seminar, Washington, D.C. June 10, 2004 Regulatory Update: Banking Industry, Insurance, and Securities Activities Introduction Many thanks to the Bank Insurance and Securities Association (BISA) for inviting me to speak to you this afternoon. Financial modernization, characterized by the ever-increasing ability of financial services firms to offer banking, securities, and insurance products, introduces new challenges as well as new opportunities. From the perspective of the Federal Reserve Board, I'd like to discuss compliance and risk-management issues for banking organizations that are beginning new, or expanding existing, insurance sales activities. I'd also like to offer a few observations on the "push-out" provisions being drafted by the Securities and Exchange Commission to require certain securities-related activities previously conducted by banks to be removed from the banks and "pushed out" to an entity that is a licensed, SEC-regulated securities broker-dealer. My comments today are my own and do not necessarily represent the views of my fellow Federal Reserve Board members or the Federal Reserve System. Background Following enactment of the McCarran-Ferguson Act in 1945, supervision of insurance was almost exclusively the domain of the states. Therefore, for most of the past century, we--that is, the Federal Reserve and state insurance supervisors--have traveled in different circles. The Federal Reserve has had very little to do with insurance issues because banks and bank holding companies have generally been involved only in credit-related insurance sales and underwriting activities. In fact, the federal legislation that charges the Federal Reserve with supervising bank holding companies--the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956--was enacted in large part to prevent the affiliation of one of the largest banks in this country with a large insurance underwriter. Congress went on to strengthen the separation of banking and insurance in 1982 with an amendment to that act generally prohibiting bank holding companies from engaging in insurance agency activities. The historic statutory separation of banking and insurance was ended in November 1999 by the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLB Act), which allows well-managed and well-capitalized banking organizations to affiliate with any kind of insurance underwriter and insurance sales and brokerage firms not just those that offer credit-related financial services, such as insurance to pay off a loan in the event of a borrower's death or disability, or mortgage guaranty insurance. To engage in the broader range of insurance activities, a bank holding company must qualify to become a financial holding company by certifying that its subsidiary banks are well capitalized and well managed, among other criteria. As of year-end 2003, about 630 bank holding companies and foreign banks have chosen to become financial holding companies. Only 12 percent of U.S. bank holding companies have become financial holding companies; however, these financial holding companies control about 80 percent of the domestic banking industry's assets. Since enactment of the GLB Act, surprisingly few banking organizations have taken advantage of their expanded insurance powers. About 25 percent of financial holding companies have used their new insurance powers, largely through acquisitions of insurance agency or brokerage firms or, in a few instances, of insurance underwriters. Only a few financial holding companies have expanded their insurance activities in any significant way. Anecdotal evidence suggests that many more financial holding companies are considering commencing or further expanding their existing insurance sales and, to a lesser extent, insurance underwriting. The sale of insurance by banking organizations makes sense. Insurance is a financial product that many customers need. Entering the insurance market as an agent fits naturally with the nature of banking. Banking organizations have developed networks and systems for delivering financial products to consumers--a business model that does not always require manufacture of the product. Insurance is increasingly viewed not just as a product that stands on its own, but as an important item on a menu of financial products that helps consumers create a portfolio of financial assets, manage their financial risks, and plan for their financial security and well-being. Many consumers find it convenient to purchase financial planning products at a single location that offers a full range of financial services. Thus, banking organizations are a natural alternative sales channel for insurance underwriters looking to expand their customer base. Compliance and Risk Management Issues With these developments have come new challenges. While some types of risks are common to banking organizations and insurance companies, the products, business practices, and regulatory framework of the insurance industry are outside the experience of many banking organizations. Changes in the banking and financial services industry have highlighted the importance of incorporating an assessment of compliance risk into the evaluation of a banking organization's overall risk profile and into its enterprisewide risk-management program. In December 2003, to further augment the Federal Reserve's risk-focused supervision program, we adopted a policy to emphasize the importance of compliance with consumer protection regulations in the context of overall bank safety and soundness evaluations. Examiners will assess consumer compliance risk across the broad range of a banking organization's activities to determine the level and trend of consumer compliance risk. Supervision and consumer compliance examiners will work together more closely to evaluate how consumer compliance risk affects the organization's reputational, legal, and operational risk profiles. Supervisory plans, particularly for large complex banking organizations, now will more fully integrate the consumer compliance reviews into the overall risk-focused safety and soundness supervisory program. Key issues for bank and bank holding company compliance and risk managers to address in designing and updating their insurance and annuity sales programs are Preventing conflicts of interest--ensuring that sales are suitable in light of customer needs and that appropriate alternative products are adequately considered; Monitoring consumer complaints regarding sales practices, and identifying and addressing trends and issues that may expose the banking organization to potential loss; Implementing the Consumer Protection in Sales of Insurance Regulation, upon which I will elaborate in a moment; Ensuring that the parent bank or bank holding company have in place appropriate controls over accounting and other systems, including disaster recovery programs related to the insurance sales line of business; Ensuring that the bank or bank holding company has controls to protect the privacy of customer information, consistent with relevant state or other regulations; Monitoring claims and potential exposures from mistakes--"errors and omissions"--related to insurance sales and brokerage activities, and identifying and reporting to banking organization management adverse trends and potential significant legal exposures; Formal reporting to the board and management regarding the risks associated with insurance sales activities and the internal controls used by the organization to minimize potential loss from those risks. Many of these issues are covered in more detail in Federal Reserve supervisory guidance. While I'll discuss just one of these issues, I urge you, when updating your compliance and risk management programs, to review and consider all of the issues as described in the Federal Reserve's recently updated supervisory guidance entitled "Insurance Sales Activities and Consumer Protection in Sales of Insurance," which is contained in the Commercial Bank Examination Manual and the Bank Holding Company Inspection Manual . The issue in the compliance area that I'd like to discuss with you today is conformity with federal consumer protection rules required by the GLB Act for bank sales of insurance and annuities. The Consumer Protection in Sales of Insurance Regulation, as the rule is referred to, was issued on an interagency basis by the federal banking and thrift regulators, effective in October 2001. The federal banking and thrift agencies have responsibility for enforcing these relatively new regulations. The regulations require insurance and credit disclosures to consumers regarding insurance sold or solicited at or on behalf of a bank. The insurance disclosures, among other things, are intended to ensure that consumers understand that insurance products and annuities sold by banks are not insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation--disclosures that are similar to those required for bank sales of non-deposit investment products. The credit disclosures seek to ensure that consumers understand that banks can not "tie" loans to the purchase of an insurance product or annuity from the bank or an affiliate. The federal regulation also generally prohibits certain deceptive sales practices. In addition, the regulation limits the fees that may be paid to a bank employee for insurance and annuity referrals to a one-time, nominal fee that is not based on whether the referral results in the sale of insurance or an annuity product. While banking organizations, generally, are attuned to these new regulations and are implementing appropriate controls, some banking organizations have been slow to train staff appropriately, to update internal procedures, and to provide adequate controls to ensure compliance with the regulations. Such deficiencies may expose the institution to reputational and legal risk. Sales incentive programs that award points toward nonmonetary prizes of significant value, such as vacation packages, based on the number of insurance and securities product referrals also may raise compliance issues. Compliance staff should closely review these programs to ensure that they do not give bank employees, or those acting on behalf of the bank, rewards for insurance or non-deposit investment product referrals, that have a value exceeding a nominal one-time fee. While most banking organizations provide appropriate oversight over their insurance activities, it is important that banks have in place a formal mechanism for reporting to the board and senior management, at regular intervals, regarding the identification and assessment of risks arising from that business activity and the status of issue resolution. The insurance sales and annuity line of business should not be run on autopilot, even though this may be convenient simply because the business line is new and likely unfamiliar to bank management and the board, is managed by the "business line experts," and is already being reviewed by the insurance underwriter and the functional regulator. As required in the GLB Act, the Federal Reserve generally does not examine insurance underwriters or insurance agencies owned by a bank holding company. Instead, we defer to the appropriate state insurance authorities. However, we do review, at the bank or holding company level, the appropriateness of risk management and internal controls over a banking organization's insurance and annuity sales activities, and assess the level of risk arising from such activities. To improve our own understanding of the issues developing in the insurance industry, we also have established resource centers at the Board and at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston to monitor developments in the insurance industry. Observations Regarding the Proposed "Push-Out" Provisions Before concluding, I'd like to touch on the securities side of the business. The GLB Act removed the blanket exemption from the definition of broker and dealer under the federal securities laws for so many years enjoyed by banks. In that exemption's place, the GLB Act provides specific exemptions that permit banks to continue to conduct securities activities that are part of providing traditional banking products and services, including trust and fiduciary, custody and safekeeping and other specified traditional banking products and services. The SEC recently decided to invite public comment on rules that implement these exemptions. I believe that it is instructive to remember the context in which Congress adopted this change. Importantly, the replacement of the general exemption for banks with more- targeted exemptions was not in response to problems at banks providing trust and fiduciary or other traditional banking products and services. In fact, Congress recognized that banks have provided these services, and I quote, "without any problems for years." Moreover, Congress recognized that banks have the expertise and customer relationships that make them uniquely qualified to provide these products and services. In particular, Congress expressed its expectation that the GLB Act would not disturb traditional bank trust activities. Congress concluded that the trust and fiduciary laws and oversight by federal and state banking agencies provide sufficient consumer protection. The Federal Reserve Board concurs with the judgment of Congress. We have expressed concern in the past that the rules proposed by the SEC would significantly disrupt--and might force discontinuation of--major lines of business for banks as well as longstanding relationships with bank customers. I believe that such consequences would be wholly unwarranted given the long-standing customer protections provided under federal and state banking and fiduciary laws. The members of the SEC have indicated their interest in engaging in a dialogue with the banking agencies and the banking industry about the effects of their recently proposed rules. We will carefully review this latest proposal and have already expressed our willingness to work with the SEC to ensure that the bank exceptions adopted by Congress in the GLB Act are implemented in a manner consistent with the purposes of those exceptions and, thus, enable banks to continue engaging in activities that Congress intended without incurring unnecessary burden and expense. Conclusion To be sure, the U.S. system of risk-focused bank supervision relies heavily on cooperation among multiple state and federal supervisors, and it is not perfect. But it is working--and, we think, working effectively. Certainly, we could not have postponed interstate banking until we had devised the perfect system for supervising it. The marketplace is constantly moving, and we have to adjust our role. To conclude, I offer one final thought on financial services convergence. It is simply that, even with the changes we have seen, further change is inevitable. The future offers the promise of better, more efficient, and more convenient financial services. Your role as compliance officers and risk managers is of utmost importance in ensuring that this potential is achieved. I encourage you to continue your efforts, and I am confident that your efforts will make an important difference.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced its approval of the application filed by J. P. Morgan Chase & Co., New York, New York, to merge with Bank One Corporation, Chicago, Illinois, and to acquire Bank Ones subsidiary banks, including its lead subsidiary bank, Bank One, National Association, also in Chicago. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
Remarks by Governor Mark W. Olson At the annual meeting of the Charlotte Regional Partnership, Charlotte, North Carolina June 15, 2004 Economic Outlook I am very pleased to have the opportunity to share with you my thoughts about what is required to maintain an economic environment that businesses like yours will find conducive to investment and job creation. I should note that these views are my own; I do not speak for my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. Over the second half of last year, the U.S. economy gathered strength, and its performance so far this year suggests that it has made the transition to a sustained, broad-based expansion. Household spending and new homebuilding have continued to move up, and businesses now appear to have shed a good deal of the uncertainty and caution that for some time weighed on their decisions to upgrade their capital and to hire workers. Real business spending on new equipment and software in the first quarter of this year was 12-1/2 percent above its level a year earlier, and more-recent data indicate that manufacturers are continuing to book new orders for capital goods at a solid pace. The upturn in hiring has been particularly encouraging; between January and May, private nonfarm establishments added almost 1.2 million jobs. We have not seen a string of monthly increases like that in more than four years. To be sure, monetary and fiscal policies played key roles in the strengthening in aggregate demand over the past year. Accommodative monetary policy raised the prices of household assets and lowered the costs of financing new homes and durable goods while reductions in personal taxes boosted disposable income. Businesses, too, benefited from the more-accommodative financial environment. Low interest rates have not only reduced short-term borrowing costs but they have combined with more narrow risk spreads to keep longer-term corporate borrowing costs attractive. The extended period of low interest rates has allowed firms to refinance high-cost debt and to substitute long-term debt for short-maturity debt to improve their balance sheet liquidity. On the fiscal front, firms have been able to take advantage of the temporary partial-expensing tax provision. At the same time, the impressive efforts that businesses have been making to control costs and to increase productivity have paid off in a strong rebound in profitability and cash flow. The combination of balance sheet restructuring and strong profitability has allowed corporate America to achieve the highest level of liquidity in more than a decade. As I noted a moment ago, I find the recent recovery in hiring to be a particularly welcome indication that businesses have become confident about the durability of the expansion. Last year, as economic activity began to pick up, the recovery remained even more "jobless" than the recovery of the early 1990s. A good deal of monetary and fiscal stimulus was in place, which we expected over time to show through to a pickup in real economic activity. But firms were unusually reluctant to make commitments to take on new workers in an atmosphere clouded by risks and uncertainties associated with the war in Iraq and with the fallout from lapses in corporate governance. My sense, from both my informal contacts in the business and banking communities and the available surveys of business attitudes, is that confidence has recovered noticeably this year. Other explanations for the sluggish recovery in employment during 2002 and 2003 focused on developments that may have more lasting effects on the labor market. First, the recovery seemed to be marked to an unusual degree by an ability of businesses to achieve labor-saving efficiency gains. Recall that we began to detect an improvement in productivity in the second half of the 1990s. The rate of increase in output per hour in the nonfarm business sector moved up from just 1-1/2 percent per year between 1973 and 1995 to 2-1/2 percent per year between 1996 and 2000. That acceleration appears to have been largely the result of brisk business investment. Since then, even with the slump in capital spending from 2001 to early 2003, productivity has risen at a stunning annual rate of 4 percent. One of the striking features of the recent acceleration is that the gains in efficiency seem to be the result of organizational changes and innovations in the use of existing resources--perhaps in part the result of learning better how to apply the new technologies that they acquired at a rapid pace in the late 1990s. During the early part of the expansion, when aggregate demand remained weak, the especially rapid gains in efficiency allowed businesses to meet their sales and production goals without having to add workers. But as the pace of the expansion has stepped up over the past several quarters, we have begun to see both sustained advances in output per hour and gains in jobs. I suspect that productivity will eventually slow from the extraordinary pace of the past couple of years--indeed, the recent figures offer some evidence that some slowing has already occurred. Nonetheless, I am optimistic that part of the step-up in productivity growth will be sustained and that it will be reinforced by the renewed upturn in capital spending. Continued solid gains in productivity will be an important plus for our economy over the longer run because faster increases in productivity lead over time to higher profits, wages, and standards of living. The jobless recovery also led economists to debate the extent to which the lack of hiring overall and the continued decline in manufacturing jobs specifically represented structural changes, that is, changes that were not likely to be reversed as the recovery strengthened. Specifically, a great deal of attention focused on the loss of international competitiveness, foreign outsourcing, and the relocation of jobs to overseas subsidiaries. Although these changes are, indeed, a natural consequence of globalization, we have considerable evidence that they are only a small part of the larger story. The ongoing turnover in jobs in our dynamic economy is considerable. The estimates that our staff assembled for a speech earlier this year at Duke University by my Federal Reserve Board colleague Ben Bernanke indicated that, over the past decade, gross private-sector job losses in the U.S. economy have likely amounted to 15 million per year, not including seasonal and short-term layoffs. Estimates of jobs lost to imports account for only slightly more than 2 percent of the total. More important, of course, is that the job creation side of the churning process has been even larger--roughly 17 million jobs per year. Given the total number of private-sector jobs of 108 million, an average year of job gains and losses represents about 30 percent of the total. Certainly, the Charlotte region is very familiar with this dynamic process of job creation and destruction. In 1990, the Charlotte-Gastonia-Rock Hill metropolitan area was relatively dependent on the fortunes of its manufacturing sector. The area had almost 150,000 manufacturing jobs, which represented almost one-fourth of the area's employment; by contrast, jobs in professional and business services accounted for just 10 percent of the area's employment, or roughly 60,000 jobs. Ten years later, the picture was dramatically different: Largely because of cutbacks at textile mills, the Charlotte metropolitan area had lost almost 20,000 factory jobs. But, at the same time, employment in professional and business services had more than doubled to roughly equal the number of manufacturing jobs that existed here in 2000. Employment in education, health, and leisure had also expanded rapidly. Certainly, the broader distribution of employment in recent years has helped the area weather the recession generally and, more specifically, the continued loss of textile jobs to import competition. You have also witnessed first-hand that globalization works two ways. As you know from your experience in attracting foreign-owned companies to this region, U.S. workers also benefit from a good deal of "insourcing." Nationwide, the employment of U.S. workers by affiliates of foreign firms was more than 5.5 million during the 2000-2002 period--up 1.7 million from ten years earlier. Although globalization clearly has resulted in very real hardships for workers in certain industries, it remains more generally an essential component of economic growth by encouraging innovation and promoting efficiency and higher standards of living. Placing restrictions on international trade would, over the long run, be counterproductive; consumers would likely end up paying higher prices for consumer goods, and businesses might lose the opportunities to be more productive that arise in an environment of open trade. The appropriate policy approaches are those that promote maximum job creation while easing the transition for workers caught up in the painful but inevitable shifts in the mix of job opportunities. An important feature of the ongoing structural change in our economy is the increasing demand for skilled workers, which has arisen both from shifts in the industrial composition of jobs and from the upgrading of skills required within specific industries. Ensuring that the supply of workers with the necessary skills matches the demand is a critical element in adjusting effectively to ongoing structural change. As recently as 1980, many young persons depended on a high school education to launch a career; only half of all high school graduates enrolled in college. Today, the expectations of our high school students have changed dramatically as the rising demand for skilled workers has resulted in a sharp increase in the premium paid in the labor market for a college education. In recent years, roughly 60 percent of high school graduates have enrolled in college. And surveys of high school sophomores indicate that many of them believe that simply earning a bachelor's degree is not enough. In addition to the 40 percent of tenth graders in 2002 who expected that they would complete a bachelor's degree as their highest degree, another 40 percent expected to finish a graduate or professional degree. This appetite for education is good news because the knowledge and skill of a country's workforce is an important factor in economic growth. Because the demand for skills and the churning of jobs is a never-ending process, workers have also come to realize that their education is not complete once they have a formal degree. In 2002-2003, 40 percent of adults participated in work-related training to retool, upgrade, or acquire skills. Many benefited from programs conducted on-site by their employers, but courses at colleges and technical schools were also an important source of training. I am sure that you all realize that your area's universities, colleges, community colleges, and technical schools are a valuable asset in developing and maintaining a flexible and ever more productive workforce. I urge you also to engage in a civic dialogue with educators at all levels--including those at the elementary and secondary levels--about the importance not only of developing skills but also of adopting the view that education is a life-long process with important economic payoffs. As I indicated earlier, monetary policy has played an important role in providing support for the economy in recent years. But our work is not done. Now that the expansion seems to have taken hold, we face the challenge of making the transition to a policy stance more appropriate for sustained economic expansion. Our goal is to do so in a way that maximizes economic growth while sustaining the significant progress that we have made in achieving price stability. I only have to compare my experience as a banker in the 1970s and early 1980s with the environment today to see the value of price stability. In that earlier period, my colleagues and I doubted that we would ever see single-digit mortgage rates again. And, many of us despaired as we listened to borrowers who were convinced that it was wise to "buy now" before prices inevitably rose further. Certainly, today's environment of low inflation and stable inflation expectations allows for much more rational business decisions concerning capital investment than we experienced in that earlier period. Although inflation has picked up so far this year, it remains moderate. In this morning's report, the core CPI was up 1.7 percent from a year earlier; in December, the year-over-year change was 1.1 percent. Keeping inflation low and stable will contribute importantly to sustaining financial conditions conducive for further gains in business investment. Over the short run, low inflation and well-anchored inflation expectations are critical to maintaining economic stability and, over the long run, price stability promotes growth and efficiency. As Chairman Greenspan indicated last week, economic developments will determine the level and term structure of interest rates. Of course, we cannot predict exactly how economic events will unfold over the coming year. But, at this point, I still concur with the Federal Open Market Committee's characterization that monetary policy accommodation will become increasingly less necessary over time and can be removed at a pace that is likely to be measured. Footnotes Governor Ben S. Bernanke, Distinguished Speaker Series, Fuqua School of Business, Duke University, Durham, N.C., March 30, 2004. National Center for Education Statistics, "Student Attitudes and Aspirations: Postsecondary Expectations of 10th-Graders," U.S. Department of Education, June 2004. National Center for Education Statistics, "Adult Learning: Adult Participation in Work-Related Learning," U.S. Department of Education, June 2004.
I want to express my gratitude to President Bush for his confidence in me and to you, Mr. Chairman and members of the committee, for expeditiously holding this hearing on my renomination for a fifth term as Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. The Federal Reserve has had a close and productive relationship with this committee over the years. If you and your Senate colleagues afford me the opportunity, I look forward to working with you in advancing our shared goal of strengthening the firm foundation upon which the American people have built a prosperous economy and a sound and efficient financial system. The performance of the U.S. economy has been most impressive in recent years in the face of staggering shocks that in years past would almost surely have been destabilizing. Economic policies directed at increasing market flexibility have played a major role in that solid performance. Those policies, aided by major technological advances, fostered a globalization, which unleashed powerful new forces of competition, and an acceleration of productivity, which at least for a time has held down cost pressures. We at the Federal Reserve gradually came to recognize these structural changes and accordingly altered our understanding of the key parameters of the economic system and our policy stance. But while we lived through them, there was much uncertainty about the evolving structure of the economy and about the influence of monetary policy. The Federal Reserve's experiences over the past two decades make it clear that such uncertainty is not just a pervasive feature of the monetary policy landscape; it is the defining characteristic of that landscape. As a consequence, the conduct of monetary policy in the United States has come to involve, at its core, crucial elements of risk management. This conceptual framework emphasizes understanding the many sources of risk and uncertainty that policymakers face, quantifying those risks when possible, and assessing the costs associated with each of the risks. This framework entails devising, in light of those risks, a strategy for policy directed at maximizing the probabilities of achieving over time our goals of price stability and the maximum sustainable economic growth that we associate with it. In designing strategies to meet our policy objectives, we have drawn on the work of analysts, both inside and outside the Fed, who over the past half century have devoted much effort to improving our understanding of the economy and its monetary transmission mechanism. A critical result has been the identification of key relationships that, taken together, provide a useful approximation of our economy's dynamics. Such an approximation underlies the statistical models that we at the Federal Reserve employ to assess the likely influence of our policy decisions. However, despite extensive efforts to capture and quantify what we perceive as the key macroeconomic relationships, our knowledge about many of the important linkages is far from complete and, in all likelihood, will always remain so. Every economic model, no matter how detailed or how well designed, conceptually and empirically, is a vastly simplified representation of the world that we experience with all its intricacies on a day-to-day basis. Policymakers have needed to reach beyond models to broader--though less mathematically precise--hypotheses about how the world works. A central bank needs to consider not only the most likely future path for the economy but also the distribution of possible outcomes around that path. The decisionmakers then need to reach a judgment about the probabilities, costs, and benefits of the various possible outcomes under alternative choices for policy. As the transcripts of Federal Open Market Committee meetings attest, faced with these abundant challenges, we find the making of monetary policy to be an especially humbling activity. In hindsight, the paths of inflation, real output, employment, productivity, stock prices, and exchange rates may seem to have been preordained, but no such insight existed as we experienced these developments at the time. Yet, during the past quarter-century, policymakers managed to defuse dangerous inflationary forces and to deal with the consequences of a stock market crash, a large asset price bubble, and a series of liquidity crises. These developments did not divert us from the pursuit and eventual achievement of price stability and the greater economic stability that goes with it. Going forward, we must remain prepared to deal with a wide range of events. Particularly notable in this regard is the fortunately low, but still deeply disturbing, possibility of another significant terrorist attack in the United States. Our economy was able to absorb the shock of the attacks of September 11 and to recover, though remnants of the effects remain. We at the Federal Reserve learned a good deal from that tragic episode with respect to the impact of policy and, of no less importance, the functioning under stress of the sophisticated payments system that supports our economy. Our efforts to further bolster the operational effectiveness of the Federal Reserve and the strength of the financial infrastructure continue today. Each generation of policymakers has had to grapple with a changing portfolio of problems. So while we importantly draw on the experiences of our predecessors, we can be sure that we will confront different problems in the future. The Federal Reserve has been fortunate to have worked in a particularly favorable structural and political environment over the past quarter-century. But we trust that monetary policy has contributed meaningfully to the impressive performance of our economy in those years. I have been extraordinarily privileged to serve my country at the Federal Reserve during most of these years and would be honored if the Senate saw fit to enable me to continue this service.
Financial Services Policy Committee Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 90 Hennepin Avenue P.O. Box 291 Minneapolis, MN 55480-0291 David Fettig Director of Public Affairs Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis (612) 204-5274 Federal Reserve Banks Announce Strategy to Meet Evolving Demands of Payment System Minneapolis, Minn., June 16, 2004--The Federal Reserve Banks today announced a strategy to accommodate the evolution of the nation's payments system from paper check processing to electronic processing, a development driven by a significant broad-based change in user preference. The Reserve Banks' strategy entails launching new products and services to support the implementation of the Check 21 Act in October 2004, as well as streamlining its check-processing infrastructure by discontinuing check processing at locations to be announced later this year. Even with these changes, the Federal Reserve Banks will continue to provide check processing services on a national basis. In this effort, Reserve Banks will provide opportunities through their Check 21 products and services for financial institutions to make use of electronic check services as a means of reducing their overall check operating costs. These steps should also reduce the time during which industry participants and the Reserve Banks must support significant investments in dual processing platforms. "These steps are part of a forward-looking strategy that acknowledges the financial services industry's ongoing evolution from paper to electronic processing," said Gary Stern, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis and chairman of the Reserve Banks' Financial Services Policy Committee. "This shift is good for consumers and good for the financial services industry, and the Fed has encouraged this evolution for a number of years. As the payments system moves to accommodate more electronic options, the Fed will embrace a strategy that will respond to the marketplace as necessary." As part of this strategy, the Reserve Banks also will undertake a thorough annual review of their existing check processing infrastructure, including potentially discontinuing paper check processing at some locations as the market evolves. Currently, the Reserve Banks are examining their existing check facilities and within the next few months will announce the discontinuation of some additional check-processing facilities through 2005. The criteria for decisions about infrastructure changes will closely parallel those used in the Reserve Banks' check re-engineering initiative announced in 2003, and will rely on an evaluation of volume levels, business retention plans, local market impact and other data. Last year, the Fed announced a restructuring of its check processing operations from 45 to 32 sites by year-end 2004. In 2003, Reserve Banks' check volume declined at about a 5 percent rate. For 2004, check volumes have declined at an accelerated pace compared to the same period last year. A 2001 Federal Reserve study revealed that about 42 billion checks were written that year in the United States, considerably lower than industry estimates. Those volumes are expected to continue to decline in coming years. The Reserve Banks will continue to assist the nation's financial services industry by conducting research related to the nation's payments system. The results of the most recent study will be available later this year. "The Federal Reserve Banks are committed to their role in providing payments services, and that means responding to the changing demands of the industry," Stern said. This long-term check processing strategy will allow the Reserve Banks to better meet the expectations of the 1980 Monetary Control Act. That act requires the Reserve Banks to set prices to recover, over the long run, their total operating costs of providing payment services to depository institutions, as well as the imputed costs they would have incurred and the imputed profits they would have expected to earn had the services been provided by a private business firm. "To date, the transfer of Fed check processing activities to other Fed sites has occurred smoothly, with deposit times and availability transitioning as close to existing service levels as possible," Stern said. "We expect a smooth transition for the next round of restructuring." As before, the Reserve Banks will offer a variety of programs to affected staff. These programs include separation packages, extended medical coverage and career transition assistance. "While the changes in payments technology are good for consumers and make the industry more efficient, these changes mean that the Reserve Banks will be losing dedicated management and staff," Stern said. "While regrettable, these job reductions are an outgrowth of change, and the Reserve Banks will do their best to make this transition as smooth as possible for affected employees."
No content found
Joint Press Release Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Office of the Comptroller of the Currency Office of Thrift Supervision Securities and Exchange Commission For Immediate Release June 18, 2004 Agencies Extend Comment Period on Statement Concerning Complex Structured Finance Activities Five federal agencies today agreed to extend for 30 days the comment period on the proposed Interagency Statement on Sound Practices Concerning Complex Structured Finance Activities published in the Federal Register on May 19, 2004. In a letter submitted to the five agencies on June 10, eight trade associations representing financial institutions asked the agencies to provide the public with an additional 30-day period to review, analyze and submit comments on the proposed interagency statement. The public comment period on the interagency statement will now end July 19, 2004. The scope and comment process for this interagency statement remain as stated in the original Federal Register notice of May 19, 2004 and comments should be received on or before July 19, 2004. # # # Federal Reserve Dave Skidmore (202) 452-2955 FDIC Rosemary George (202) 898-6530 SEC John Heine (202) 942-0022 OCC Kevin Mukri (202) 874-5770 OTS Erin Hickman (202) 906-6677
No content found
No content found
Remarks by Governor Susan Schmidt Bies At the Financial Managers Society Finance and Accounting Forum for Financial Institutions, Washington, D.C. June 22, 2004 Trends in Risk Management and Corporate Governance Thank you for the invitation to participate in the 2004 Finance and Accounting Forum of the Financial Managers Society. The agenda for this year's forum included a significant number of sessions devoted to corporate governance, which is a change from prior years. As senior members of the accounting, auditing, or management functions within your financial institutions, you are probably at the forefront of your institutions' discussion of governance matters. You are also probably spending a considerably greater amount of time and energy implementing revisions to your governance process than you did just three years ago. Even if your institution is not publicly traded, this increased activity is certainly the result of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002. However, the practice of corporate governance at U.S. financial institutions is not new and did not begin with Sarbanes-Oxley. U.S. financial institutions, both publicly traded and privately held, have a tradition of taking their responsibilities for ensuring effective governance seriously, and those with total assets of $500 million or more have been subject to section 112 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act (FDICIA) for more than ten years. In my comments today, I will focus primarily on the state of corporate governance at financial institutions. I'll discuss the assessments some of the consultants and public accountants are giving the banking industry, and I'll contrast those assessments with what we are observing through the examination process. I'll also touch on some of the developing best practices in corporate governance, internal controls, and operational risk management. It seems that many of these best practices are being developed by professionals such as yourselves, who are implementing the mandates of Sarbanes-Oxley in a manner that is relevant for your individual businesses and corporate structure. At the Federal Reserve, we tend to favor best-practice approaches for corporate governance rather than a one-size-fits-all approach. Corporate Governance Perspective of Consultants Over the past few years, there has been a marked increase in the number of corporate governance surveys at both publicly traded and privately held financial institutions. Recently, several of the major consulting and accounting firms reported on the governance practices at financial services firms, including federally regulated banks. Although the survey questions varied somewhat by consulting or accounting firm, the survey results seem to have a certain amount of commonality. They all begin by recognizing the progress financial services firms have made in the areas of director independence, audit committee oversight, and overall board awareness of governance issues within their organizations. They all cite a growing sensitivity to governance issues among employees and a heightened awareness among senior management and the board. They cite improvements in governance-type disclosures to shareholders and stakeholders and increased vigilance on the part of the regulatory agencies. However, they almost all conclude by saying that banks and other financial services firms have a long road ahead of them if they are to achieve the goal of effective corporate governance--which sounds as if the firms believe that financial institution governance practices are deficient. Why is this? According to a global survey of financial institutions conducted by PricewaterhouseCoopers, financial institution governance practices need improvement in part because most institutions equate effective governance with meeting the demands of regulators and legislators. That is, they tend to look at this as another compliance exercise. The study goes on to state that the compliance mentality is limiting these institutions' ability to achieve strategic advantages through governance. I agree that any institution that views corporate governance as merely a compliance exercise is missing the mark. We all are aware of companies in various industries who have successfully presented their strategic vision to investors but later stumbled because the execution of that strategy did not meet expectations. Although shortfalls can occur for many reasons, one of the more common shortcomings is focusing the strategy itself too much on market and financial results without giving adequate attention to the infrastructure necessary to support and sustain the strategy. Corporate strategies often focus on the most likely future scenario and the benefits of a strategic initiative. Creation of a sound governance, risk-management, and internal control environment starts by making it part of the strategic-planning exercise. That is, while the strategy is being considered, managers and board members should be asking a number of questions: What are the major risks of this plan? How much risk exposure are we willing to accept? What mitigating controls need to be in place to effectively limit these risks? How will we know if these controls are working effectively? In other words, by considering risks as part of the planning process, controls can be built into the design, the costs of errors and reworking in the initial rollout can be reduced, and the ongoing initiative can be more successful because monitoring can reveal when activities and results are missing their intended goals, so that corrective actions can be initiated more promptly. Similarly, as these strategies are being implemented, all managers and employees in the organization must have an understanding of the risk exposures and controls in their particular areas of responsibility. Furthermore, management should assign ownership of each control in the various areas to appropriate individuals. From past experience, we know the more common causes of ineffective controls occur when a properly designed control is monitored by an individual who has an incomplete understanding of how the control helps to mitigate risk exposures or fails to assume full responsibility for the operation of the control, or misinterprets the operating effectiveness of the control. In short, controls are only as good as the individuals who operate and monitor their effectiveness. Many of these surveys note that it is very difficult for outsiders to determine the effectiveness of corporate governance. Unfortunately, it takes significant breaks in internal controls for the public to be aware of weaknesses in the process. The disclosure of deficient business and governance practices can then lead to lower share prices, the likelihood of shareholder lawsuits and enforcement actions, loss of credibility and damage to a bank's reputation, and the payment of higher spreads to access capital markets. The magnitude of the detrimental impact that can result from a serious breach in governance puts the costs of improved governance in perspective. Several studies reveal that institutions are spending more on corporate governance today than in the past. According to Grant Thornton's Eleventh Annual Survey of Community Bank Executives , it isn't just large organizations that are feeling the financial impact of corporate governance. Institutions that are not subject to the Sarbanes-Oxley Act and FDICIA incurred or are expected to incur increases in costs for a number of services and functions related to corporate governance. Seventy-three percent of these banks surveyed expected to incur increases in general audit fees, 62 percent expected to incur increases in director and officer liability insurance premiums, 32 percent expected to incur increases in financial education costs for directors, and 12 percent expected to incur increases in costs associated with attracting and retaining board members. In response to this survey, a logical question is whether the benefits outweigh the costs. Many of you are reflecting on the first-half 2004 discussion of your operating results, budget estimates, and income projections for the future that were presented at recent board and staff meetings. True, these costs reduced some of your current profitability goals. But corporate managers have demonstrated over the years that focusing on better process management can enhance financial returns and customer satisfaction. They have learned that correcting errors, downtime in critical systems, and lack of training that enables staff to promptly handle their changing tasks, all create higher costs, unhappy customers and lost revenue opportunities. I challenge you to consider the development of a corporate governance structure appropriate to your institution's unique business strategy and scale as an important investment, and consider returns on that investment in terms of avoidance of the costs of poor internal controls. Corporate Governance Perspective of Regulators Now I would like to discuss the regulatory community's assessment of corporate governance practices at certain community banks. Regulators typically measure effectiveness by some sort of examination assessment. Using the current CAMELS-type of assessment, a review of recent Federal Reserve examination results indicate that most community banks have effective corporate governance. Eighty-four percent of the banks reviewed were highly rated on their risk-management practices, including corporate governance. This is not to say that we don't see the need for improvement in certain areas. Examination findings routinely cite ways in which risk management, including corporate governance, could be improved. However, it is apparent that the senior management, boards, and audit committees in these highly rated organizations are setting annual agendas that focus attention on the high-risk and emerging-risk areas within their banks while continuing to provide appropriate oversight to the low-risk areas. Internal auditors, or equivalent functions at these banks, are testing to determine whether the risk- management program is effective and are communicating the results to the board and audit committee. So, the examination results appear to indicate that the vast majority of banks are getting the message on the basics of sound governance. I would like to stop my speech here and conclude by saying, "All is well in the banking industry." However, we also performed a review of the corporate governance at the subset of banks with weak or unsatisfactory ratings. Not surprisingly, the review identified the major challenges facing these banks to be poor asset quality and corporate governance issues, such as policies, planning, management, audits, controls, and systems. Eighty-nine percent of the banks in this group experienced serious asset-quality problems, which was the most significant factor in their low rating. Sixty percent of the banks in this group experienced significant deficiencies in corporate governance. The corporate governance deficiencies could broadly be described as internal control weaknesses, weak or inadequate internal audit coverage, significant violations of law, accounting system weaknesses, and information technology issues. Obviously, poor asset quality and ineffective corporate governance are not mutually exclusive. When we find significant asset-quality problems, we usually find corporate governance problems--particularly inadequate internal controls. Similarly, when we find significant control deficiencies, significant asset-quality or financial-reporting problems are generally present. So what is the message we should take away from these statistics? On the one hand, we could pat ourselves on the back and say that things are generally going very well for most of the industry and we can finally tone down all of the corporate governance rhetoric. Or, we could say that those negative statistics apply only to the boards and senior managers at a small group of poorly rated institutions, which now have to pay the price. Or, yet again, we could say that effective corporate governance is a continuous process that requires ongoing vigilance on the part of the board, audit committee, senior management, and others within your bank. I hope you are thinking along the lines of this last sentiment. As you know, once an organization gets lax in its approach to corporate governance, problems tend to follow. Many of you can recall the time and attention management devoted to section 112 of FDICIA, which first required management reports and auditor attestations in the early 1990s. Then the process became routine, delegated to lower levels of management, and no longer relevant to the way businesses were being run. That is when the breakdown in internal controls began to occur. Unfortunately, trying to change the culture again is taking an exceptional amount of senior management and directors' time--time taken away from building the business. It is also taking more time from line managers and their staff. The challenge, therefore, is to ensure that banks' corporate governance practices keep pace with the changing risks that you will face in the coming years. Another consequence of so much public attention on the breakdowns in controls at a few organizations is difficulty in finding good directors. One common theme we have heard during our examinations is the challenge facing banks of all sizes to retain, or attract, board members with the appropriate depth of understanding and commitment to sound corporate governance practices. Many potential directors who have the experience needed are cautious about the potential liability they face. Also, they would rather join a board on which they are able to balance their time among all of the areas of oversight--strategy, marketing, financial performance, human resource development, community involvement, and so on--and not just governance, compliance, audits, and internal controls. This is another result of inconsistent attention over time to good governance practices. Operational Risk In addition to corporate governance, the Federal Reserve System is also focusing on operational risk, conducting selected reviews for operational risk at community banks. By operational risk, I mean "the risk of direct or indirect loss resulting from inadequate or failed internal processes, people and systems or from external events," which is the definition used by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. The Federal Reserve's increasing focus on operational risk is due, in part, to the significant improvements we have seen in the last two decades in the management of interest-rate and credit risk. Thus, operational risks and weaknesses in governance and internal controls become more apparent. For example, at one of our Reserve Banks we are conducting a pilot program specifically geared toward the operational-risk activities of smaller community banks, those with less than $500 million in assets. One of the objectives of the program is to identify and test the key internal controls used by banks to mitigate operational risk exposures. The reviews focus on specific business processes with high operational risk--for example, the wire transfer and loan administration areas. The bankers involved have responded very favorably to the program and indicated they have received measurable benefits. Moreover, the program has identified some common operational-control weaknesses to which we believe community banks should pay particular attention. Let's use wire transfers and loan administration as examples. With wires and similar transactions, the bank could suffer a significant financial loss from unauthorized transfers, as well as incur considerable damage to its reputation if operational-risk factors are not properly mitigated. A few recurring recommendations from our reviews are to: (1) establish reasonable approval and authorization requirements for these transactions to ensure that an appropriate level of management is aware of the transaction and to establish better accountability; (2) establish call-back procedures, passwords, funds transfer agreements, and other authentication controls related to customer wire-transfer requests; and (3) pay increased attention to authentication controls, since this area may also be particularly susceptible to external fraud. Loan administration is an area in which a bank could suffer a significant financial loss from the lack of appropriate segregation of duties or dual controls and could incur considerable damage to its reputation if operational-risk factors are not properly mitigated. A few recommendations that have arisen from our reviews are to (1) ensure that loan officers do not have the ability to book and maintain their own loans; (2) limit employee access to loan system computer applications that are inconsistent with their responsibilities; and (3) provide line staff with consistent guidance in the form of policies and procedures, on how to identify and handle unusual transactions. Several other recommendations resulted from these reviews, and we have a number of operational-risk initiatives under way. We expect to summarize these findings and provide further updates and guidance to the industry as we move forward. But given the examples of best practice I just mentioned, these are not revolutionary insights. Well-run organizations have these or similar controls in place. We hope these studies serve as reminders to bank managers to keep the focus on continuous improvements in internal controls as part of the normal business process. Observations on Best Practices Finally, I want to focus on some best practices for corporate governance at your institutions. Rather than talk broadly about best practices, I'll focus on certain aspects of internal controls and operational-risk management. Best Practice 1: Adopt a recognized internal control framework that works for the bank . All financial institutions have some framework for internal control. What I'm suggesting as a best practice is to adopt a version of the Internal Control--Integrated Framework commissioned by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations (COSO) of the Treadway Commission . Don't be put off by the title of this framework. It is flexible enough to work effectively at a $25 million bank or a multibillion dollar financial institution and describes how each internal control element can be tailored to smaller and less-complex organizations. For example, if the COSO framework is used as a best practice, you should modify the five following elements of internal control to meet your organization's needs. Control environment. Board members and senior managers should identify the bank's key business strategies, objectives, and goals and tailor the COSO framework to influence the bank's management philosophy, culture, and ethics to establish and maintain an appropriate control environment. Line managers and employees should be able to articulate how specific objectives and goals are addressed in their business areas. Risk assessment. Managers should look at the risks inherent in the businesses and processes they manage, determine the bank's risk appetite, and establish risk-measurement practices that are appropriate for their organization. All employees in the area should have a good sense of acceptable risks and have a process for communicating apparently unacceptable risk taking to appropriate levels of management. Control activities. Managers should establish and maintain controls and monitoring processes to ensure that they will be effective in achieving the organization's profit and other objectives, based on a designated level of risk. Managers should monitor the organization's business plan to assess how risk exposures are changing and determine whether new controls, or changes in existing controls, are needed to manage that level of risk. Employees should have a detailed understanding of the purpose of each group of controls in their areas of responsibility and a good understanding of how the controls contribute to the institution's ability to achieve its operating objectives and accurate financial reporting. Information and communication. Information required to achieve the organization's control objectives should typically be accumulated in a management information system and should be communicated through reliable channels to all responsible parties--from tellers to board members. Normal bank communication channels should usually be adequate for this purpose. However, new channels may be necessary if the type of information is too sensitive to communicate over existing channels or if communicating that information poses a risk to the individual making the communication (in other words, if the individual is a whistle blower with knowledge of an incident of identified fraud). Monitoring. Monitoring should typically be the role of internal audit. A number of small institutions do not have a permanent internal audit department. Each institution must therefore develop a review (audit) function that is appropriate to its size and the nature and scope of its activities. As you may know, COSO is just about to release a revised framework that will incorporate enterprise risk management (ERM). When this is issued, the best practices in these five elements will need to be re-evaluated to address ERM. Best Practice 2: Adopt a program for independently assessing the effectiveness of internal controls at least annually . Boards of directors and audit committees are responsible for ensuring that their organizations have effective internal controls that are adequate to the nature and scope of their businesses and are subject to an effective audit process. Effective internal control is the responsibility of line management. Line managers must determine the acceptable level of risk in their line of business and must assure themselves that they are getting an appropriate return for this risk and that adequate capital is being maintained. Supporting functions such as accounting, internal audit, risk management, credit review, compliance, and legal should independently monitor and test the control processes to ensure that they are effective. Implementing management reports on internal controls comparable to those required under Sarbanes-Oxley and FDICIA 112 can also help boards of directors and audit committees of institutions that are not subject to these acts obtain a better understanding of the controllable risks within their organizations and the quality of the controls over those risks that are in place. Sarbanes-Oxley and FDCIA 112 require an annual management assessment of internal control effectiveness and an attestation of management's assessment and the effectiveness of controls by the bank's external auditor. Management at institutions that are not subject to Sarbanes-Oxley and FDICIA 112 could perform their own periodic assessment of internal control effectiveness, including a report. Another group of employees within the institution could perform an independent evaluation of management's report. When I say independent , I do not necessarily mean that an external auditor should be engaged to issue a report. In this sense, independent may mean that internal audit is brought in to perform something similar to an external auditor's attestation. The details of such an approach need to be worked out. The important point is that the audit committee should have some reasonably independent assessment of management's report. Audit committee members could use these reports to set the audit plan for the next year, to track how risks have changed and are changing within the organization, and to facilitate discussion of which controls should be added. Best Practice 3: Adopt a framework for assessing operational risk . Over the past few years, the discussion of operational-risk management has increased significantly in banking circles. In 2003, the Basel Committee released a paper, "Sound Practices for the Management and Supervision of Operational Risk." This paper sets forth a set of broad principles that should govern the management of operational risk at banks of all sizes. Although operational risk is nothing new to financial institutions, the prospect of addressing this risk in a structured framework with measurable results is something new. The broad variety of products and services that institutions provide, the evolution of business processes, and changes in the ethical environment in which we live have all contributed to more observable exposures to this type of risk. Managers and boards are beginning to gather the information necessary to monitor and understand the growing risks inherent in their operations. Supervisors are developing approaches to measuring and evaluating operating risk. At the Federal Reserve, we are studying different approaches and have a project underway to develop guidance on how to address this risk. In the near future, we plan to compare our observations on best practices in the area of internal controls and operational risk management with yours to develop some useful resource materials for good corporate governance at the banks we supervise. Conclusion In conclusion, financial institutions are further improving their traditional focus on strong corporate governance. Those institutions leading the way recognize that the culture of governance, ethics, and controls cannot readily be switched on and off. They build a culture of accountability and ethics to make governance a part of every strategic plan and daily operation. These organizations are also beginning to focus more attention on operational-risk issues, which are an essential part of the overall risk-management plan of the organization. The Federal Reserve has a number of initiatives underway, and we plan to work with banking organizations to continue to identify emerging best practices. Footnotes PricewaterhouseCoopers and the Economist Intelligence Unit, (April 2004). Grant Thornton, LLP, Eleventh Annual Survey of Community Bank Executives (January 2004). Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission, (American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, 2002). Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, (February 2003).
Chairman Shelby, Senator Sarbanes, and members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify on issues related to regulatory relief. The Federal Reserve strongly supports this and other efforts to review the federal banking laws periodically to determine whether they may be streamlined without jeopardizing the safety and soundness of this nation's insured depository institutions or undermining consumer protection or other important policy principles that Congress has established to guide the development of our financial system. Earlier this spring, Chairman Shelby and Senator Crapo asked the Federal Reserve Board to identify its top two or three legislative priorities for regulatory relief. In his letter of April 23, Chairman Greenspan highlighted three proposals that the Board has supported for many years: authorization for the Federal Reserve to pay interest on balances held by depository institutions in their accounts at Federal Reserve Banks, repeal of the prohibition against the payment of interest on demand deposits by depository institutions, and increased flexibility for the Federal Reserve in setting reserve requirements. As we have previously testified, unnecessary legal restrictions on the payment of interest on demand deposits at depository institutions and on balances held at Reserve Banks distort market prices and lead to economically wasteful efforts by depository institutions to circumvent these artificial limits. In addition, authorization of interest on all types of balances held at Reserve Banks would enhance the toolkit available for the continued efficient conduct of monetary policy. And the ability to pay interest on a variety of balances, together with increased authority to lower or even eliminate reserve requirements, could allow the Federal Reserve to reduce the regulatory and reporting burden on depository institutions of reserve requirements. Let me explore each of these topics at greater length. Interest on Reserves and Reserve Requirement Flexibility For the purpose of implementing monetary policy, the Federal Reserve is obliged by law to establish reserve requirements on certain deposits held at depository institutions. Banks, thrifts, and credit unions may satisfy their reserve requirements either by holding cash in their vaults and ATM machines, which they need in any case for normal business activities, or by holding balances at Reserve Banks. Because no interest is paid on the balances held at Reserve Banks to meet reserve requirements, depositories have an incentive to reduce their reserve requirements to a minimum. To do so, they engage in a variety of reserve avoidance activities, including sweep arrangements that move funds from deposits that are subject to reserve requirements to those that are not and to money market investments. These sweep programs and similar activities absorb real resources and therefore diminish the efficiency of our banking institutions. The payment of interest on required reserve balances would remove a substantial portion of the incentive for depositories to engage in such reserve avoidance measures, and the resulting improvements in efficiency should eventually be passed through to bank borrowers and depositors. Although paying interest on reserves would yield significant benefits, even greater efficiencies and regulatory burden reduction might be realized by substantially reducing, or even eliminating, reserve requirements. To understand how elimination of reserve requirements could be consistent with effective monetary policy and the other legislative changes that would be necessary to realize this greater reduction in regulatory burden, I need to review with you the role of reserve requirements in the implementation of monetary policy and alternatives that might be possible. The Federal Reserve's Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) conducts monetary policy by setting a target for the overnight federal funds rate--the interest rate on loans between depository institutions of balances held at Reserve Banks. While the federal funds rate is a market interest rate, the Federal Reserve can strongly influence its level by adjusting the aggregate supply of balances held at Reserve Banks. It does so through open market operations--the purchase or sale of securities that causes increases or decreases in such balances. However, in deciding on the appropriate level of balances to supply in order to achieve the targeted funds rate, the Federal Reserve's Open Market Desk must estimate the aggregate demand for such balances. At present, a depository institution may hold three types of balances in its account at a Federal Reserve Bank--required reserve balances, contractual clearing balances, and excess reserve balances. As noted above, required reserve balances are the balances that a depository institution must hold to meet reserve requirements. A depository institution holds contractual clearing balances when it needs a higher level of balances than its required reserve balances in order to pay checks or make wire transfers out of its account at the Federal Reserve without incurring overnight overdrafts. Currently, such clearing balances do not earn explicit interest, but they do earn implicit interest for depository institutions in the form of credits that may be used to pay for Federal Reserve services, such as check clearing. Finally, excess reserve balances, which earn no interest, are funds held by depository institutions in their accounts at Reserve Banks in excess of their required reserve and contractual clearing balances. To conduct policy effectively, it is important that the combined demand for these balances be predictable, so that the Open Market Desk knows the volume of reserves to supply to achieve the FOMC's target federal funds rate. Required reserve and contractual clearing balances are predictable in that depository institutions must maintain these balances over a two-week maintenance period, and the required amounts of both types of balances are known in advance. It is also helpful for policy implementation that, when the level of balances unexpectedly deviates from the desk's intention, banks engage in arbitrage activities that help to keep the funds rate near its target. Depository institutions have an incentive to engage in this arbitrage activity because required reserve and contractual clearing balances must be maintained, not day-by-day, but only on an average basis over a two-week period. Thus, for example, if the funds rate were higher than usual on a particular day, some depository institutions could choose to hold lower balances on that day, and their reduced demand would help to alleviate the upward pressure on the funds rate. Later in the period, when the funds rate might be lower, those institutions could choose to hold extra balances to make up the shortfall in their average holdings of reserve balances. The averaging feature is only effective in stabilizing markets, however, if the sum of required reserve and contractual clearing balances is sufficiently high that banks hold balances, on the margin, as a means of hitting their two-week average requirements. If the sum of required reserve and contractual clearing balances declined to a very low level so that depositories held balances at Reserve Banks on the margin only to meet possible payments out of their accounts late in the day, the demand for balances would be more variable from day to day and more difficult to predict. While overnight interest rates have exhibited little volatility in recent years, even when the sum of required and contractual balances was considerably smaller than at present, volatility nevertheless could potentially become a problem at some future time if such balances fell to very low levels. Such a development might be possible if interest rates were to rise to high levels, which would reduce the demand for required and contractual balances and provide extra incentives for reserve avoidance. Paying interest on such balances is one way to ensure that they do not drop too low. If increased flexibility in setting reserve requirements were authorized, the Federal Reserve nonetheless could consider substantial reductions in reserve requirements, or even their eventual removal, as long as balances held at Reserve Banks other than required reserve balances could serve the purpose of ensuring the effective implementation of monetary policy. To enable the alternative types of balances to play a more important policy implementation role, it would be essential for the Federal Reserve to be authorized to pay explicit interest on them. In particular, in the absence of reserve requirements, the Federal Reserve would need to be able to pay explicit interest on contractual clearing balances or a similar type of voluntary instrument maintained over a two-week average period. This could potentially provide a demand for Federal Reserve balances that would be high and stable enough for monetary policy to be implemented effectively through existing procedures for open market operations, even with lower or zero required reserve balances. A number of other countries, including Canada, Switzerland, Sweden, Australia, and New Zealand, have found that they are able to implement monetary policy satisfactorily without the aid of reserve requirements. One method central banks in some of these countries employ to mitigate potential volatility in overnight interest rates is to attempt to establish a ceiling and floor for such rates through the central bank's own lending and deposit rates. If a central bank lends freely at a penalty interest rate, that rate tends to act as a ceiling on overnight market interest rates. Last year, the Federal Reserve changed its discount window operations to institute a lending facility of this type that should help to mitigate large upward spikes in overnight interest rates. If the Federal Reserve had the authority to pay interest on excess reserve balances, and did so, that interest rate would act as a minimum for overnight interest rates, because banks would not generally lend to other banks at a lower rate than they could earn by keeping their excess funds at the Federal Reserve. However, our depository institutions are much more heterogeneous than those in other countries and it is not entirely clear how well a ceiling and floor arrangement would work in the United States. Although the Federal Reserve sees no need to pay interest on excess reserves in the near future, the ability to do so nevertheless would be a potentially useful addition to the monetary toolkit of the Federal Reserve. Interest on Demand Deposits The efficiency of our financial sector also would be improved by repealing the prohibition of interest on demand deposits. This prohibition was enacted during the Great Depression, due to concerns that large money center banks might have earlier bid deposits away from country banks to make loans to stock market speculators, depriving rural areas of financing. It is doubtful that the rationale for this prohibition was ever valid, and it is certainly no longer applicable. Today, funds flow freely around the country, and among banks of all sizes, to find the most profitable lending opportunities, using a wide variety of market mechanisms, including the federal funds market. Moreover, Congress authorized interest payments on household checking accounts with the approval of nationwide NOW accounts in the early 1980s. The absence of interest on demand deposits, which are held predominantly by businesses, is no bar to the movement of funds from depositories with surplus funds--whatever their size or location--to the markets where the funding can be profitably employed. Moreover, in rural areas, small firms with extra cash are able to bypass their local banks and invest in money market mutual funds with check-writing and other transaction capabilities. Indeed, smaller banks have complained that they are unable to compete for the deposits of businesses precisely because of their inability to offer interest on demand deposits. The prohibition of interest on demand deposits distorts the pricing of transaction deposits and associated bank services. In order to compete for the liquid assets of businesses, banks have been compelled to set up complicated procedures to pay implicit interest on compensating balance accounts. Banks also spend resources--and charge fees--for sweeping the excess demand deposits of businesses into money market investments on a nightly basis. To be sure, the progress of computer technology has reduced the cost of such systems over time. However, the expenses are not trivial, particularly when substantial efforts are needed to upgrade such automation systems or to integrate the diverse systems of merging banks. From the standpoint of the overall economy, such expenses are a waste of resources and would be unnecessary if interest were allowed to be paid on both demand deposits and the reserve balances that must be held against them. The prohibition of interest on demand deposits also distorts the pricing of other bank products. Many demand deposits are not compensating balances, and because banks cannot pay explicit interest, they often try to attract these deposits by pricing other bank services below their actual cost. When services are offered below cost, they tend to be overused to the extent that the benefits of consuming them are less than the costs to society of producing them. Interest on demand deposits would clearly benefit small businesses, which currently earn no interest on their checking accounts. But larger firms would also benefit as direct interest payments replaced more costly sweep and compensating balance arrangements. For banks, paying interest on demand deposits likely would increase costs, at least in the short run. However, to the extent that banks were underpricing some services to attract these "free" deposits, those prices would adjust to reflect costs. Moreover, combining interest on demand deposits with interest on required reserve balances and possibly a lower burden associated with reduced or eliminated reserve requirements would help to offset the rise in costs for some banks. Many banks will benefit from the elimination of unnecessary costs associated with sweep programs and other reserve-avoidance procedures. Over time, these measures should help the banking sector attract liquid funds in competition with nonbank institutions and direct market investments by businesses. Small banks in particular should be able to bid for business demand deposits on a more level playing field vis-a-vis both nonbank competition and large banks that currently use sweep programs for such deposits. The payment of interest on demand deposits would have no direct effect on federal revenues, as interest payments would be deductible for banks but taxable for the firms that received them. However, the payment of interest on required reserve balances, or reductions in reserve requirements, would lower the revenues received by the Treasury from the Federal Reserve. The extent of the potential revenue loss, however, has fallen over the last decade as banks have increasingly implemented reserve-avoidance techniques. Paying interest on contractual clearing balances would primarily involve a switch to explicit interest from the implicit interest currently paid in the form of credits, and therefore would have essentially no net cost to the Treasury. Industrial Loan Companies Although the Federal Reserve Board strongly supports repealing the prohibition of interest payments on demand deposits, the Board opposes any amendment--such as the one contained in H.R. 1375--that would permit industrial loan companies (ILCs) to offer NOW accounts to businesses. ILCs are state-chartered FDIC-insured banks that were first established early in the twentieth century to make small loans to industrial workers, but over time have been granted by the states many of the powers of commercial banks and in some cases now hold billions of dollars of assets. Under a special exemption in current law, ILCs that are chartered in certain states are excluded from the definition of "bank," and their parent companies are not considered "bank holding companies" for purposes of the Bank Holding Company Act. This special exemption allows any type of company--including a commercial or retail company--to own an FDIC-insured bank without complying with either the limitations on activities or the consolidated supervision requirements that apply to bank holding companies under the Bank Holding Company Act. An amendment that would allow ILCs to offer NOW accounts to businesses would permit ILCs to become the functional equivalent of full-service insured banks. These expanded powers are inconsistent with both the historical functions of ILCs and the terms of their special exemption in current law. Granting these powers to ILCs would provide their owners a competitive advantage over the owners of other insured banks. Moreover, such an amendment would raise significant questions for the Congress concerning the nation's policy of maintaining the separation of banking and commerce and the desirability of permitting large, diversified companies to control insured depository institutions without consolidated supervision. H.R. 1375 also included ILCs in a provision removing limitations on de novo interstate branching by banks. The Federal Reserve supports expanding the de novo branching authority of depository institutions. Current limitations on de novo branching are anti-competitive obstacles to interstate entry for banks and also create an unlevel playing field between banks and federal savings associations, which have long been allowed to open new branches in other states. But we also believe that Congress should not grant this new branching authority to ILCs unless the corporate owners of these institutions are subject to the same type of consolidated supervision and activities restrictions as the owners of other insured banks. With de novo branching, a large retail company could potentially open a branch of an ILC in each of the company's retail stores nationwide. As mentioned above, allowing a commercial or financial firm to operate an insured nationwide bank outside the supervisory framework established by Congress for the other owners of insured banks raises significant safety and soundness concerns, creates an unlevel competitive playing field, and undermines the policy of separating banking and commerce that Congress reaffirmed in the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act of 1999. These important questions should be addressed in a more comprehensive and equitable manner than would be possible in the consideration of minor amendments to legislation on demand deposits or de novo branching. Conclusion In conclusion, the Federal Reserve Board strongly supports, as its key priorities for regulatory relief, legislative proposals that would authorize the payment of interest on demand deposits and on balances held by depository institutions at Reserve Banks, as well as increased flexibility in the setting of reserve requirements. We believe these steps would improve the efficiency of our financial sector, make a wider variety of interest-bearing accounts available to more bank customers, and better ensure the efficient conduct of monetary policy in the future.
Remarks by Governor Edward M. Gramlich At the Concord Coalition Budget and Fiscal Policy Conference, Washington, D.C. June 24, 2004 Reducing Budget Deficits Thank you for inviting me to speak today. Three years ago, at just about this time of year, I gave a talk about the supposed large and growing federal budget surpluses that were then being projected. It then appeared that the national debt could be paid off within the decade, and my remarks addressed the economic and political implications of this declining national debt. Unfortunately, much has changed for the worse since that time. Rather than expecting the stream of surpluses projected just three years ago, budget analysts now expect sizable deficits for at least the remainder of the decade. The national debt as a share of gross domestic product (GDP), which reached almost 50 percent in 1993 and declined to 33 percent by 2001, is now rising again. Today, I am here to talk about how to deal with our current worsening fiscal outlook. Fiscal policy can have important long-run effects on the health of the economy, particularly through its impact on national saving and the growth of productivity. National savings can be generated privately, by households and business, or publicly, by government. Although fiscal policy can, in theory, help boost private saving, this has proven difficult, in practice. Instead, the most important effect of fiscal policy on national saving has been through the direct government budget. When the government runs deficits, it siphons off private savings (reducing national saving), leaving less available for capital investment. With less capital investment, less new equipment is provided to workers, and, all else being equal, future productivity growth rates and levels are lower. Productivity growth is the principal source of improvement in economic well-being. The faster productivity increases over time, the more rapidly living standards increase. Maintaining a rapid rate of trend productivity growth is particularly important in light of the coming budgetary pressures associated with the retirement of the baby boom generation. A more productive economy will ease the financing of Social Security and Medicare benefits for tomorrow's retirees without placing an undue burden on tomorrow's workers. In contrast, if we allow debt to build now and in coming years, we will have both lower output to meet future obligations as well as the added burden of financing a growing amount of debt. Indeed, under numerous scenarios, our current debt path is unsustainable: Without changes to taxes or spending, we may reach a point where ever-larger amounts of debt must be issued to pay ever-larger interest charges. To be sure, budget deficits are not always inappropriate, and to a certain extent, the recent fiscal deficits have helped limit the recent economic slowdown. But now that the recovery is well under way, it is important to concentrate on longer-run fiscal policy. Specifically, it is time to bring the budget deficits under control. Doing so will, of course, require action in the political arena. But the manner in which the process of deficit reduction is framed can strongly influence the likelihood of success. There are various ways to restore fiscal discipline. Today I will discuss some of these approaches, focusing on their past performance and future potential. Better Information One approach is to provide the Congress with better information about the fiscal situation and the costs of legislation. The first milestone in that effort was the Congressional Budget and Impoundment Control Act of 1974. This act established the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) to provide baseline projections of current and future revenues and outlays and to estimate the budgetary effect of spending proposals. The act named the Joint Committee on Taxation (JCT) as the official "scorekeeper" for revenue legislation. The CBO and the JCT provide credible estimates of taxes, spending, and deficits based on a common set of assumptions. By establishing a sensible context in which the inevitable political struggles associated with setting budgetary priorities can take place, this information significantly affects the budget process and, ultimately, budget outcomes. Many analysts have worried about deficiencies in the concepts underlying the official budget estimates. Apart from a few exceptions, budget estimates are based on cash accounting. Thus, they do not take into account the accrual of future obligations or revenues and do not offer an accurate picture of the entire fiscal situation. For example, by today's cash-based yardstick, the federal budget posted surpluses from 1998 to 2001; yet, if the budget definitions had included the costs of future Medicare and Social Security benefits accrued over this period, the budget likely would have shown substantial deficits. Similarly, if our measure of national debt had included the present value of our already accrued future liabilities for Medicare and Social Security, the debt would never have been close to being paid off. In short, although cash deficits have economic relevance, they can provide a misleading picture of the nation's long-term budgetary situation. Should the Congress try to target a better measure of the fiscal situation than the deficit as it is currently defined? Would providing the Congress with this better measure affect budget outcomes and help improve the fiscal outlook? Some have suggested moving to an accrual-based accounting system, where the deficit would better account for future obligations and revenues. Others suggest adopting the generational accounts framework. Rather than focusing on a particular year's imbalance between revenues and spending, this framework recognizes that, ultimately, we must pay for all government spending, and instead calculates the net burden of government taxes and spending on each generation. Calculating generational accounts and other long-term budget measures requires many assumptions that are not as critical under today's rules. For example, to calculate generational accounts, one must specify the future path of numerous economic and demographic variables like wages, capital income, immigration, longevity, health costs, and inflation. One must also specify a discount rate in order to calculate present values--a choice that would likely be controversial and that could greatly affect the results. Finally, one must assume something about future policy variables. Typically, generational accounts assume the continuation of current policy. Thus, they measure the fiscal burden under the assumption that current tax policy is continued, Social Security benefits are not curtailed, and Medicare spending continues to rise with health costs. The information provided by generational accounts and other similar methods would definitely be valuable, but their computational methods seem too complicated and rely too much on assumptions about future variables to make them a viable alternative to the current deficit as the main benchmark of fiscal policy. Moreover, much useful information about the future implications of current policy is already provided by the Office of Management and Budget and the CBO, both in their official five- and ten-year budget projections and in their longer-run projections. Targeting longer-term measures like generational accounts is further complicated by the fact that the estimates would be affected by promises to raise taxes or cut spending far off in the future. These very long-term calculations may be subject to a great deal of budgetary sleight of hand. Indeed, even the five- and ten-year targets currently used in the budget process have already been subject to considerable budget sleight of hand. Most important, I am skeptical of the view that more information, as desirable as it is, would alone lead to greater budget discipline. The major differences between the various measures of the current fiscal situation stem from differences in their accounting for Medicare and Social Security. It is no secret to the public or to members of the Congress that these programs face long-term imbalances. This information has been widely known and studied in depth for many years. And yet, despite that fact, we still find ourselves on a fiscal trajectory that is probably unsustainable. Better information alone does not seem to be the answer to our fiscal difficulties. Overall Deficit Targets A second approach to controlling budget deficits is for the Congress to establish budget targets. This approach was the centerpiece of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985--commonly known as the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings (GRH) Act. That act aimed to wipe out the deficit in five years. It did so by establishing annual targets--declining to zero--for the budget deficit. The process worked as follows: If projected deficits in the next fiscal year exceeded the targets by $10 billion or more, the legislation mandated that unprotected programs be cut, across-the-board, and by enough to reach the legislated targets. This process of across-the-board cuts was known as "sequestration." The law did not specify how the targets were to be reached; instead, the assumption was that the existence of those targets and the threat of sequestration would be enough to get the Congress and the Administration to agree on a package of spending cuts and tax increases. GRH did not allow changes in external circumstances to affect the budget deficit targets. Spending cuts were to be enforced regardless of whether the deficit picture had deteriorated because of worsening economic circumstances or because of congressional action. The result of this legislation was quite different than originally envisioned. A sequestration was enforced only once, in the first year. In other years, the Congress used various gimmicks to avoid sequestration, or it simply raised the targets. The actual deficit did not meet the target in any of the years GRH was law, in part because, during this period, external events, such as the savings and loan crisis, tended to overtake the policies that the Congress had enacted to try to close the budget gaps. Other countries have also used budget targets as a means of enforcing fiscal discipline. For example, the Stability and Growth Pact of the European Monetary Union specifies that the budget deficits of member countries are not to exceed 3 percent of GDP except under some special circumstances. If they do, sanctions are to be imposed. But the Stability and Growth Pact has been as ineffective as GRH has, and for the same reasons: Countries have resorted to budgetary gimmicks to meet the criteria, and the sanctions have not been imposed on countries that have not met their targets. Another example of deficit targets comes from the balanced-budget requirements of the states, which can be viewed as deficit targets with the target set at zero. Most states have some form of balanced-budget requirement, although the form and stringency of the requirement varies considerably across states. In the most stringent cases, states are required to pass balanced budgets, and no borrowing is allowed to finance the operating budget. The states can use rainy day funds built up from previous years' surpluses to finance current operations. The states keep capital budgets separate, and states are permitted to finance capital expenditures with borrowing. The available academic literature suggests that these balanced-budget requirements do work, at least in part. Although states have a wide array of budgetary tricks they can and do employ to hit their deficit targets, research evidence suggests that the balanced-budget requirements do limit borrowing and that, as a result, states with more stringent requirements face somewhat lower borrowing costs. Furthermore, there seems to be a deeply held consensus that state budgets should be balanced, and this consensus undoubtedly helps legislators make the difficult choices sometimes necessary to balance state budgets. Hence, it may seem attractive just to limit overall deficits, but such limits have had only mixed success. They have typically worked, at least to a small degree, for U.S. states. For national governments, however, they typically generated more budgetary gimmicks than real cutbacks because the limits have not adjusted to the sources of fiscal shock. In a political setting, inflexible deficit limits are likely to lead more to avoidance than to real changes. Controls on Legislative Action A third approach involves tighter controls on legislative action. Even though GRH did not produce the budget balance it sought, the determination to improve the fiscal outlook remained. In response to the perceived failures of GRH, the Congress passed the Budget Enforcement Act (BEA) of 1990. This legislation replaced the system of deficit targets with two types of restraints on legislative actions. First, a cap was imposed on discretionary spending--spending that the Congress appropriates each year--and was to be enforced with a sequestration process. The cap declined slightly over time, in real terms. Second, for revenues and entitlement programs, the BEA established a system called PAYGO (pay as you go) that required all revenue and mandatory spending legislation to be deficit-neutral over a five-year period. For example, an expansion in a program like Medicare would be allowed only if it were accompanied by a reduction in other entitlement spending or an increase in revenues. In other words, the PAYGO restraint didn't require the Congress to climb out of the deficit hole by any particular date, but it did prohibit the Congress from digging the hole any deeper. The largest difference between the BEA and GRH was that the BEA attempted to restrain legislative action alone. Changes in the deficit resulting from changes in economic conditions, health prices, demographics, and other technical or economic factors were allowed to show through to the deficit without sanction. Only those parts of the budget that the Congress could control directly--discretionary spending and programmatic changes to entitlement and revenue programs--were subject to the new requirements. The BEA's budget rules--which were extended twice before they were allowed to expire in 2002--appear to have been more successful than previous attempts at budget control. Budget deficits declined sharply from 1992 to 1997 and then turned to surpluses from 1998 through 2001. To a significant extent, of course, the decline in the deficit and the emergence of surpluses were attributable to circumstances external to the budget process, including the stellar performance of the economy; the increase in equity prices, which raised tax revenues to historic highs; and the end of the Cold War, which allowed for a decrease in defense spending. But without a broad consensus to reduce the deficit, and without a mechanism to enforce that consensus, the Congress might have responded to these positive developments by increasing spending or cutting taxes. Instead, the federal deficit was allowed to decline. As a result, national saving increased, providing further impetus to economic growth. Most economists view these rates of national saving as an important factor in the strong economic performance of the late 1990s. It is difficult to know exactly what the deficit path would have been in the absence of the BEA. But budget experts generally believe that the BEA did help to reduce deficits. How? A likely possibility is that the rules helped solve the prisoner's dilemma problem inherent in the legislative process. When representatives choose between seeking funding for local projects and exercising fiscal discipline (by not requesting funding for local projects), they will naturally consider the payoff of each choice. Without a set of credible budget rules, the narrow local interest is usually the more attractive option for two reasons. First, any individual representative knows that bringing home the pork is not likely to have much of an effect on the deficit. Therefore, there really is no measurable payoff in greater national fiscal virtue from an individual representative curtailing efforts to win special benefits for the home district. Second, in the absence of a credible set of budget rules, representatives have no assurance that others in the Congress will not be doing everything in their power to work the system to their benefit, and an individual representative would not want to appear to be relatively lax in his or her pork-procuring efforts. Budget rules help alleviate this problem. Under discretionary caps and PAYGO, individual representatives could choose to forgo their special projects, secure in the knowledge that others would not gain an advantage as a result. As already noted, an advantage of the budget rules was that they aimed at constraining the things that the Congress could control directly rather than targeting the overall level of the deficit. But these rules also had a fatal flaw, which was that they had no sensible stopping point. Over the course of the 1990s, the economic news got better and better. The federal budget was borne along on the tide, and eventually moved into surplus, even excluding the Social Security cash surplus. At that point, a well-designed set of rules probably would have said "enough." But unfortunately, even when surpluses emerged, the PAYGO rules continued to require deficit neutrality in mandatory spending and revenue programs and adherence to the discretionary caps. Unfortunately, because such strict fiscal discipline was no longer viewed as necessary, the budget rules ceased to be effective: Congress enacted measures that reduced or eliminated their bite until they were finally allowed to expire in 2002. As a consequence of this aftertaste, it may be harder to bring back PAYGO rules now, when they are really needed. A Sensible Strategy for the Future The main lesson to be learned from this examination of past budget rules is that, within limits, budget institutions do matter. A good budget process can help the Congress enforce fiscal discipline if the political consensus to do so exists. In order to be effective, the process must be based on reliable information about current and future baseline budget deficits and about the effects of legislation on the budget. It must produce results that are reasonable and valued by the Congress and the public. The process must be flexible enough to adjust in a reasonable way to changing economic and technical factors that affect the budget. Of course, no single set of rules can be flexible enough to address all possible circumstances, and over time, any set of budget rules likely will have to be revised. Although the budget rules of the BEA did not prove flexible enough to endure in the face of budget surpluses, that is no longer an important problem. Reinstating both the discretionary caps as well as the PAYGO rules for revenue and mandatory spending programs--perhaps with some adjustments--would be useful initial steps in restoring fiscal discipline. Once some success has been achieved with these measures, it may be easier to tackle the more ambitious step of instituting overall deficit limits. Two further issues are worth considering. First, what is the appropriate time horizon for budget rules? We have seen problems in the past with periods that were too short--for example, under GRH, the annual budget targets could be met by simply pushing costs into the next year. But there are also problems with periods that are too long--for example, when budget rules are satisfied by specifying painful measures that occur ten years in the future. The current focus on five years may be a reasonable compromise, or it might be worth considering some more-complicated rules that might limit annual deficits as well as five- or ten-year totals. A second question concerns the ultimate target of budget rules. Should we, as a nation, aim to build up surpluses to fully fund all of our future Medicare and Social Security liabilities as they would exist under current law? Would that commit the government to maintain those programs as they are under current law rather than allowing the government to adapt them to future circumstances? Can the government reasonably accumulate the large stock of assets that full funding would require? These are all difficult questions on which there is no political consensus. In the past, a reasonable goal might have been to maintain a zero deficit in our on-budget accounts--those accounts that exclude the Social Security and Medicare surplus--and to begin a serious discussion of reforms to Social Security and Medicare to bring them closer into actuarial balance. In the future, as the cash surplus for these retirement programs winds down, a proximate budget goal might be just a balanced overall budget (including the retirement programs), though we will still need to confront Social Security and Medicare issues. As I have stressed, rules alone cannot create fiscal discipline where none exists. So, in conclusion, let me reiterate the most important point: Restoring fiscal discipline should be one of our nation's most important priorities. While the current deficits may not be terribly harmful in the short run, a failure to confront them now will steadily detract from the growth of the economy and will require even more wrenching changes in the future. Footnotes Typically, these are the types of assumptions used to provide long-term projections of the budget deficit or to calculate the long-term solvency of the Social Security system. To illustrate the uncertainty inherent in long-term projections, the CBOs most recent long-term outlook report focused on six possible scenarios based on different assumptions about future revenues and spending. Determining future policy for tax rates is not clear-cut either. Under current law, tax revenues as a share of GDP will reach levels well above historical norms as real bracket creep pushes more and more income into the highest tax brackets. Yet, most calculations of generational accounts assume that the tax law will be adjusted so that average tax rates remain constant over time. There is a real question about the cyclical sensitivity of tax revenues. The states' balanced-budget rules typically do not make adjustments for such sensitivity, but they effectively accommodate fiscal stabilizers because states, as mentioned, can build up rainy day funds in good years and run them down in bad years. A federal balanced-budget amendment would need to confront similar issues.
No content found
Joint Press Release Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Office of the Comptroller of the Currency Office of Thrift Supervision For Immediate Release June 26, 2004 Banking Agencies Announce Publication of Revised Capital Framework and Describe U.S. Implementation Efforts The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision today released its document "International Convergence of Capital Measurement and Capital Standards: A Revised Framework." The Framework (also referred to as Basel II) represents the outcome of the work of the Basel Committee, with active participation by the U.S. banking and thrift agencies (Agencies), over recent years to secure international convergence on revisions to regulations and standards governing the capital adequacy of internationally active banking organizations. The Framework will form the basis upon which the Agencies, and representatives of the other Basel Committee member countries, develop proposed revisions to existing capital adequacy regulations and standards. The Framework is available on the Basel Committee's web site at , the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency's (OCC) web site at , the Federal Reserve Board's (Federal Reserve) web site at , the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation's (FDIC) web site at , and the Office of Thrift Supervision's (OTS) web site at . U.S. Implementation Plans As noted, the Framework will form the basis upon which the Agencies develop proposed revisions to their existing risk-based capital adequacy regulations. As previously announced, the Agencies expect that only a small number of large, internationally active U.S. banking organizations would be required to use the Framework, and that those institutions would use only the most advanced approaches for determining their risk-based capital requirements. Application of the Framework's advanced approaches to other qualifying U.S. banking organizations would be at the banking organization's option. The Agencies have developed a comprehensive plan to incorporate the advanced risk and capital measurement methodologies of the Framework into regulations and supervisory guidance for U.S. institutions. This plan will ensure that U.S. implementation efforts are consistent with the Framework; reflect the unique statutory, regulatory and supervisory processes in the United States; and appropriately seek and consider comments on individual aspects of the plan from all interested parties. Prior to implementation, it is expected that institutions using Framework-based regulations and guidance will first be subject to a year of "parallel running;" i.e. application of the advanced approaches in tandem with the current risk-based capital regime, beginning in January 2007. The Agencies anticipate that the Framework would become fully effective in the United States in January 2008. The Agencies plan to apply prudential floors to risk-based regulatory capital calculations in the two years immediately after adoption of the Framework. Qualified institutions that opt in to the Framework subsequent to the initial implementation period would be subject to a similar phase-in schedule (i.e. parallel running and floors). Given the investments needed to qualify for the advanced approaches of the Framework, the Agencies believe that it would be prudent for banking organizations that expect to adopt the Framework on or near the effective date to begin planning their implementation efforts. In order to facilitate such efforts, the Agencies have described below the significant milestones in the development of Framework-based regulations, guidance, and policies. Additional information on these activities will be forthcoming. Supervisory Guidance The Agencies are developing supervisory guidance for various portfolios and risk exposures addressed by the Framework. This guidance is intended to provide U.S. institutions and supervisors with a clear description of the essential components and characteristics of the measurement and management structure for these risks and to describe relevant supervisory expectations for banking organizations adopting a Framework-based process for the determination of minimum regulatory risk-based capital requirements. The Agencies have previously published for notice and comment draft supervisory guidance on Internal Ratings-Based Systems (IRB) for Corporate Credit and on the Advanced Measurement Approaches (AMA) for Operational Risk. See 68 Fed. Reg. 45949 (August 4, 2003). The Agencies expect to publish for notice and comment draft supervisory guidance on IRB Systems for Retail Credit in the third quarter of 2004. Over the course of the next year, the Agencies will publish for comment additional guidance on other aspects of IRB Systems. Institutions that expect to adopt the Framework are encouraged to consider the supervisory standards articulated in the guidance in developing their implementation plans for the adoption of Framework-based systems. Specifically, institutions should begin to self-assess the extent to which their systems and processes comply with or differ from proposed supervisory standards. The Agencies expect to publish additional information regarding the process that will be used to assess individual institutions' efforts to meet IRB and AMA qualifying standards. Additional Quantitative Impact Study Later this year, the Agencies will conduct a fourth Quantitative Impact Study (QIS-4) to evaluate the potential effects of a U.S. implementation of the Framework. QIS-4 will assist banking organizations and their supervisors in better understanding the implications of this proposal on the regulatory capital requirements of individual institutions and may provide some insight with regard to the competitive implications of the new rules. A full or partial recalibration of the Framework may be considered based on the results of the QIS-4 exercise. Although other countries may undertake joint or independent reviews similar to QIS-4, the forthcoming study, as implemented in the United States, will be tailored to the domestic interests of the Agencies and will focus on the effect of the proposal on U.S. banking organizations, especially those large internationally active institutions that the Agencies have proposed to require to conform to Framework-based regulations. Other institutions that anticipate adhering to Framework-based regulations on a voluntary basis may also participate in the study in order to understand better the nature of the internal risk measurement information that the new rules would require and to estimate their resulting capital requirements. As before, the Agencies will request that participants submit requested information by completing a series of computerized spreadsheets--the Agencies will ensure consistency in responses through detailed instructions, questionnaires, and supervisory oversight. The Agencies expect to finalize and distribute survey materials to participating institutions in October 2004 and to request that institutions complete and return the survey results by mid-January 2005. Institutions that want to participate in the study should discuss the project with their federal supervisor(s) by the end of July 2004. Revision of Capital Adequacy Regulations In August of 2003, the Agencies published for notice and comment an advance notice of proposed rulemaking (ANPR) discussing possible revisions to U.S. risk-based capital adequacy regulations relating to an earlier iteration of the Framework. See 68 Fed. Reg. 45900 (August 4, 2003). With the publication of the Framework, the Agencies will continue this rulemaking process. As provided in the ANPR, the Agencies expect that some U.S. banking organizations would use the most advanced approaches set forth in the Framework to determine their risk-based capital requirements, while others would continue to apply the existing capital rules. As a result, the United States would have a bifurcated regulatory capital framework. In conjunction with the assessment of U.S. risk-based capital adequacy regulations relating to the Framework, the Agencies are assessing possible changes to capital regulations for U.S. institutions not subject to Framework-based regulations. Importantly, all U.S. banking organizations would continue to be subject to a leverage ratio requirement under existing regulations, and Prompt Corrective Action (PCA) legislation and implementing regulations would remain in effect. The Agencies expect that a notice of proposed rulemaking on possible revisions to risk-based capital adequacy regulations relating to the Framework will be published in mid-2005. After fully considering all comments, the Agencies expect to be in a position to publish final rules on this proposal in the second quarter of 2006. Possible changes to capital regulations for U.S. institutions not subject to the Framework-based regulations will be considered and addressed in this same general timeframe. ### FDIC David Barr (202) 898-6993 OCC Robert Garsson (202) 874-5770 OTS Erin Hickman (202) 906-6677 Federal Reserve Susan.K.Stawick (202) 452-2955
No content found
Joint Press Release Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Bureau of Engraving and Printing For Immediate Release June 30, 2004 CONTACT : Federal Reserve Board Rose Pianalto or Susan Stawick (202) 452-2955 Bureau of Engraving and Printing Dawn Haley or Claudia Dickens (202) 874-3019 New Color of Money Media Support Penny Kozakos (202) 530-4887