The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the issuance of a consent Cease and Desist Order against Banco de Chile, Santiago, Chile, and Banco de Chile's Miami branch. The Order addresses Bank Secrecy Act and anti-money laundering compliance at Banco de Chile's Miami branch. In a separate, coordinated action, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency on Wednesday announced the issuance of a Consent Order against Banco de Chile and Banco de Chile's New York branch. A copy of the Board's Order is attached.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced its approval of the proposal filed by Webster Financial Corporation, Waterbury, Connecticut, to acquire Eastern Wisconsin Bancshares and thereby indirectly acquire its subsidiary depository institution, State Bank of Howards Grove, both in Howards Grove, Wisconsin. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan Current account At Advancing Enterprise 2005 Conference, London, England February 4, 2005 International trade has been expanding as a share of world gross domestic product since the end of World War II. Yet through 1995, the expansion was essentially a balanced grossing up of cross-border flows. Only in the past decade has expanding trade been associated with the emergence of ever-larger U.S. current account deficits, lesser deficits elsewhere, matched by a corresponding widening of external surpluses in a majority of trading nations. The increased dispersion of these external imbalances is mirrored in a decline in the tight association between national saving rates and domestic investment rates. The correlation between the two, for countries representing four-fifths of world GDP, declined from a coefficient of around 0.96 in 1992, where it had hovered for a half-century, to an estimated low of 0.8 last year. A number of factors have recently converged to lessen restraints on cross-border financial flows as well as on trade in goods and services. The advance of information and communication technology has effectively shrunk the time and distance that separate markets around the world. The vast improvements in these newer technologies have broadened investors' vision to the point that foreign investment appears less exotic and risky. Combined with improvements in transportation networks, these developments have expanded the range of tradable goods and services that can be brought to each market and have enabled greater integration of the productive resources of national economies. Both deregulation and technological innovation have driven the globalization process by tearing down the barriers that have separated economic agents, thus lowering costs. The effect of these developments has been to markedly increase the willingness and ability of financial market participants to reach beyond national borders to invest in foreign countries, just as a century and more ago savings moved beyond local investment opportunities to develop national markets. Implicit in the movement of savings across national borders to fund investment has been the significant increase in the dispersion of national current account balances. In recent years, the negative tail of the distribution of current account balances has been, of course, dominated by the U.S. deficit. The decline in home bias, as economists call the parochial tendency to invest domestic savings at home, has clearly enlarged the capacity of the United States to fund deficits. Arguably, however, it has been economic characteristics special to the United States that have permitted our current account deficit to be driven ever higher, in an environment of greater international capital mobility. In particular, the dramatic increase in underlying growth of U.S. productivity over the past decade lifted real rates of return on dollar investments. These higher rates, in turn, appeared to be the principal cause of the notable rise in the exchange rate of the U.S. dollar in the late 1990s. As the dollar rose, gross operating profit margins of exporters to the United States increased even as trade and current account deficits in the United States widened markedly. But these deficits have continued to grow over the past three years despite a decline in the dollar, whose broadly weighted real index is now much of the way back to its previous low in 1995. Although the dollar's exchange rate has been declining since early 2002, increasingly tight competitive conditions in the United States, as elsewhere, in 2002 and 2003 apparently induced exporters to the United States to hold dollar prices to competitive levels to ensure their market share and foothold in the world's largest economy. For example, from early 2002 to early 2004, the dollar's exchange rate against the euro and sterling, on average, declined about 30 percent, yet dollar prices of imported manufactured goods from the European Union rose by only 9 percent, slightly more than dollar prices of U.S. manufactured goods during the same two years. The consequence of the relatively small rise in the dollar price was a significant compression of gross operating profit margins on European exports to the United States. In recent years, exporters, not only in Europe but in many other trading partners of the United States as well, have tended to increasingly absorb declines in prices denominated in their own currencies when their currencies rose and to fatten profit margins when their currencies fell. Unit labor costs in euros and sterling, for example, increased nearly 2 percent between the first quarter of 2002 and the first quarter of 2004. So, given the average fall in euro and sterling prices of European exports to the United States, gross operating profit margins on those sales must have declined more than 20 percentage points. The margin squeeze, in effect, absorbed about three-quarters of the decline in the dollar's exchange rate relative to the euro and the pound, on average, over the two years. Export margins, as I indicated earlier, had apparently risen to high levels by early 2002, following the roughly 40 percent increase in the value of the dollar in terms of euro and sterling from 1995 to 2002. Hence, margins in early 2004 might still have exceeded their levels of 1995. However, with the strengthening of sterling and the euro that resumed in the last three quarters of 2004, exporters to the United States exhibited significant resistance to further lowering of euro and sterling prices. Accordingly, dollar prices of imports from Europe picked up a bit. This pickup suggests that profit margins were minimal at best a year ago and hence that exporters were willing to lose some U.S. market share rather than compress margins still further. A noticeable downtrend in the share of European exports in U.S. imports has been apparent over the past year. *** Gains from increased currency hedging against the dollar since early 2002 may have enabled European exporters to tolerate a fall in operating profit margins beyond what they otherwise would have been able to tolerate. Hedging, however, can only partially and temporarily alter the impact of exchange rates on export prices. To be sure, very long-dated contracts can transcend short-run fluctuations in currencies. But, long-term hedging is expensive, and therefore, most currency futures contracts are short-term. Once hedges expire, export revenues are no longer protected from past and future changes in exchange rates, and any new hedges must reflect the new exchange rates. Thus, successful currency hedges can at best delay but cannot prevent the ultimate effects of changes in exchange rates on trade. Many other exporters to the United States have exhibited pricing strategies similar to those of European firms. Chinese exporters, of course, have not had to address this issue because China continues to hold its renminbi at a fixed rate against the dollar. U.S. exporters have also faced large exchange rate movements relative to many of their destination markets. The ratio of U.S. merchandise export prices to manufacturing unit labor costs provides some evidence of margin movements linked to exchange rates that is analogous to the effects I described earlier for foreign exporters. Given the dollar's depreciation since 2002, U.S. exporters' profit margins appear to be increasing, which bodes well for future U.S. exports and the adjustment process. *** A consequence of the contraction in profit margins of exporters to the United States, and thus low pass-through of dollar depreciation to U.S. import prices, has been minimal pressure on U.S. consumer price inflation in recent years. A corollary is that the adjustment of U.S. real imports--that is, the quantity of imported goods and services--has been negligible. However, we may be approaching a point, if we are not already there, at which exporters to the United States, should the dollar decline further, would no longer choose to absorb a further reduction in profit margins. Although the limited response, to date, of import prices to the dollar's decline has likely forestalled a decline in U.S. real imports, the effect of the low pass-through of exchange rates into import prices on the nominal dollar value of imports, and thus on the trade balance, is more complex. Increases in import prices lower the quantity of imports but leave the resulting value of imports uncertain. *** To understand why the nominal trade deficit--the nominal dollar value of imports minus exports--has widened considerably since 2002, even as the dollar has declined, we must consider several additional factors. First, partly as a legacy of the dollar's previous strength, the level of imports exceeds that of exports by about 50 percent. Thus exports must grow half again as quickly as imports just to keep the trade deficit from widening--a benchmark that has yet to be met. Second, as is well-documented, the responsiveness of U.S. imports to U.S. income exceeds the responsiveness of U.S. exports to foreign income; this difference leads to a tendency--even if the United States and foreign economies are growing at about the same rate--for the growth of U.S. imports to exceed that of our exports. Third, as of late, the growth of the U.S. economy has exceeded that of our trading partners, further reinforcing the factors leading imports to outstrip exports. Finally, our import bill has expanded significantly as oil prices have risen in recent years. To be sure, the lower dollar has undoubtedly boosted the competitiveness of U.S. exports and the profitability of U.S. exporters. These factors help explain the considerable increase in exports over the past couple of years. Yet the positive effect of the dollar's decline on exports and on the trade balance has been offset by the other aforementioned factors. *** Besides market pressures, which appear poised to stabilize and over the longer run possibly to decrease the U.S. current account deficit and its attendant financing requirements, some forces in the domestic U.S. economy seem about to head in the same direction. The voice of fiscal restraint, barely audible a year ago, has at least partially regained volume. If actions are taken to reduce federal government dissaving, pressures to borrow from abroad will presumably diminish. An increase in household saving should also act to diminish borrowing from abroad. The growth of home mortgage debt has been the major contributor, at least in an accounting sense, to the decline in the personal saving rate in the United States from almost 6 percent in 1993 to its current level of 1 percent. The fall in U.S. interest rates since the early 1980s has supported both home price increases and, in recent years, an unprecedented rate of existing home turnover. This combination has led to a significant increase in home mortgage debt. The rise in home prices creates capital gains, which become realized with the subsequent sale of a home. The amount of debt paid off by the seller of an existing home averages about three-fifths of the mortgage debt taken on by the buyer, effectively converting to cash an amount of home equity close to the realized gain. This cash payout is financed by the net increase in debt on the purchased home, and hence on total mortgage debt outstanding. Even after accounting for the down payments on any subsequent home purchase, sellers receive, net, large amounts of cash, which they view as unencumbered. The counterpart of that cash, the increased debt taken on by the homebuyers, is supported by the new home values enhanced by capital gains. In addition, low mortgage interest rates have encouraged significant growth of home equity loan advances and cash-out refinancings, which are another channel for the extraction of previously unrealized capital gains on homes. All told, home mortgage debt, driven largely by equity extraction, has grown much more rapidly in the past five years than during the previous five years. Surveys suggest that approximately half of equity extraction shows up in additional household expenditures, reducing savings commensurately and thereby presumably contributing to the current account deficit. Interestingly, the change in U.S. home mortgage debt over the past half-century correlates significantly with our current account deficit. To be sure, correlation is not causation, and there have been many influences on both mortgage debt and the current account. Nevertheless, over the past two decades, major innovations in the United States have improved the availability and lowered the costs of home mortgages. These developments likely spurred homeowners to tap increasing home equity to finance consumer expenditures beyond home purchase. In contrast, mortgage debt is not so readily available among our trading partners as a vehicle to finance consumption expenditures. *** Because exporters to the United States are willing to countenance wide swings in profit margins, the level of international trade may be less variable than under previous price-setting regimes when exchange rate pass-through was greater. Arguably, this development has contributed to a higher level of trade. Accordingly, the competitive benefits of globalization may be greater than if exporters allowed exports rather than profit margins to swing widely with exchange rate changes, as they apparently did earlier in the post-World War II period. Exports, of course, were a much smaller share of world GDP in those years. And many, perhaps most, producers, as exchange rates moved in their favor, accordingly chose to pick off only the low-hanging trade fruit, so to speak. Such opportunistic exports obviated large up-front financial commitments to foreign markets. As trade barriers have been lowered over the decades, much has changed, evidenced by the emergence of critical mass in many export markets, the growing importance of multinational firms, and the rise of production processes that are integrated across borders. *** The interaction of a wide range of economic forces, which adjust at national borders to create what we call the current account balance, has proved difficult to predict with any precision, primarily because of the difficulty of forecasting exchange rates. These same forces have lessened our ability to anticipate the consequences of a buildup of either a surplus or a deficit. In addition, numerous issues that have arisen with respect to the adjustment of the U.S. current account remain unresolved. One is the effect of Asian official purchases of dollars in support of their currencies. Such intervention may be supporting the dollar and U.S. Treasury bond prices somewhat, but the effect is difficult to pin down. Another issue is the influence of still-growing globalization, arguably one of the key factors that has facilitated the financing of the U.S. current account deficit. There is little evidence that the growth of globalization has yet slowed. The dramatic advances over the past decade in virtually all measures of globalization have resulted in an international economic environment with little relevant historical precedent. I have argued elsewhere that the U.S. current account deficit cannot widen forever but that, fortunately, the increased flexibility of the American economy will likely facilitate any adjustment without significant consequences to aggregate economic activity. That argument will be tested, I suspect, by possibly new twists and turns that will emerge in a seemingly ever-more complex international economic and financial structure. Footnotes The seminal work on this issue by Martin Feldstein and Charles Horioka a quarter-century ago ( Economic Journal, vol. 90 [1980], pp. 314-29) implied that global savings are inefficiently distributed to investment, meaning that savers are bearing too much risk for the returns they achieve and that countries with high-potential investment projects are getting less financing than they could productively employ. Savers tend, to their own detriment, to over-discount foreign returns. Such suboptimal allocation of capital lowers living standards everywhere. Data on profits and profit margins for export sales to the United States are generally not available for our major trading partners. However, indirect evidence of levels and trends can be gleaned from U.S. import prices converted to exporters' currencies and foreign unit labor costs. The other significant component of unit costs, other than labor costs, is materials prices. Over this period, the IMF primary commodities price index denominated in euros and sterling--a proxy for materials costs--was roughly unchanged on balance. The Bank for International Settlements , December, 2004), for example, points out that the increase in certain forward foreign exchange market transactions that has occurred in recent years, could reflect heightened interest in hedging. A recent Federal Reserve study, however, points out that only one-fifth of reductions in budget deficits tend to show through to reduced current account deficits. (See Christopher Erceg, Luca Guerrieri, and Christopher Gust [2005], Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, International Finance Division, Paper 825.) The R² of a simple regression using quarterly data since 1952 is 0.5. Adding a trend to reflect the influence of other factors such as the greater income elasticity of demand of U.S. imports relative to that of exports raises the R² to 0.7 and does not reduce the significance of the connection between home mortgage debt and the current account. To be sure, the rapid globalization of the latter part of the nineteenth century exhibited many of the characteristics of today's international economy. But the far lower level of technology and the existence of the gold standard adjustment process renders that period of little use for current comparisons. Alan Greenspan, in Frankfurt, Germany, on November 19, 2004.
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan Adam Smith At the Adam Smith Memorial Lecture, Kirkcaldy, Scotland February 6, 2005 Kirkcaldy--the birthplace, in 1723, of Adam Smith and, by extension, of modern economics--is also, of course, where your Chancellor of the Exchequer was reared. I am led to ponder to what extent the Chancellor's renowned economic and financial skills are the result of exposure to the subliminal intellect-enhancing emanations of this area. *** In the broad sweep of history, it is ideas that matter. Indeed, the world is ruled by little else. As John Maynard Keynes famously observed: "Practical men, who believe themselves to be quite exempt from intellectual influences, are usually the slaves of some defunct economist. Madmen in authority, who hear voices in the air, are distilling their frenzy from some academic scribbler of a few years back." Emperors and armies come and go; but unless they leave new ideas in their wake, they are of passing historic consequence. The short list of intellectuals who have materially advanced the betterment of civilization unquestionably includes Adam Smith. He is a towering contributor to the development of the modern world. In his Wealth of Nations , Smith reached far beyond the insights of his predecessors to frame a global view of how market economies, just then emerging, worked. In so doing, he supported changes in societal organization that were to measurably enhance world standards of living. For most of recorded history, people appear to have acquiesced in, and in some ways embraced, a society that was static and predictable. A young twelfth-century vassal could look forward to tilling the same plot of his landlord's soil until disease, famine, natural disaster, or violence ended his life. And that end often came quickly. Life expectancy at birth was, on average, twenty-five years, the same as it had been for the previous thousand years. Moreover, the vassal could fully expect that his children and doubtless their children, in turn, would till the same plot. Perhaps such a programmed life had a certain security, established by a rigid social and legal hierarchy that left little to individual enterprise. To be sure, improved agricultural techniques and the expansion of trade beyond the largely self-sufficient feudal manor increased the division of labor and raised living standards and populations, but growth in both was glacial. In the fifteenth century, the great mass of people were engaged in the same productive practices as those of their forebears many generations earlier. Smith lived at a time when market forces were beginning to erode the rigidities of the remaining feudal and medieval practices and the mercantilism that followed them. Influenced by the ideas and events of the Reformation, which helped undermine the concept of the divine right of kings, a view of individuals acting independently of ecclesiastic and state restraint emerged in the early part of the eighteenth century. For the first time, modern notions of political and economic freedom began to gain traction. Those ideas, associated with the Age of Enlightenment, especially in England, Scotland, and France, gave rise to a vision of a society in which individuals guided by reason were free to choose their destinies unshackled from repressive restrictions and custom. What we now know as the rule of law--namely protection of the rights of individuals and their property--widened, encouraging people to increase their efforts to produce, trade, and innovate. A whole new system of enterprise began to develop, which, though it seemed bewildering in its complexity and consequences, appeared nonetheless to possess a degree of stability as if guided by an "invisible hand." The French Physiocrats, among others, struggled in the middle of the eighteenth century to develop rudimentary principles to untangle that conundrum. Those principles were an attempt to explain how an economy governed by a calculable regularity--that is, natural law and, as characterized by the Physiocrat Vincent de Tournay, "Laissez-faire, laissez-passer"--would function. The Physiocrats' influence, however, waned rapidly along with the influence of other political economists as evidence grew that their models were, at best, incomplete. It was left to Adam Smith to identify the more-general set of principles that brought conceptual clarity to the seeming chaos of market transactions. In 1776, Smith produced one of the great achievements in human intellectual history: An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations . Most of Smith's free-market paradigm remains applicable to this day. Smith was doubtless inspired by the Physiocrats, as well as by his friend David Hume, his mentor Francis Hutcheson, and other participants in the Enlightenment. Early political economists had made impressive contributions, many of them anticipating parts of Smith's global view. But Smith reached beyond his predecessors and subjected market processes to a far more formidable intellectual analysis. One hears a good deal of Franz Joseph Haydn in the string quartets and symphonies of Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart; yet to my ear, at least, Mozart rose to a plateau beyond anything Haydn and his contemporaries were able to reach. So, too, in his sphere, did Smith. He concluded that, to enhance the wealth of a nation, every man, consistent with the law, should be "free to pursue his own interest his own way, and to bring both his industry and capital into competition with those of ... other ... men." "It is not from the benevolence of the butcher, the brewer, or the baker, that we expect our dinner, but from their regard to their own interest." The individual is driven by private gain but is "led by an invisible hand" to promote the public good, "which was no part of his intention." This last insight is all the more extraordinary in that, for much of human history, acting in one's self-interest--indeed, seeking to accumulate wealth--had been perceived as unseemly and was, in some instances, illegal. In the opening paragraphs of the Wealth of Nations , Smith recognized the crucial role played by the expansion of labor productivity in improving welfare when he cited "the skill, dexterity, and judgment with which labor is generally applied" as one of the essential determinants of a nation's standard of living. "Whatever be the soil, climate, or extent of territory of any particular nation, the abundance or scantiness of its annual supply must in that particular situation, depend upon ... the productive powers of labor." More than two centuries of economic thought have added little to those insights. Smith, on remarkably little formal empirical evidence, drew broad inferences about the nature of commercial organization and institutions that led to a set of principles that would profoundly influence and alter a significant segment of the civilized world of that time. Economies based on those principles first created levels of sustenance adequate to enable the population to grow and later--far later--to create material conditions of living that fostered an increase in life expectancy. The latter development opened up the possibility that individuals could establish long-term personal goals, a possibility that was remote to all but a sliver of earlier generations. *** Smith's ideas fell on fertile ground and within a very few decades verged on conventional wisdom. The ancient political power of the landed gentry, the major beneficiaries of the older order, was giving way to a new class of merchants and manufacturers that was a product of the Industrial Revolution, which had begun a quarter-century earlier. Pressures were building in Britain and elsewhere to break down mercantilist restrictions. But with Smith, the emerging elite found their voice and sanction. Smith's sanction, however, was directed to the freedom of markets and trade, not to the new business elite, many of whose business practices Smith severely deprecated. He concluded that the competitive force unleashed by individuals in pursuit of their rational self-interest induces each person to do better. Such competitive interaction, by encouraging specialization and division of labor, increases economic growth. *** Smith's essentially benevolent views of the workings of competition counteracted pressures for market regulation of the evident excesses of the factory system that had begun early in the eighteenth century. Those excesses were decried a century later by the poet William Blake as "... the dark Satanic mills" that by then characterized much of industrial England. Perhaps if the Wealth of Nations had never been written, the Industrial Revolution would still have proceeded into the nineteenth century at an impressive pace. But without Smith's demonstration of the inherent stability and growth of what we now term free-market capitalism, the remarkable advance of material well-being for whole nations might well have been quashed. Pressures conceivably could have emerged to strengthen mercantilistic regulations in response to the stresses created by competition and to the all-too-evident ills of industrialization. *** Smith was the first in a line of political economists whom we now identify as the classical school. Foremost of his followers was David Ricardo, a stockbroker, parliamentarian, and skilled essayist. Ricardo's major work, The Principles of Political Economy and Taxation , published in 1817, offered a rigorous, though less optimistic, analysis of the structure of a system of wholly free commerce. Under the political onslaught of a rising industrialist class intellectually supported by the classical school, mercantilism was gradually dismantled, and economic freedom spread widely. This process reached its apex with the repeal of Britain's Corn Laws in 1846. The acceptance of classical economics was, by then, broad enough to prompt reorganization of commercial life in most of the civilized world. *** Adam Smith died in 1790, well before his extraordinary impact could have been assessed. But Ricardo lived until 1823, and John Stuart Mill, another member of the school, lived until 1873. Would they and the other early followers of Smith find the current economic landscape at all familiar? In one sense, not likely. Among the developed countries, famine is now virtually nonexistent. Thomas Robert Malthus's penetrating analysis at the end of the eighteenth century of the limits of subsistence, to which many of the classical school subscribed, proved wrong. Malthus built his pessimistic vision on a notion that the long-evident forces of stagnation would persist: A human population with a propensity to grow geometrically would be thwarted by limits to growth in the means of subsistence. Having observed crop yields that had changed only marginally for millennia, Malthus could not have foreseen the dramatic increase in agricultural yields. In the United States, for example, corn yields--or should I say maize yields--rose from 25 bushels per acre in the early 1800s to 160 by 2004. Moreover, those living in the early part of the nineteenth century could not have imagined that life expectancy in developed countries two centuries later would rise on average to more than twice that which they experienced. That increase directly and indirectly resulted largely from the almost twentyfold increase in average real per capita gross domestic product gained since 1820, according to estimates of Angus Maddison, the economic historian. From this expanding output, society has been able to devote more resources to nutrition, sanitation, and health care. And yet, regrettably, much of today's developing world would appear familiar to our forebears. Pestilence is present in the form of AIDS, and as a consequence, life expectancy in much of Africa is not much different from what it was in most of the world two centuries ago. Significant parts of the world still experience periodic famine. Although workers in developed and many emerging nations have witnessed an extraordinary rise in living standards, some shadow of worker angst of the earlier period remains. Today's vast technological advances and the labor turnover associated with it have not sparked the violence of the early nineteenth-century Luddites, but they are nonetheless associated with significant job insecurity. Finally, classical economists, who battled the rear guard of mercantilism in their days, would certainly recognize the assault on their paradigm in the anti-capitalist, anti-free-trade rhetoric currently prevalent in some contemporary discourse. *** Yet, with all of today's economic shortcomings, there can be little doubt that the Industrial Revolution and the emergence of free-market capitalism have brought civilization to a material level that could not have been imagined two centuries ago. The late eighteenth century, when the dramatic rise in standards of living and in population began after millennia of virtual stagnation, was one of the seminal turning points of history. With few exceptions, that advance has carried forward to this day. Average global real per capita GDP has risen 1.2 percent annually since 1820, enough to double standards of living every fifty-eight years. In the same period, world population has increased sixfold. In the previous two millennia average per capita incomes barely exceeded levels required to support, at minimum subsistence, a marginally noticeable rise in population. *** Today, Adam Smith's insights still resonate as they did after the publication of the Wealth of Nations . However, during the intervening generations the esteem in which Smith's contributions were held waxed and waned with the acceptance of free-market capitalism. After its initial acceptance in the late eighteenth century, the new economic order soon attracted criticism. The Industrial Revolution brought "the dark Satanic mills" and all the squalor associated with them. To be sure, life for a significant part of the population at the margin of subsistence during the early days of the Industrial Revolution was misery. But it was life. A half-century earlier, many of those miserable souls would have died as infants or children. Nonetheless, within decades of the emergence of the new order the visible misery and the evident wretched struggle for subsistence inspired competing visions of economic organization. Robert Owen, a successful British factory owner, in a challenge to Smith, averred that unrestrained laissez-faire by its nature would lead to poverty and disease. He led a school of so-called Utopian Socialists who advocated, in Owen's phrase, "villages of cooperation." In 1826, he set up such a community in the United States, which he named New Harmony. Ironically, communal strife brought the New Harmony experiment to collapse within two years. Many saw the initiative as opposed to the laws of human nature, a component of natural law. But Owen's charismatic devotion to his cause continued to draw large followings among those barely able to eke out subsistence in an appalling working environment. The elevation to a more civilized state of work was still a century in the future. Karl Marx was dismissive of Owen and his utopian followers. Indeed, Marx was attracted to the intellectual rigor of Smith and Ricardo, who to his mind, up to a point, accurately described the evolution of capitalism. As we all know, Marx viewed capitalism as a transition to the inevitable emergence of communism. Unlike Marx, the Fabian socialists who emerged in the last decades of the nineteenth century advocated evolution rather than revolution to a more collectivized economy. Indeed, many of the restraints on laissez-faire advanced by the Fabians and other reformers were eventually enacted into law. However, throughout the nineteenth century, notwithstanding widespread criticism of market capitalism, standards of living continued to increase, propelling the world's population to more than 1-1/2 billion by 1900. The major advances in life expectancy by the early twentieth century were attributable largely to efforts to ensure a clean water supply, the result of the increased capital stock associated with rising affluence. *** In the nineteenth century, criticism of capitalism emphasized abuses of business practice. Aside from Marxist views of the exploitation of workers by capitalists, monopoly was seen by many as a natural consequence of unfettered capitalism. Even earlier, Smith had weighed in with his oft-quoted insight that "people of the same trade seldom meet together, even for merriment and diversion, but the conversation ends in a conspiracy against the public, or in some contrivance to raise prices." Yet standards of living of the average worker moved inexorably higher, serving through most of the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries as an effective political buffer to the widespread emergence of socialism. Because agriculture so dominated the world's economies at that time, the industrial recessions, which appeared from time to time, did not provoke a severe enough political response to alter the capitalistic order. The writings of Jean Baptiste Say, an early nineteenth-century follower of Smith, were significant in this regard. He postulated that supply creates its own demand and concluded that marked contractions in economic activity would, with time, be unwound. The widespread acceptance of Say's Law and the associated confidence in the self-stabilizing property of a market-based price system were dominant factors inhibiting government intervention in periods of economic distress, especially during the latter part of the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. But the Great Depression of the 1930s subjected the optimistic conclusions of classical economics, especially Say's Law, to a much broader assault. As the economic stagnation of the 1930s dragged on, the critical notion that capitalism was self-correcting fell into disrepute. The marked increase in government intervention into markets, in effect a partial reversion to mercantilism, was perhaps an inevitable response to the distress of the Great Depression. At the same time, the notions of Marx gained influence in the West, perhaps because the repressions of the Soviet Union, the major avowed practitioner of Marx, were not well known before World War II. But cracks in the facade of economic management by government emerged early in the post-World War II years, and those cracks were to widen as time passed. Britain's heavily controlled economy, a carryover from the war, was under persistent stress as it encountered one crisis after another in the early postwar decades. In the United States, unbalanced macroeconomic policies led to a gradual uptrend in the rate of inflation in the 1960s. The imposition of wage and price controls to deal with rising inflation in the 1970s proved ineffective and unworkable. The notion that the centrally planned Soviet economy was catching up with the West was, by the early 1980s, increasingly viewed as dubious, though the view was not fully discredited until the collapse of the Berlin Wall in 1989 exposed the economic ruin behind the Iron Curtain. The East-West divisions following World War II engendered an unintended four-decade-long experiment in comparative economic systems--Smith versus Marx, so to speak. The results, evident with the dismantling of the Iron Curtain, were unequivocally in favor of market economies. The consequences were far-reaching. The long-standing debate between the virtues of economies organized around free markets and those governed by central planning came to an end. There was no eulogy for central planning; it just ceased to be mentioned, leaving the principles of Adam Smith and his followers, revised only in the details, as the seemingly sole remaining effective paradigm for economic organization. A large majority of developing nations quietly shifted to more market-oriented economies. But even earlier in the postwar decades, distortions induced by regulation were viewed as more and more disturbing in the developed world. Starting in the 1970s, American Presidents, supported by bipartisan majorities in the Congress, deregulated large segments of America's transportation, communications, energy, and financial services industries. Similar initiatives were advanced in Britain and elsewhere. The stated purpose was to enhance competition, which following Adam Smith was increasingly seen as a significant spur to the growth of productivity and standards of living. The slow, but persistent, lowering of barriers to cross-border trade and finance assisted in the dismantling of economic rigidities. By the 1980s, the success of that strategy in the United States confirmed the earlier views that a loosening of regulatory restraint on business would improve the flexibility of our economies. Flexibility implies a faster response to shocks, a correspondingly greater ability to absorb their downside consequences, and a quicker recovery in their aftermath. Enhanced flexibility has the advantage of enabling market economies to adjust automatically and not having to rest on policymakers' initiatives, which often come too late or are misguided. Such views, which echo Jean Baptiste Say in some ways, clearly have been paramount in a renewed twenty-first century appreciation of Adam Smith's contributions. *** Classical economics, especially as refined and formalized by Ricardo and Alfred Marshall, emphasized competition in the marketplace among economic participants governed by rational self-interest. The value preferences of these participants would be revealed by their actions in that marketplace. But the ultimate source of value preference was assumed to be outside the scope of economics. Adam Smith's purview was broader: He sought in his Theory of Moral Sentiments , published nearly two decades before the Wealth of Nations , to delve into the roots of human motivation and interaction. He concluded that human sympathy, by fostering the institutions supporting human civil interaction and life, was a major contributor to societal cohesion. To guide their own lives, people also exhibit a seeming inborn sense of right and wrong, presumably tested by the laws of nature. Those sentiments fashion each person's value preferences and their intensity. Rational thought, in Smith's thesis, apparently emerges only in the contemplation and initiation of those actions that will make manifest the innate propensities. Over the past two centuries, scholars have examined these issues extensively, but our knowledge of the source of inbred value preference remains importantly shaped by the debates that engaged the Enlightenment. The vast majority of economic decisions today fit those earlier presumptions of individuals acting more or less in their rational self-interest. Were it otherwise, economic variables would fluctuate more than we observe in markets at most times. Indeed, without the presumption of rational self-interest, the supply and demand curves of classical economics might not intersect, eliminating the possibility of market-determined prices. For example, one could hardly imagine that today's awesome array of international transactions would produce the relative economic stability that we experience daily if they were not led by some international version of Smith's invisible hand. The inference is not that people always act rationally in commercial transactions. The periodic bubbles in product and financial markets prove otherwise. But, by and large, the description of economic process that Smith developed, and others have since extended, does appear to adequately describe today's determinants of world commerce and the wealth of nations. *** A notable aspect of economics as a major discipline is its emergence largely on British soil. Smith, Ricardo, Mill, Marshall, and Keynes developed and extended classical economics. Even Marx constructed much of his revolutionary thesis in London. The incredible insights of a handful of intellectuals of the Enlightenment--especially the Scottish Enlightenment, with Smith and Hume toiling in the environs of Kirkcaldy--created the modern vision of people free to choose and to act according to their individual self-interest. As a consequence, today we enjoy material benefits and longevity that Smith's generation could not have remotely imagined. We owe them, especially Adam Smith, a debt of gratitude that can never be repaid. Footnotes J.M. Keynes, , Interest, and Money, 1936, p. 383. Adam Smith, , 1776, p. 687. Ibid., p. 26-27. Ibid., p. 456. Ibid., p. 10. Ibid., p. 10. J.B. Say, Traité d'économie politique , 1803. A. Marshall, , 1890.
Remarks by Governor Susan Schmidt Bies At the Academic Speaker Series, University of Tennessee, Martin, Tennessee February 7, 2005 Behind the Scenes at the FOMC: How the Federal Reserve Determines Monetary Policy Good evening. I'm certainly pleased to be back in Tennessee with a chance to visit with some old friends. I am often asked what it is like to be a Federal Reserve Governor and what I actually do. So I thought I would give you an overview of the Federal Reserve System, to assure my friends that, yes, it is a full-time job, and, yes, I did have to move to Washington to accept the appointment. Before I start, let me offer the customary caution that the views I'll express are my own and don't necessarily reflect those of other policymakers or staff members of the Federal Reserve. First, I want to spend some time offering you a broader perspective on the Federal Reserve's purposes and functions. Then I want to talk in more detail about how monetary policy is determined. At the Board, we sometimes nickname this topic "Fed 101." In fact, the Fed has a wonderful website with just that name. You can find it by going to and clicking on the "Fed101" tab at the top of the page. The Federal Reserve System The Federal Reserve System is generically described as the central bank of the United States. It represents our nation's third, and I trust final, attempt to establish a central bank. You may well recall learning in school that, in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, the Congress chartered the First Bank of the United States and the Second Bank of the United States, but neither institution lasted more than twenty years. The Banks' very existence was controversial and went to the heart of the great national debate, which continues to this day, over which responsibilities and powers should be handled at the federal level and which should be left to the states. Suffice it to say that, after the charter of the Second Bank of the United States expired in 1836, we went without a central bank for nearly eighty years. A series of financial panics in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, most notably the Panic of 1907, revived the idea of creating a central bank to provide the nation with a safer, more flexible, and more stable monetary and financial system. But suspicion of centralized power remained at the core of the American psyche, and so the institution that the Federal Reserve Act established in 1913 was a central bank that assigned significant responsibilities for monetary-policy-making to regional Federal Reserve Banks. The System that resulted consists of a governmental agency--the Board of Governors--in Washington and, in twelve major cities, the regional Federal Reserve Banks, which combine public and private elements. The role of the Board vis-à-vis the regional Banks was elevated in the aftermath of the stock market crash of 1929 and in the early years of the Great Depression, but the combination of centralized and regional responsibilities remains an important strength of the Federal Reserve System, as I'll explain shortly when I discuss the formulation of monetary policy. The role that the Fed's founders envisioned for the central bank was narrower, and more passive, than the role that the Fed plays today. The emphasis was on providing currency and reserves to meet seasonal demands and on assisting banks in accommodating the credit needs of commerce and business. Indeed, until the 1920s, it wasn't clearly understood that the Reserve Banks' purchases and sales of government securities influenced the supply of money and credit in the economy. Today, the Federal Reserve's duties fall into four general areas--some that would have been familiar to the central bankers in the Fed's early years and some that would have been unfamiliar: maintaining the stability of the financial system and containing systemic risk that may arise in financial markets supervising and regulating banking organizations to ensure the safety and soundness of the nation's banking and financial system and to protect consumers from harm in their use of credit and banking services playing a major role in operating and overseeing the nation's payment system, including providing certain financial services to financial institutions, the U.S. government, and foreign official institutions conducting monetary policy in pursuit of stable prices and maximum sustainable employment We have an all-too-recent example of the Fed as a source of financial stability in its response to the financial aftermath of the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, which occurred just before I joined the Board in December 2001. As a commercial bank executive, I was impressed with the speed at which the Fed responded when the normal settlement and information systems in check and securities markets were interrupted. The Fed worked immediately through discount window lending, open market operations, and other means to provide the financial and banking systems with sufficient liquidity. It worked with public- and private-sector participants to keep markets open or, if circumstances forced markets to close, to return them quickly to normal operations. As the operator and overseer of key payment systems, it had to ensure that its own systems, as well as those of the private sector, were operational. And on the Monday after September 11, it lowered the target federal funds rate to help cushion the economic fallout of the blow to consumers' and businesses' confidence. Because the Fed worked so effectively, bankers throughout the country could serve their consumer and business customers and thereby help to minimize the economic effects of the terrorist attacks. The Fed's role as the supervisor of banking organizations--both as the federal supervisor of the roughly 900 state-chartered banks that have joined the Federal Reserve System and as the umbrella overseer of more than 5,000 financial and bank holding companies--gives the Fed's staff and policymakers the kind of hands-on experience and knowledge that is essential for a central bank during a financial crisis. The Fed's examiners and supervisors seek to ensure not only the safety and soundness of the banking system but also the financial strength of individual banking organizations and the effectiveness of their systems for complying with anti-money-laundering, consumer-protection, and other laws. In fact, the Congress charged the Federal Reserve Board with writing the rules that implement consumer protection laws such as the Truth in Savings Act and the Truth in Lending Act, though each of the various federal banking agencies enforces the regulations for the institutions within its purview. Given all the attention paid to the Board and its Chairman, you may be surprised to learn that more than 21,000 of the Federal Reserve System's roughly 23,000 employees work not in Washington but at the twelve regional Federal Reserve Banks. A substantial portion of these employees work in vital, but often unsung jobs, keeping the payment system operating smoothly. The System's employees handle the distribution of U.S. currency and coin throughout the nation and the world. They also clear and process checks and electronic payments, such as the direct deposit of paychecks, and they facilitate the electronic transfer of huge sums between large financial institutions. Monetary Policy But it is monetary policy--and the Fed's principal monetary lever, the federal funds rate, which is the interest rate on overnight loans of reserves between depository institutions--that earns the Federal Reserve all that ink and airtime. Deciding on the appropriate policy from among the various options keeps nineteen policymakers and a staff of more than four hundred Ph.D. economists at the Board and the Reserve Banks quite busy. The chief monetary-policy-making body within the Federal Reserve is the Federal Open Market Committee, or FOMC. It meets eight times a year but can confer by telephone more often if necessary, as it did in 2001 as it responded to incoming economic information as well as economic shocks from terrorism, and as it did again in 2003 as policymakers sought to understand the economic effect of the war in Iraq. The FOMC has nineteen participants--the seven Governors of the Federal Reserve Board and the twelve presidents of the Reserve Banks. Although all actively participate in discussions at the meetings, only twelve have votes at any one time on the Committee. Each of the seven members of the Board wields a vote, as does the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York by virtue of that Bank's unique responsibility for implementing monetary policy decisions through the open market operations of its Domestic Trading Desk. The responsibility for casting the remaining four votes alternates among the remaining eleven Reserve Bank presidents: Two vote every other year, and the other nine vote every third year. But the important point to remember is that, in a consensus-driven body such as the FOMC, the identity of a member who casts a vote in any given year is less significant than the fact that each member of the FOMC participates fully in the deliberations. The presidents, in particular, bring to the table analyses of economic and business conditions in their districts. The boards of the Reserve Banks also contribute a wealth of anecdotal information to supplement the torrent of hard economic data the Fed analyzes. Moreover, they make recommendations to the Board on the discount rate, the rate the Fed charges on its own loans to financial institutions. The information from the Reserve Bank boards, along with other economic intelligence, is summarized in a report known as the Beige Book, which is publicly released about two weeks before each FOMC meeting. The FOMC also consults other books of other colors. But I'm getting ahead of myself. Let me describe the routine at a typical FOMC meeting. After seating ourselves around the twenty-seven-foot-long, polished mahogany-and-black-granite Board table, we begin punctually at nine o'clock. After approving the minutes of the previous meeting, our first order of business is a report from the Manager of the System Open Market Account at the New York Fed, who focuses on conditions in domestic and international financial markets. That report is followed by a presentation from the directors of the Board's Divisions of Research and Statistics and International Finance, who deliver the Board staffs' economic forecast as represented in the Greenbook, which FOMC members have usually had the weekend to study. The Greenbook contains the staffs' summary of recent economic information, a baseline economic forecast, which is the staff's best estimate, and scenarios based on possible alternative future events. Then comes the first "go-round," in which every member of the Committee offers his or her assessment of current economic conditions. We may usefully digress here to consider how the Board staff arrives at its forecast and to describe what role the forecast plays in policymakers' deliberations. An important, perhaps obvious, point to make is that it is not--I repeat, not--the FOMC's forecast. The economic staff of each Reserve Bank independently advises its president. And the economic staffs of the Reserve Banks and the individual members of the FOMC may or may not agree with elements of the Board staff's forecast. Indeed, FOMC members sometimes couch the presentation of their economic views in terms of where those views coincide with and diverge from the Greenbook's forecast. That description, in and of itself, gives you some sense of the staff's influence of the forecast. It sets the parameters of the discussion. So what kind of forecast is it? It is a forecast based on human judgment. But this judgmental forecast is informed by sophisticated econometric models. The staff's core, large-scale structural model has been dubbed FRB/US--pronounced "ferbus." But that model is not the only one the staff uses. Indeed, the staff uses its suite of smaller-scale models to probe the vulnerabilities of the core model. But as seductive as modeling is to us economists, we must remember that no model can fully capture a dynamic, ever-evolving economy such as ours. Thus, the staff's forecast, and I'm sure the individual forecasts of each FOMC member, are in the end judgmental assessments. After the Greenbook session, the director of the Board's Division of Monetary Affairs briefs the committee on the Bluebook, a document that presents policy options, usually two or three, for the Committee's consideration and that offers arguments for and against each course of action. Not a recommendation from the staff, the briefing is instead a vehicle against which FOMC members can test their own thinking. Finally, after hours of discussion and analysis, the Chairman speaks on the policy choice for the first time. Until this point, his participation in the meeting has usually been limited to questions and to comments aimed at keeping the meeting moving. After the Chairman makes his recommendation, FOMC members react in the second go-round. Then we vote, and by then it is usually about one o'clock and time for lunch. About an hour later, at around quarter after two, a statement publicly announces our decision. As currently formulated, the announcement has four parts: the first states the target for the federal funds rate; the second briefly explains the Committee's analysis of current economic conditions; the third provides the Committee's assessment of the risks to price stability and economic growth; and the last provides Committee members' votes. The statement is a relatively recent innovation; it is about a decade old and, over that period, it has evolved from a quite terse missive to the almost loquacious form it takes today. Before the advent of FOMC statements, market observers had to infer shifts in monetary policy by watching the New York Fed's open market operations, and trying to guess whether the Fed was easing or tightening monetary policy. As you may know, the Federal Open Market Committee decided this past December to begin releasing the minutes of its meetings on an accelerated basis. Previously, our practice had been to release the minutes on the Thursday following the next regularly scheduled meeting--that is, with a typical lag of a bit more than six weeks. Under the new schedule, that time has been cut in half: Minutes will now be released with a lag of just three weeks. This move is the latest in a long sequence of changes that the Federal Reserve has implemented over the past decade to enhance the openness and transparency of monetary policymaking. Before reaching our decision to accelerate the minutes, we discussed the pros and cons of doing so at some length at our December meeting. For a number of months, we had been experimenting internally with accelerating the preparation of the minutes, and we agreed that the trial had been a success. The minutes contain a more complete and nuanced explanation of the reasons for the Committee's policy decisions and our view of the risks to the outlook than we can possibly include in a brief post-meeting announcement. For that reason, speeding up the release of the minutes was seen as helping markets interpret our policy actions in the context of evolving economic developments and so better anticipate the course of interest rates. Another advantage is that the minutes now will provide the public a more up-to-date context for individual policymakers' public remarks. That is, when members of the FOMC give speeches, you will know how their views compare with the range of other members at the last FOMC meeting. We recognized, however, that there are risks to accelerated release: In particular, there is a possibility that, at times, the markets could misinterpret the minutes. In the end, our clear consensus was that the likely benefits outweigh the risks, and we decided to proceed with releasing the minutes on an expedited schedule. We went "live" with accelerated release beginning with the minutes of the December meeting, which were published on January 4. The document was intensively covered in the press and received considerable attention in financial markets. My impression is that most investors agree that the change is an improvement in openness and transparency of monetary policy. However, it is important to note that, when interpreting the minutes, readers should keep in mind that they are not simply a longer and more-detailed version of the statement that the FOMC issues after each meeting. The statements are intended to concisely convey the Committee's broad consensus. The minutes, however, are intended to reflect the broad range of views held by members of the Committee, including views expressed by just a few members. Thus, it is perfectly possible and appropriate that a statement in one part of the minutes does not accord with another passage in the minutes. If you want further details of how the discussion goes at FOMC meetings, transcripts are released after five years. These are verbatim transcripts, but the names of companies who provide confidential information are redacted, to encourage the sharing of forward-looking information with FOMC members, who in turn share that information with others as we have our discussions. Members of the FOMC also communicate to the public through speeches, which we all make at various times during the year. As I noted in the disclaimer I gave at the start of this speech, when we give speeches, we are speaking for ourselves, and not necessarily for the FOMC or in my case the Board of Governors. The Chairman also delivers twice-a-year reports to the Congress on monetary policy, where he speaks for the FOMC. The Chairman also testifies before Congress, giving his views on economic policy. These methods of communication are all important elements of the transparency necessary for an independent central bank to function within a democracy. As I mentioned, our goals--price stability and maximum sustainable employment--are set by law, but we are afforded the political independence to make the sometimes unpopular decisions required to achieve those goals. Appropriate transparency and accountability offer a necessary counterbalance to that independence. Conclusion I hope this gives you an overview of the broad range of purposes and functions of the Federal Reserve System, as well as an insiders view of what happens behind the scenes at the FOMC. Next time you hear or read a news account of the Fed's actions to change the fed funds rate, I hope you appreciate all of the activities that go behind our decisions. Footnotes These remarks draw from the following sources: Laurence H. Meyer (1998), speech delivered at Willamette University, April 2; Mark W. Olson (2004), speech delivered at the Twenty-sixth Conference of the American Council on Gift Annuities, May 5; and David J. Stockton (2002), "What Makes a Good Model for the Central Bank to Use?" speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, March 2.
No content found
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between Bank of America Corporation, Charlotte, N.C., a bank holding company, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond. In separate, coordinated actions, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency announced the execution of a formal agreement with Bank of America, N.A., Charlotte, N.C., a wholly owned subsidiary of Bank of America Corporation, and the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission announced the execution of an administrative cease-and-desist order against Banc of America Capital Management LLC, a registered investment adviser, BACAP Distributors, LLC, a registered investment adviser, and Banc of America Securities, LLC, a registered investment adviser and broker dealer. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
Joint Press Release Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation For immediate release February 10, 2005 FEDERAL RESERVE AND FDIC ISSUE ENFORCEMENT ACTIONS AGAINST THE NORCROWN TRUST AND CHARLES KUSHNER The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation on Thursday announced the issuance of joint enforcement actions against The NorCrown Trust and Charles Kushner. The NorCrown Trust controls NorCrown Bank, Livingston, N.J. Charles Kushner is the trustee of the The NorCrown Trust and a former chairman of NorCrown Bank. The joint Order requires that The NorCrown Trust and Charles Kushner pay civil money penalties totaling at least $12.5 million, to divest The NorCrown Trust's shares of NorCrown Bank, and to transfer the shares to a voting trust administered by an independent trustee until the divestiture is completed. The joint Order also prohibits Mr. Kushner from participating in the conduct of the affairs of any financial institution or holding company. The Federal Reserve Board also issued an order upon consent under the Bank Holding Company Act requiring other individuals and trusts with relationships to The NorCrown Trust to cooperate in implementing the divestiture plan. The enforcement actions resolve allegations that The NorCrown Trust and Charles Kushner violated the Change in Bank Control Act, the Bank Holding Company, or both, in a series of transactions from 1995 through 1997 that led to the formation of the NorCrown Trust, which never received the Federal Reserve's approval to become a bank holding company. The joint Order also resolves allegations of violations of Regulation O and Sections 23A and 23B relating to transactions with NorCrown Bank. A copy of the joint consent Order is attached. Federal Reserve Andrew Williams 202-452-2955 FDIC David Barr 202-898-6992
Joint Press Release Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Office of the Comptroller of the Currency Office of Thrift Supervision For Immediate Release February 11, 2005 Agencies Extend Comment Period on Proposed Data Collection Changes for Shared National Credits The federal banking and thrift regulatory agencies today agreed to extend for 45 days the comment period on the proposed changes to the data collection process that supports the Shared National Credit review of large syndicated loans published in the Federal Register on December 20, 2004. The deadline extension is in response to several banks asking the agencies to provide an additional period to review, analyze, and submit comments on the proposed interagency statement. The public comment period on the interagency statement will now end April 7, 2005. The scope and comment process for this interagency statement remain as stated in the original Federal Register notice of December 20, 2004 and comments should be received on or before April 7, 2005. Federal Reserve Andrew Williams 202-452-2955 FDIC David Barr 202-898-6992 OCC Kevin Mukri 202-874-5770 OTS Erin Hickman 202-906-6677
Remarks by Ben S. Bernanke At the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research Economic Summit, Stanford, California February 11, 2005 Inflation in Latin America: A New Era? The Federal Reserve is justly proud of its success in reducing and stabilizing inflation in the United States. When Paul Volcker became Fed chairman twenty-five years ago, Americans were enduring double-digit inflation rates and subpar economic performance. Under the leadership of Volcker and, subsequently, Alan Greenspan, the Federal Open Market Committee took the actions necessary to bring the nation to price stability. In my view, the conquest of inflation has been a major source of the more-rapid economic growth and the greater stability of output and employment that the United States has enjoyed since the mid-1980s (Bernanke, 2004). Impressive as the Fed's inflation-fighting accomplishments may be, however, inflation developments to our south, in Latin America, may prove to be more impressive yet. For much of the latter half of the twentieth century, Latin America experienced recurrent bouts of high inflation together with erratic growth and periods of economic and financial crisis. Since the mid-1990s, however, inflation rates in virtually all of Latin America have come down dramatically, to the single digits in most cases. What explains this remarkable turnaround? Will Latin American progress on inflation be sustained, or is the recent improvement only a temporary lull? These are challenging questions of monetary economics and political economy, and their answers have important implications for the economic future of the Western Hemisphere--including the United States, which stands to benefit greatly from increased trade with and investment in a more prosperous Latin America. In my remarks today I will offer some tentative answers to these questions, noting as always that the views I will express are not necessarily shared by my colleagues at the Federal Reserve. The Roots of Latin American Inflation For those of us here in the United States, acclimated as we have become to price stability, the severity of inflation in many Latin American countries in recent decades may be difficult to comprehend. A measure of price changes in nine of the most populous Latin American countries shows that inflation in the region averaged nearly 160 percent per year in the 1980s and 235 percent per year in the first half of the 1990s. Indeed, high inflation morphed into hyperinflation--conventionally defined as inflation exceeding 50 percent per month (Cagan, 1956)--in a number of Latin countries during the latter part of the 1980s and in the early 1990s. Brazil's inflation rate, for example, exceeded 1,000 percent per year in four of the five years between 1989 and 1993. Other Latin American countries suffering hyperinflations at about that time included Argentina, Bolivia, Nicaragua, and Peru. A particularly striking aspect of this poor inflation performance is that it occurred while most of the rest of the world was reducing inflation to low levels. Inflation in the region began to moderate in the mid-1990s, however. Inflation in nine major countries--which, as already noted, averaged nearly 235 percent per year in the first half of the 1990s--averaged only 13 percent per year in 1995-99 and less than 8 percent in 2000-04 despite the spike in Argentine inflation that followed that country's crisis in 2002. Why was inflation a perennial problem in Latin America until about ten years ago, and what explains the recent improvement? Fundamentally, in my view, inflation trends are driven by ideas and politics, which in turn influence economic institutions and economic policies. In the realm of ideas, the current consensus among economists--that money growth generated by fiscal deficits is the driving force behind virtually all episodes of very high inflation--has not always held sway in the region. For example, during the 1950s and 1960s, the United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), under the direction of Raul Prebisch, promoted so-called structuralist theories of development. The structuralist theory drew a strong distinction between the economies making up the developed "center" and those in the less-developed "periphery" and concluded that policies appropriate for the center were unlikely to be right for the much poorer and structurally less developed nations on the periphery. Notably, this approach supported the use of so-called import-substitution policies, which call for the government to protect domestic manufacturers from foreign competition in order to promote industrialization and reduce dependence on commodity exports. In practice, the application of this approach involved extensive government intervention in the economy, including the provision of subsidies to firms and heavy protection and regulation of industry. The outsized role of the government in the economies that pursued the import substitution strategy, together with relatively narrow tax bases and inefficient tax collection, led to chronic fiscal deficits and pervasive economic inefficiency in the protected industries. Importantly, structuralism placed little weight on monetary factors in explaining inflation. Proponents of this approach viewed price increases as being determined largely on the real side of the economy--for example, by spot shortages arising from uneven patterns of development and by the efforts of labor and other groups to increase their shares of aggregate income. From the structuralist perspective, monetary policy makers have little option other than to accommodate wage and price increases, as these increases are determined outside the monetary sphere--a conclusion that rationalized central banks' abdication of responsibility for inflation. Structuralists also promoted extensive indexation of wages and contracts as a way of minimizing unintended distributional consequences of the unavoidable inflation. Unfortunately, pervasive wage-price indexation only increased the virulence of inflationary cycles, as price increases were rapidly transmitted to wages and then back to prices. Among the political sources of inflation, populist views exerted strong influence in many Latin American countries, supported by understandable public dissatisfaction over the degree of income inequality. Unfortunately, more often than not, populist macroeconomic policies pushed the economy into crisis (Dornbusch and Edwards, 1991). In their zeal for rapid social and economic change, governments often introduced aggressive new spending programs that could not be financed through taxes or borrowing. The programs were consequently financed--with the (willing or unwilling) cooperation of central banks--by printing new money. These over-expansionary fiscal and monetary policies were generally followed in short order by wage and price controls and new rounds of subsidies as the overheating economy stoked inflation and inflation expectations and created bottlenecks and shortages. Currency overvaluation, capital flight, declining real tax revenues, sharp increases in external debt, and accelerating inflation completed the downward spiral, which typically ended in general economic and political crisis. Ironically, the poor often were among those most hurt by extreme populist policies because they were the most vulnerable to rising unemployment and real-wage declines and the least able to protect themselves against inflation. Latin America's macroeconomic problems reached their apogee during the so-called Lost Decade of the 1980s. Governments had run up large amounts of external debt in the 1970s in an attempt to maintain growth in the face of oil price shocks and macroeconomic mismanagement at home. But in 1982, during a period of high real interest rates and slow growth around the globe, Mexico briefly defaulted on its debt, an event that marked the beginning of the debt crisis of the 1980s. The crisis effectively closed off the region's access to international credit. Currencies were sharply devalued as current accounts were forced to adjust, rising fiscal deficits were again financed by money creation, and inflation soon rose to new heights. Several "heterodox" stabilization plans initiated in the mid-1980s, such as Argentina's Austral Plan and Brazil's Cruzado Plan, attempted to stabilize the currency and rein in inflation by using a fixed exchange rate as a nominal anchor. As a fixed exchange rate (if successfully maintained) ties down the level of import prices, policymakers hoped that this approach would stabilize inflation and inflation expectations more generally. Other features of heterodox plans included the scaling back of indexation provisions and, in some cases, the imposition of wage and price controls. However, in most cases, the underlying fiscal problems were not addressed, resulting in the collapse of the stabilization plans and further acceleration of inflation. The experience of Chile was the most important exception to this pattern, as that country adopted market-friendly reforms in the latter part of the 1970s and pursued a more disciplined fiscal policy. Notwithstanding a sharp banking and balance-of-payments crisis early in the decade, inflation in Chile averaged less than 20 percent in the 1980s, compared with rates of about 350 percent in Argentina and 265 percent in Brazil. The Achievement of Price Stability in the 1990s After so many years of failed stabilization attempts, an observer in 1990 might have been forgiven for concluding that low and stable inflation would remain elusive in Latin America. But during the subsequent decade, better economic analysis and better policies led to far-better outcomes on the inflation front, as I have already noted. What accounts for this remarkable change? Worldviews tend to evolve slowly, and it is far too soon to claim that ideas and politics in Latin America have changed fundamentally or irrevocably. Nevertheless, during the past fifteen years or so, both the political elites and the broader public in the region have, for the most part, shown an increased willingness to abandon the failed economic models of earlier decades in favor of new approaches that emphasize improved fiscal discipline, the benefits of free trade and free markets, and the vital importance of building strong economic institutions. The visible success of more market-oriented development strategies, notably the examples of the "East Asian Tigers" and (closer to home) of Chile, was not lost on Latin American policymakers. In addition, to restructure external debts and restore access to international financial markets, countries necessarily faced outside pressure to improve their policies, both from multilateral institutions and from the discipline of market forces. The conquest of inflation in Latin America is a particularly interesting case study of the beneficial effects of the new thinking, although, as we shall see, success came only through persistent experimentation. After the debacles of the late 1980s, the view that inflation--particularly very high inflation--carries significant economic costs became more widely accepted, supported by empirical analyses and accumulated experience (Khan and Senhadji, 2001). In the early 1990s, consequently, many Latin American countries attacked their inflation problems with a new energy. Initially, a common tactic was to fix the exchange rate, in the hope that an exchange-rate peg might stabilize inflation expectations and help to "import" some necessary monetary discipline. The use of fixed exchange rates was reminiscent of the earlier heterodox programs, although in the more market-oriented programs of the 1990s, wage-price controls and similar restrictions were generally not employed. This approach enjoyed some early successes. For example, Mexico maintained a pegged exchange rate from 1987 through 1991, as part of a program that included a substantial reduction in government spending. Inflation fell from 160 percent in 1987 to less than 20 percent in 1991, and growth picked up. Greater exchange-rate flexibility was introduced in late 1991 by the adoption of exchange-rate bands. However, in 1994, a speculative attack on the peso led to a sharp currency devaluation and a financial crisis. Brazil adopted a stabilization program in 1994, the Real Plan, which included aggressive de-indexation of wages and prices along with other structural reforms (Bogdanski, de Freitas, Goldfajn, and Tombini, 2002). At first, the exchange rate was allowed to float. However, after the Mexican crisis in late 1994, the Brazilians adopted a crawling-band regime, under which the exchange rate was devalued at a pre-determined rate. This regime was successful in ending the country's rapid inflation of the first half of the decade: Inflation in Brazil fell to less than 2 percent in 1998. The most radical example of an exchange-rate-based stabilization plan, of course, was Argentina's adoption in 1991 of a currency board, a form of "hard peg" under which the government attempted to establish permanent one-to-one convertibility between the Argentine peso and the U.S. dollar. The currency board helped Argentina enjoy price stability for more than a decade. With the benefit of hindsight, many economists would now agree that exchange-rate pegs, if combined with other policy measures such as fiscal consolidation, can be useful in the transition from high to low inflation. However, a key lesson of the recent experience is that fixed exchange rates are generally not a long-run solution to problems of monetary and fiscal instability, at least not in a world of high capital mobility. Indeed, despite the early successes, virtually all the Latin American exchange-rate pegs proved unsustainable and collapsed in a disorderly way. Exchange-rate over-valuation, imperfect credibility of both monetary and fiscal policy, and short-duration external debt all contributed to a high incidence of costly speculative attacks and financial crises in Latin America during the 1990s and into the new millennium. As already noted, Mexico was compelled to devalue in 1994. Brazil was forced from its peg in 1999, and Argentina (its currency board notwithstanding) in 2002. If not fixed exchange rates, then what? Ecuador and El Salvador have pursued strategies of official dollarization, the replacement of the local currency by the U.S. dollar as legal tender. (Panama has been dollarized for many years.) Dollarization seems unlikely to be a good option for the larger Latin American countries, however. Thus, the principal Latin American nations, forced to float their currencies, needed a new nominal anchor for monetary policy. Following a growing trend in the industrialized world, a number of countries made the decision to adopt explicit, quantitative targets for inflation. As with many other reforms, Chile was the Latin American pioneer, adopting an inflation target in 1990 after the passage of a new central-banking law in 1989. Like a number of other early adopters, particularly among emerging markets, Chile eased into the new approach by combining inflation targets with a reference band for the exchange rate. The exchange rate band did not disappear entirely until 1999. The Central Bank of Chile's initial inflation target, for 1991, was the range between 15 and 20 percent; the actual outcome for that year was 18.7 percent. Over the next decade, both the target and actual inflation came down gradually. Since 2001, the target has been fixed at 2 to 4 percent. Following the 1994 peso crisis, Mexico, while setting a goal for inflation, adopted a dual monetary regime that focused primarily on money growth. In the early years, the inflation target was almost always missed, perhaps because of the use of a framework with multiple objectives. In 1999, Mexico instituted a formal inflation-targeting regime. Since then, Mexican inflation, which had been declining from its recent peak of 52 percent in 1995, has fallen further, to around 5 percent. The central bank recently tightened policy to bring inflation down to its current target range of 2 to 4 percent. Brazil also adopted inflation targeting in 1999, following the collapse of its crawling-peg exchange-rate regime in the months after the 1998 Russian debt crisis. After a transition period that included monetary and fiscal tightening, President Cardoso issued a decree in June 1999 announcing multiyear inflation targets. He assigned responsibility for setting the targets to the National Monetary Council and gave the central bank full responsibility for implementing monetary policy as needed to achieve the targets. The Brazilian Central Bank has taken this responsibility seriously; for example, it has tightened monetary policy several times since inflation moved above the target range last year. Brazil also moved more quickly than other Latin American inflation targeters to adopt procedures to improve communication with the public, including the publication of an Inflation Report that includes the central bank's inflation forecasts (Mishkin, 2000). Although Brazilian inflation rose temporarily following a capital outflow and a sharp depreciation of the real in 2002, inflation in that country has otherwise remained in the 6 to 8 percent range since the adoption of inflation targets. Other Latin American countries that have turned to inflation targets include Colombia, which began using the approach in 1999, and Peru; the Central Bank of Peru has been announcing inflation target ranges since 1994, although it did not adopt a full-fledged inflation-targeting regime until 2002. Argentina, which is still recovering from its 2002 debt crisis and the collapse of its currency board, has set unofficial target ranges for inflation. The new monetary approach is a good one for Latin America, I believe, for several reasons. First, in contrast to the structuralist past, the inflation-targeting approach recognizes the key role of the central bank's monetary policies in determining the inflation rate. No longer can the monetary authorities claim that inflation is not under their control. Second, the accountability and transparency that are part of a mature inflation-targeting regime fit well, I believe, with the increasingly democratic nature of Latin American governments and the growing economic sophistication of the public. Third, a well-designed inflation-targeting regime can help to stabilize and anchor the public's expectations of long-run inflation; well-anchored inflation expectations, in turn, promote macroeconomic stability and reduce the vulnerability of the domestic economy to exchange-rate fluctuations and other shocks. Finally, inflation targeting and flexible exchange rates together serve to reduce the conflict between domestic economic stability and the free movement of capital across borders that is inherent in some other arrangements, most obviously the fixed-exchange-rate regimes favored by these countries in the past. How have inflation targets worked in Latin America? As you can infer from the data I have already presented, the early returns are encouraging. Among the major inflation-targeting countries, the inflation rate has recently been in the range of 1 to 3 percent in Chile, 5 to 8 percent in Colombia, 4 to 6 percent in Mexico, 1 to 4 percent in Peru, and (as already noted) 6 to 8 percent in Brazil. Central bankers in these countries are also making progress in adapting the new regime to deal with the special issues that arise in an emerging-market context. For example, inflation is typically more difficult to control in developing economies than in the industrialized economies because of the greater influence of exchange-rate fluctuations, the heavy weight of volatile food and commodity prices in the consumer basket, and the volatility of the public's inflation expectations resulting from a history of high and unstable inflation. Emerging-market central banks that adopt inflation targeting must not only develop the forecasting and monetary-policy tools needed to meet their targets, they must also choose target ranges that are not so narrow as to be unachievable but narrow enough to allow monetary policymakers to build credibility (Fraga, Goldfajn, and Minella, 2003). As the list of middle-income inflation targeters grows--outside of Latin America, it now includes, among others, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, South Korea, Thailand, South Africa, and Israel--and as more experience is gained, knowledge about how to best manage this approach in the emerging-market context will grow as well. Underlying Causes of Improved Inflation Performance I do not mean to claim, however, that Latin America conquered inflation simply by choosing a particular framework for monetary policy. Rather, my more fundamental point is that inflation has declined in Latin America because new ideas and new political realities have fostered the development of economic institutions and policies that promote macroeconomic stability more generally. Recent changes in the policy environment have been especially important in three areas: fiscal policy, banking regulation, and central bank independence. No monetary-policy regime, including inflation targeting, will succeed in reducing inflation permanently in the face of unsustainable fiscal policies--large and growing deficits. In light of their painful experiences, Latin American citizens certainly understand that unchecked deficits will eventually exhaust the government's capacity to borrow, leading to excess money creation and a breakout of inflation. Fiscal policy does seem to have become more conservative in the region in the past decade, although there have been setbacks and variations across countries. Important developments include significant privatization, the reduction of marginal tax rates, the addition of new revenue sources such as value-added taxes, and the passage of laws that restrict the use of public funds for certain purposes. Throughout the region, lower inflation and greater fiscal discipline bear the promise of creating a virtuous circle, in which lower interest rates reduce the portion of government spending devoted to debt service. Domestic real interest rates have indeed moderated considerably and currently stand at 2-3 percent in Chile and Mexico and about zero in Argentina. Brazil's real interest rate remains stubbornly high, at about 11 percent, but that rate is down from nearly 30 percent less than a decade ago. Sovereign bond spreads in the region are also at historic lows for most of the region, with the exception of Argentina, which is still in the process of working out its recent default. Modernization of the banking system and the improvement of bank regulation and supervision are likewise essential for promoting stable monetary policy and low inflation. If the banking system is considered by foreign and domestic investors to be financially unstable or not transparent, then the fear of inducing a banking crisis may constrain the central bank's willingness to change interest rates and exchange rates as needed to fight inflation. Financial-sector reforms in the region have included reducing or eliminating targeted credit programs, decontrolling interest rates, privatizing state-owned banks, and allowing foreign banks greater scope to operate in the domestic market, among other measures. Authorities in a number of countries have also made important progress in the past decade in bringing their bank supervisory and regulatory regimes in line with international best practices, as codified in the Basel Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision. Recent enhancements in banking supervision include the expansion of supervisory powers, more frequent and thorough bank examinations, and tougher capital rules. Deposit insurance has also been introduced in most of the region. Quite a bit remains to be done on the supervision and regulation front, however: In particular, in some countries, supervisory independence from the government is not up to international standards, and the human and financial resources necessary to carry out fully supervisory responsibilities are lacking. A final institutional improvement that supports macroeconomic stability is increased independence for the central bank. A central bank that is dominated by the government may be forced to ease policy inappropriately to reduce the financing costs of government debt or to help re-elect incumbents. Inflation-targeting regimes make sense only if the central bank has independent control of the instruments of monetary policy, as holding the central bank responsible for meeting its inflation target is hardly possible otherwise. Here, once again, the trends in Latin America generally appear favorable. In the late 1980s and early 1990s, several countries took steps to enhance central bank independence, both through constitutional provisions and through changes in the central bank law. That central bank independence promotes lower inflation in developed countries is well-established by the economic literature. Although the evidence for developing countries is more mixed, several studies have found that central bank independence promotes low inflation in those countries as well, especially when de facto rather than de jure measures of independence are used (Cukierman, Webb, and Neypati, 1992; Cukierman, Miller, and Neypati, 2002). The distinction between de facto and de jure central-bank independence remains important in the region. For example, although a number of features of Brazilian law promote the independence of the nation's central bank, the bank's de facto independence may be limited by the power of the president to remove members of the Monetary Policy Committee. However, the fact that the left-of-center Lula administration in Brazil has been able to support disciplined monetary and fiscal policies without significant loss of popularity is itself testimony to the degree that such policies are becoming more widely accepted in the region. The Outlook and Prospects for the Future The near-term outlook for Latin America suggests that better monetary, fiscal, and structural policies are paying off. In its September World Economic Outlook , the International Monetary Fund projects real output growth of 3-1/2 percent for the developing Western Hemisphere (including the Caribbean) in 2005, following an estimated gain of 4-1/2 percent in 2004. Inflation in the broader region is estimated to have been about 6-1/2 percent on average in 2004 and is expected to be a bit lower than that in 2005 (annual average basis). If these projections are realized, and if the good performance of the U.S. and Canadian economies continues, then the macroeconomic environment in our hemisphere as a whole will be better than it has been in many decades. Will improved macroeconomic policies and outcomes continue in Latin America? The track record is still too short to draw definitive conclusions. Some writers have warned that the short-term costs of reform and overly optimistic projections by reform supporters may be leading to "reform fatigue" in a number of countries (Lora, Panizza, and Quispe-Agnoli, 2003). I am inclined to be more optimistic, however. I am encouraged by the fact that governments of all ideological stripes, including left-leaning governments in Brazil, Argentina, and Chile, as well as the incoming administration in Uruguay, have actively supported reform. (Venezuela is a notable exception.) In important ways, these efforts are paying off. Notably, as I have discussed today, the inflation situation has improved markedly, and real interest rates have fallen. Current account positions in the region have also strengthened considerably. On the other hand, although near-term growth prospects appear good, many Latin American economies have grown at rates below their potential in recent years, in part as a result of the financial crises of the 1990s. Much still needs to be done to alleviate income inequality and poverty. The next few years will be an interesting test of the efficacy and sustainability of economic reform in Latin America. Footnotes I thank Board staff members , , and Patrice Robitaille for excellent assistance and comments. The nine countries are Mexico, Colombia, Venezuela, Brazil, Bolivia, Uruguay, Peru, Argentina, and Chile. Inflation in each country is weighted according to relative gross domestic product, as in International Monetary Fund (2004). Median inflation rates for the nine countries, which may be more representative of typical experience, averaged 61 percent per year in the 1980s and 26 percent in the first half of the 1990s. Argentina, Brazil, and Peru, all of which had four-digit inflation rates in both 1989 and 1990, succeeded in reducing inflation to single-digit levels by 1997. Median inflation in the nine countries likewise declined, averaging 9-1/2 percent in 1995-99 and 5 percent in 2000-04. Fischer, Sahay, and Vegh (2002) present evidence of a strong correlation between fiscal deficits and money creation in high-inflation economies. They also show that high inflations are correlated with poor macroeconomic performance. Some of the more extreme examples of this pattern include Argentina in 1973-76, Chile in 1970-73, and Peru in 1985-90. The rapid Israeli stabilization of the mid-1980s is an instructive, non-Latin American example. Mishkin (2000) distinguishes the setting of inflation targets from a full-fledged inflation-targeting regime. The latter involves not only the announcement of a medium-term inflation target and an institutional commitment by the central bank and the government to meet that target but also an increased emphasis on independence, transparency, and accountability for the central bank. In Latin America, countries have usually begun only by announcing quantitative inflation targets, adopting the other important features of an inflation-targeting regime over a period of time. Bernanke, Laubach, Mishkin, and Posen (1999) discuss the rationale for and experience with inflation-targeting regimes in more detail. Mishkin (2000) and Corbo and Schmidt-Hebbel (2001) provide useful analyses of inflation targeting in emerging-market countries and in Latin America in particular. The governor of the Brazilian Central Bank, Arminio Fraga, played an important role in establishing the new regime and achieved early successes. I had the pleasure of serving on Fraga's dissertation committee when he was a doctoral student at Princeton. Fraga, Goldfajn, and Minella (2003) discuss the broader policies and reforms needed to make inflation targeting successful. References Bernanke, Ben (2004). " ," speech at the meetings of the Eastern Economic Association, February 20. Bernanke, Ben, Thomas Laubach, Frederic Mishkin, and Adam Posen (1999). Inflation Targeting: Lessons from the International Experience , Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. Bogdanski, Joel, Paulo Springer de Freitas, Ilan Goldfajn, and Alexandre Antonio Tonio Tombini (2002). "Inflation Targeting in Brazil: Shocks, Backward-Looking Prices, and IMF Conditionality," N. Loayza and R. Soto, eds., Inflation Targeting: Design, Performance, Challenges . Santiago: Central Bank of Chile. Cagan, Philip (1956). "The Monetary Dynamics of Hyperinflation," in Milton Friedman, ed., Studies in the Quantity Theory of Money , Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Corbo, Vittorio, and Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel (2001). " ," Central Bank of Chile working paper 105, September. Cukierman, Alex, Steven Webb, and Bilin Neyapti (1992). "Measuring the Independence of Central Banks and Its Effect on Policy Outcomes," World Bank Economic Review , vol. 6 (September), pp. 353-98. Cukierman, Alex, Geoffrey Miller, and Bilin Neyapti (2002). "Central Bank Reform, Liberalization, and Inflation in Transition Economies: An International Perspective," Journal of Monetary Economics , vol. 49 (March), pp. 237-64. Dornbusch, Rudiger, and Sebastian Edwards (1991). "The Macroeconomics of Populism," in R. Dornbusch and S. Edwards, eds., The Macroeconomics of Populism in Latin America . Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Fischer, Stanley, Ratna Sahay, and Carlos Vegh (2002). " ," Journal of Economic Literature , vol. 40 (September), pp. 837-80. Fraga, Arminio, Ilan Goldfajn, and André Minella (2003). " ," in M. Gertler and K. Rogoff, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual , pp. 365-400. International Monetary Fund (2004). . Washington, D.C. Khan, Mohsin, and Abdelhak Senhadji (2001). " ," IMF Staff Papers , vol. 48, pp. 1-21. Lora, Eduardo, Ugo Panizza, and Myriam Quispe-Agnoli (2003). " ," paper presented at the conference, Rethinking Structural Reform in Latin America, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, October 23. Mishkin, Frederic (2000). " ," American Economic Review , vol. 90 (May), pp. 105-09.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the termination of the enforcement actions listed below. Terminations of enforcement actions are listed on the Federal Reserve's public web site, , as they occur. Metamora Bancorp, Inc., Metamora, Oh. and The Metamora State Bank, Metamora, Oh. Written Agreement dated December 10, 2002 Terminated January 31, 2005 Independent Southern Bancshares, Inc. Employee Stock Ownership Trust and Independent Southern Bancshares, Inc., Brownsville, Tn. Written Agreement dated September 6, 2000 Terminated August 18, 2004 Banco Atlantico, S.A., Barcelona, Spain and Banco Atlantico, S.A. New York Agency, New York, N.Y. Written Agreement dated June 3, 1999 Terminated August 20, 2004
No content found
Joint Press Release Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation National Credit Union Administration Office of the Comptroller of the Currency For Immediate Release February 18, 2005 Agencies Issue Final Guidance on Overdraft Protection Programs The federal bank and credit union regulatory agencies today announced final joint guidance to assist insured depository institutions in the disclosure and administration of overdraft protection programs. Depository institutions may offer overdraft protection programs to transaction account customers as an alternative to traditional ways of covering overdrafts. In response to concerns about the marketing, disclosure, and implementation of these programs, the agencies published for comment proposed interagency guidance on overdraft protection programs in June 2004. The final joint guidance responds to comments received by consumer and community groups, individual consumers, depository institutions, trade associations, vendors offering overdraft protection products, other industry representatives, and state agencies. The final joint guidance contains three primary sections: Safety and Soundness Considerations; Legal Risks; and Best Practices. The safety and soundness discussion seeks to ensure that financial institutions offering overdraft protection programs adopt adequate policies and procedures to address credit, operational, and other associated risks. The legal risks discussion alerts institutions of the need to comply with all applicable federal and state laws, and advises institutions to have their overdraft protection programs reviewed by legal counsel to ensure overall compliance prior to implementation. Several federal consumer compliance laws are outlined in the guidance. The best practices section addresses the marketing and communications that accompany the offering of overdraft protection programs as well as the disclosure and operation of these programs. Some of these best practices include: avoiding the promotion of poor account management; providing a clear explanation of the discretionary nature of the overdraft protection program; clearly disclosing fees; explaining the impact of transaction clearing policies on the overdraft fees consumers may incur; and monitoring program usage. The agencies also advise insured depository institutions to distinguish overdraft protection services from "free" account features, to prominently distinguish balances from overdraft protection funds availability, and to alert consumers before a transaction triggers any fees. The guidance is being issued by the Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), the National Credit Union Administration (NCUA), and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC). It will be published shortly in the Federal Register. The Federal Register notice is attached. Federal Reserve Susan Stawick 202-452-2955 FDIC Frank Gresock (202) 898-6634 NCUA Cherie Umbel (703) 518-6330 OCC Dean DeBuck (202) 874-5770
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below. Termination dates of enforcement actions are available through the Federal Reserves public web site, From that page, search enforcement actions and review the termination column to find out if an action has been terminated. Rurban Financial Corp., Defiance, Ohio and The State Bank and Trust Company, Defiance, Ohio Written Agreement dated July 5, 2002 Terminated February 17, 2005
No content found
Joint Press Release Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Office of the Comptroller of the Currency Office of Thrift Supervision For Immediate Release February 28, 2005 Federal Banking Agencies Issue Advisory on Confidentiality of Supervisory Ratings The federal banking and thrift agencies today issued an interagency advisory to remind financial institutions that they are prohibited by law from disclosing their CAMELS rating and other nonpublic supervisory information without permission from the appropriate federal banking agency. Today's advisory is prompted by insurers who have requested or required banks and savings associations to disclose their CAMELS rating during the underwriting process for directors and officers liability coverage. As a result of actions by insurers, the agencies have requested the assistance of the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) in notifying insurance companies that the practice of requesting or requiring CAMELS ratings should be discontinued. The interagency statement is attached. Contacts: FRB Andrew Williams 202-452-2955 FDIC Tibby Ford 202-898-6993 OCC Dean DeBuck 202-874-5770 OTS Erin Hickman 202-906-6677
Remarks by Governor Mark W. Olson At the Government Affairs Conference of the Credit Union National Association, Washington, D.C. February 28, 2005 Loan Quality and How It Reflects the Overall Economy Thank you for inviting me to speak here today. Let me begin by congratulating all of you who take time away from your responsibilities in your respective institutions to participate in this government affairs conference. I am sure that some of your colleagues back home think you are on a junket, and there are elements of your trip to Washington, D.C., that are a welcome respite from your day-to-day activities. Nonetheless, you are taking time away from professional responsibilities and families to participate in this important event, and your efforts are both commendable and valuable. My talk today will address the sometimes complex interactions between business cycles in the economy at large and financial institutions like banks and credit unions. On the whole, these continue to be favorable times for the financial services providers, whether commercial banks or credit unions. Returns, which continue to be attractive, have been driven recently more by loan volume than margins. Household income has grown nicely while unemployment has remained low, and, together with low mortgage interest rates, these factors have contributed to appreciation in home values. A great number of households have used this historic opportunity to refinance their mortgages and reduce their debt service costs. Many have sought the tax advantages of home equity loans as an alternative to credit cards or other consumer debt. And, despite the publicity accorded to several big mergers, smaller institutions--including credit unions and community banks--have fared quite well in this environment. Risk-management strategies and processes of course need to adapt to these changing conditions. Growth in mortgage loans and mortgage-backed securities requires lenders to monitor and manage the significant and sometimes complex interest rate risk profiles associated with such exposures, especially as market interest rates have risen over the past several months. Compliance, too, has received more attention from both bankers and regulators. Historically, however, credit risk has been the most affected by changes in the economic cycle. Fortunately for financial institutions with a retail business focus, this time the growth opportunities have come in products that we don't usually associate with large potential credit losses, namely, conforming or jumbo mortgages and home equity lines of credit. Our past experience, however, suggests limits as to how much we should rely on historic experience for analyzing today's management challenge. With continuing innovation in loan products and heightened competitive pressures, risk profiles will not be identical to those of earlier cycles, and it would be unwise to rely too heavily on these past patterns without careful analysis and management. Financial institutions and financial regulators rightly spend a fair amount of time and energy monitoring economic conditions as they seek to better understand the growth opportunities that exist and the outlook for the quality of the loans being made. Let's turn that around for a moment and ask the question: What can indicators of asset quality at financial institutions tell us about where we are in the business cycle? The question is an interesting and timely one, given that many in the industry believe that credit quality is about as good as it can get. At the Federal Reserve, we've recently looked at measures of asset quality--problem assets, charge-offs, and provisions for loan losses--and related them to the economic cycle, measured as growth in real gross domestic product. The usual way to look at cyclical indicators is to line up the high points and low points--or "peaks" and "troughs" in the specialized language of business cycle analysts--and see how they compare with each other. It is usually helpful to screen out normal seasonal variations, so that one ends up with a cycle that unfolds smoothly over several years. Let me refer now to the exhibit we prepared for you. It contains two charts that compare changes in GDP with aggregate problem-asset ratios for commercial banks and credit unions respectively. shows quarterly data for commercial banks (the blue line) since 1990. The shows delinquency rates for all credit unions (the blue line). This chart uses a semiannual frequency because that was the regulatory filing frequency for many credit unions through much of this period. The first conclusion we can drawn from the data is that asset quality is a lagging indicator of what is happening in the economy at large. This idea has intuitive appeal and is probably consistent with your business experience. In a nutshell, when economic conditions deteriorate, the ability of many borrowers to service their debt erodes in turn, along with their cash flow. More generally, we know that a recession is a period in which economic activity declines. Speaking broadly, a recession begins when GDP starts declining, and it ends when GDP stops declining. The end of a recession is usually termed the low point or "trough." This lagging pattern can be seen clearly for commercial banks but is not as evident for credit unions because of differing reporting schedules. Looking back to the 1990-91 recession, economic activity stopped declining in the first quarter of 1991 whereas asset quality at commercial banks was at its worst point in the following quarter. Similarly, in the 2001 recession GDP reached its nadir in the fourth quarter of that year, but asset quality reached its worst point about nine months later. Turning to credit unions, the same pattern emerges for the 2001 recession as asset quality hit its worst point about six months after the low point in GDP. The picture is a little less clear for the 1990-1991 recession. Although the timing appears to be reversed--asset quality at its worst about a year before the low point in GDP--it is hard to draw any conclusion because the data are not as robust. There is also a mild wave of higher delinquencies in the late 1990s that was not associated with an economic downturn. Presumably those modestly higher delinquencies reflected specific lending decisions made by some credit unions during this period. A second conclusion to be drawn from the data is that the deterioration in asset quality was much less severe in 2001-02 than in the early 1990s. Of course, the 2001 recession itself was mild by historical standards. Moreover, in this most recent credit cycle, the deterioration in asset quality was less pronounced at smaller institutions--including community banks and credit unions--than at some large lending institutions that had concentrations in the high-tech and telecommunications sectors. The more favorable experience in the more recent period speaks well for the credit-risk management at smaller institutions, even in the context of a mild recession. That said, it also means that it has been a decade and a half since many lenders have seen a serious overall downturn in asset quality. We know from surveys of senior lenders that lending standards have eased overall. Some easing is normal for this phase of the business cycle, but this easing is always of concern to regulators. Some lenders have recently expanded their offerings of interest-only mortgages and mortgage loans with maturities beyond thirty years. In this context, prudent lenders should weigh their alternatives carefully before compromising established underwriting standards or pricing in the face of competitive pressures. There is a third interesting result. As asset quality improves and eventually comes to a peak, the data suggest that the cyclical erosion comes gradually rather than abruptly. In other words, inflection points in asset quality do not signal a turning point in the economic cycle. Applying this experience to the current situation, there is no reason to believe that a modest near-term cyclical increase in problem assets or charge-offs portends ill for the continuing economic recovery. The two perspectives on cycles in the financial services business--the performance of financial services firms in this phase of the business cycle, and what asset quality indicators tell us about the state of the economy--together suggest that growth in economic activity will continue to support favorable conditions for financial institutions for at least the near term. Banks and credit unions today face important challenges, such as finding a way to replace the revenue surge that came with the mortgage origination boom of 2002-03 and generating continued earnings growth without the support that has been provided recently by lower provisions and cyclical improvements in asset quality. As in the past, without strong risk management and credit discipline, the prolonged period of favorable conditions could breed behavior by lenders that will contribute to a more severe credit cycle the next time around. In closing, let me again commend you for taking the time to participate in CUNA's Government Affairs Conference. Your participation is valuable, and I thank you for inviting me to join you today. Exhibit