No content found
No content found
Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan Economic outlook and current fiscal issues Before the Committee on the Budget, U.S. House of Representatives March 2, 2005 Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Spratt, and members of the Committee, I am pleased to be here today to offer my views on the federal budget and related issues. I want to emphasize that I speak for myself and not necessarily for the Federal Reserve. The U.S. economy delivered a solid performance in 2004, and thus far this year, activity appears to be expanding at a reasonably good pace. However, the positive short-term economic outlook is playing out against a backdrop of concern about the prospects for the federal budget, especially over the longer run. Indeed, the unified budget is running deficits equal to about 3-1/2 percent of gross domestic product, and federal debt held by the public as a percent of GDP has risen noticeably since it bottomed out in 2001. To be sure, the cyclical component of the deficit should narrow as the economic expansion proceeds and incomes rise. And the current pace of the ramp-up in spending on defense and homeland security is not expected to continue indefinitely. But, as the latest projections from the Administration and the Congressional Budget Office suggest, our budget position is unlikely to improve substantially in the coming years unless major deficit-reducing actions are taken. In my judgment, the necessary choices will be especially difficult to implement without the restoration of a set of procedural restraints on the budget-making process. For about a decade, the rules laid out in the Budget Enforcement Act of 1990 and in the later modifications and extensions of the act provided a framework that helped the Congress establish a better fiscal balance. However, the brief emergence of surpluses in the late 1990s eroded the will to adhere to these rules, which were aimed specifically at promoting deficit reduction rather than at the broader goal of setting out a commonly agreed-upon standard for determining whether the nation was living within its fiscal means. Many of the provisions that helped restrain budgetary decisionmaking in the 1990s--in particular, the limits on discretionary spending and the PAYGO requirements--were violated ever more frequently; finally, in 2002, they were allowed to expire. Reinstating a structure like the one provided by the Budget Enforcement Act would signal a renewed commitment to fiscal restraint and help restore discipline to the annual budgeting process. Such a step would be even more meaningful if it were coupled with the adoption of a set of provisions for dealing with unanticipated budgetary outcomes over time. As you are well aware, budget outcomes in the past have deviated from projections--in some cases, significantly--and they will continue to do so. Accordingly, a well-designed set of mechanisms that facilitate midcourse corrections would ease the task of bringing the budget back into line when it goes off track. In particular, you might want to require that existing programs be assessed regularly to verify that they continue to meet their stated purposes and cost projections. Measures that automatically take effect when costs for a particular spending program or tax provision exceed a specified threshold may prove useful as well. The original design of the Budget Enforcement Act could also be enhanced by addressing how the strictures might evolve if and when reasonable fiscal balance came into view. I do not mean to suggest that the nation's budget problems will be solved simply by adopting a new set of rules. The fundamental fiscal issue is the need to make difficult choices among budget priorities, and this need is becoming ever more pressing in light of the unprecedented number of individuals approaching retirement age. For example, future Congresses and Presidents will, over time, have to weigh the benefits of continued access, on current terms, to advances in medical technology against other spending priorities as well as against tax initiatives that foster increases in economic growth and the revenue base. Because the baby boomers have not yet started to retire in force, we have been in a demographic lull. But this state of relative stability will soon end. In 2008--just three years from now--the leading edge of the baby-boom generation will reach 62, the earliest age at which Social Security retirement benefits can be drawn and the age at which about half of those eligible to claim benefits have been doing so in recent years. Just three years after that, in 2011, the oldest baby boomers will reach 65 and will thus be eligible for Medicare. Currently, 3-1/4 workers contribute to the Social Security system for each beneficiary. Under the intermediate assumptions of the program's trustees, the number of beneficiaries will have roughly doubled by 2030, and the ratio of covered workers to beneficiaries will be down to about 2. The pressures on the budget from this dramatic demographic change will be exacerbated by those stemming from the anticipated steep upward trend in spending per Medicare beneficiary. The combination of an aging population and the soaring costs of its medical care is certain to place enormous demands on our nation's resources and to exert pressure on the budget that economic growth alone is unlikely to eliminate. To be sure, favorable productivity developments would help to alleviate the impending budgetary strains. But unless productivity growth far outstrips that embodied in current budget forecasts, it is unlikely to represent more than part of the answer. Higher productivity does, of course, buoy revenues. But because initial Social Security benefits are influenced heavily by economywide wages, faster productivity growth, with a lag, also raises benefits under current law. Moreover, because the long-range budget assumptions already make reasonable allowance for future productivity growth, one cannot rule out the possibility that productivity growth will fall short of projected future averages. In fiscal year 2004, federal outlays for Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid totaled about 8 percent of GDP. The long-run projections from the Office of Management and Budget suggest that the share will rise to 9-1/2 percent by 2015 and will be in the neighborhood of 13 percent by 2030. So long as health-care costs continue to grow faster than the economy as a whole, the additional resources needed for such programs will exert pressure on the federal budget that seems increasingly likely to make current fiscal policy unsustainable. The likelihood of escalating unified budget deficits is of especially great concern because they would drain an inexorably growing volume of real resources away from private capital formation over time and cast an ever-larger shadow over the growth of living standards. The broad contours of the challenges ahead are clear. But considerable uncertainty remains about the precise dimensions of the problem and about the extent to which future resources will fall short of our current statutory obligations to the coming generations of retirees. We already know a good deal about the size of the adult population in, say, 2030. Almost all have already been born. Thus, forecasting the number of Social Security and Medicare beneficiaries is fairly straightforward. So too is projecting future Social Security benefits, which are tied to the wage histories of retirees. However, the uncertainty about future medical spending is daunting. We know very little about how rapidly medical technology will continue to advance and how those innovations will translate into future spending. Consequently, the range of possible outcomes for spending per Medicare beneficiary expands dramatically as we move into the next decade and beyond. Technological innovations can greatly improve the quality of medical care and can, in some instances, reduce the costs of existing treatments. But because technology expands the set of treatment possibilities, it also has the potential to add to overall spending--in some cases, by a great deal. Other sources of uncertainty--for example, the extent to which longer life expectancies among the elderly will affect medical spending--may also turn out to be important. As a result, the range of future possible outlays per recipient is extremely wide. The actuaries' projections of Medicare costs are, perforce, highly provisional. These uncertainties--especially our inability to identify the upper bound of future demands for medical care--counsel significant prudence in policymaking. The critical reason to proceed cautiously is that new programs quickly develop constituencies willing to fiercely resist any curtailment of spending or tax benefits. As a consequence, our ability to rein in deficit-expanding initiatives, should they later prove to have been excessive or misguided, is quite limited. Thus, policymakers need to err on the side of prudence when considering new budget initiatives. Programs can always be expanded in the future should the resources for them become available, but they cannot be easily curtailed if resources later fall short of commitments. I fear that we may have already committed more physical resources to the baby-boom generation in its retirement years than our economy has the capacity to deliver. If existing promises need to be changed, those changes should be made sooner rather than later. We owe future retirees as much time as possible to adjust their plans for work, saving, and retirement spending. They need to ensure that their personal resources, along with what they expect to receive from the government, will be sufficient to meet their retirement goals. Addressing the government's own imbalances will require scrutiny of both spending and taxes. However, tax increases of sufficient dimension to deal with our looming fiscal problems arguably pose significant risks to economic growth and the revenue base. The exact magnitude of such risks is very difficult to estimate, but, in my judgment, they are sufficiently worrisome to warrant aiming, if at all possible, to close the fiscal gap primarily, if not wholly, from the outlay side. In the end, I suspect that, unless we attain unprecedented increases in productivity, we will have to make significant structural adjustments in the nation's major retirement and health programs. Our current, largely pay-as-you go social insurance system worked well given the demographics of the second half of the twentieth century. But as I have argued previously, the system is ill-suited to address the unprecedented shift of population from the workforce to retirement that will start in 2008. Much attention has been focused on the forecasted exhaustion of the Social Security trust fund in 2042. But solving that problem will do little in itself to meet the imperative to boost our national saving. Raising national saving is an essential step if we are to build a capital stock that by, say, 2030 will be sufficiently large to produce goods and services adequate to meet the needs of retirees without unduly curbing the standard of living of our working-age population. Unfortunately, the current Social Security system has not proven a reliable vehicle for such saving. Indeed, although the trust funds have been running annual surpluses since the mid-1980s, one can credibly argue that they have served primarily to facilitate larger deficits in the rest of the budget and therefore have added little or nothing to national saving. In my view, a retirement system with a significant personal accounts component would provide a more credible means of ensuring that the program actually adds to overall saving and, in turn, boosts the nation's capital stock. The reason is that money allocated to the personal accounts would no longer be available to fund other government activities and--barring an offsetting reduction in private saving outside the new accounts--would, in effect, be reserved for future consumption needs. The challenge of Medicare is far more problematic than that associated with Social Security. A major reason is the large variance of possible outcomes mentioned earlier coupled with the inadequacy of the current medical information base. Some important efforts are under way to use the capabilities of information technology to improve the health-care system. If supported and promoted, these efforts could provide key insights into clinical best practices and substantially reduce administrative costs. And, with time, we should also gain valuable knowledge about the best approaches to restraining the growth of overall health-care spending. Crafting a budget strategy that meets the nation's longer-run needs will become ever more difficult the more we delay. The one certainty is that the resolution of the nation's unprecedented demographic challenge will require hard choices and that the future performance of the economy will depend on those choices. No changes will be easy, as they all will involve setting priorities and, in the main, lowering claims on resources. It falls to the Congress to determine how best to address the competing claims on our limited resources. In doing so, you will need to consider not only the distributional effects of policy changes but also the broader economic effects on labor supply, retirement behavior, and private saving. In the end, the consequences for the U.S. economy of doing nothing could be severe. But the benefits of taking sound, timely action could extend many decades into the future.
Speech by Governor Edward M. Gramlich At the Benjamin Rush Lecture, Dickinson College, Pennsylvania March 2, 2005 The Importance of Raising National Saving An old saw has it that central bankers are paid to worry. They are supposed to look past any superficial good news and try to discern longer-run problems--perhaps inflation heating up, perhaps something else. For a central banker, every silver lining has a cloud. The present time provides a good illustration. We are just completing the forecasting season, at which time various economists make their projections. The Blue Chip survey of leading business forecasters predicts that the growth of real gross domestic product will average 3.5 percent over the next two years and that unemployment rates will decline slightly. Unemployment rates are near their normal, or equilibrium, level, yet these forecasters still look for basic stability in core inflation rates. According to the Blue Chip survey, investment should grow at healthy rates, and productivity growth should remain strong. In these forecasts, the Federal Reserve is expected to keep raising short-term interest rates toward their equilibrium level. It all seems pretty healthy--what is there to worry about? Well, unfortunately, there could be something to worry about, and that is what I want to talk about today. It is the nation's low national saving rate, basically the share of our output that is devoted to building up the country. This share can be defined either as the share of output not consumed either by households or government, or as the share of output devoted to capital investment less the share represented by borrowing from foreigners. The last clause is important--high investment is a good thing, but if much of this investment is financed by borrowing from foreigners rather than by our own saving, there could be trouble spots down the road. Whether there will be such trouble spots, I don't know. That is another issue I'd like to discuss. National Saving As important as I think it is, national saving has always been relegated to the B list of economic measures. When economic data are released, there is always a great deal of attention to overall output, unemployment, inflation, interest rates, and budget and trade deficits. National saving rates have a lot to do with shaping each of these variables, but one searches in vain for mention of such rates. Today I am going to elevate national saving rates to center stage. I begin with a simple identity, taken from the national income accounts: NS = S - BD = I - B The left side of this identity covers the sources of national saving (NS), which are private saving in the economy (S) less budget deficits (BD). Budget deficits are subtracted because budget deficits imply that private saving is in part going to pay for the deficits of the government and not going into private investment. The more interesting part of the equation involves the uses of national saving, given on the right side of the identity. In an economy closed to international trade and capital flows, the long-time staple of undergraduate macroeconomics classes, national saving equals just domestic investment (I), which is spending on new capital equipment. This is the spending that raises productivity and output in the long run, and for that reason it is of special interest. But since economies are now open to international trade and capital flows, the identity must also account for the portion of national saving lent abroad or the portion of investment financed by borrowing from abroad (B). This is done by deducting B, essentially the nation's current account deficit (through another accounting identity of which I will spare you discussion). One value of writing out the national saving identity is to bring out an important short-run, long-run dichotomy. In the short-run, international borrowing can go up or down depending on cyclical movements, exchange rates, and a host of other factors. Very few countries do without any international borrowing or lending in a particular year. But over a longer period of time international borrowing kept close to zero stabilizes a country's ratio of international obligations to its gross domestic product (GDP). When this liability ratio is stable, a nation's saving is implicitly financing most of its domestic investment. Persistent borrowing, keeping investment above saving, may be possible, but it is not common, and in any case it automatically implies a buildup of international liabilities relative to its national output. If a nation wants to have its investment and not pay increasing shares of income in interest or dividends, it has to finance this investment by its own national saving. Or, turning the equation around, high national saving will raise future living standards whether it finances investment directly or reduces international borrowing. A further value in writing out the identity is to tie all this to budget and current account deficits, which are the focus of much popular discussion. In a word, both deficits are subtraction items. Budget deficits reduce national saving by, as I said earlier, siphoning off some private saving to pay for government deficits. Current account deficits can be associated with low national saving if a nation borrows to finance its investment. Some economists talk about a "twin deficit" scenario in which budget deficits lead to current account deficits of exactly the same size. There are macroeconomic scenarios that can lead to that result, and these, according to the equation, imply that investment and private saving move together or are fixed. But it is also possible to imagine many scenarios in which budget and current account deficits move independently. These deficits are certainly linked through their impact on national saving, but they are not twins. Finally, the numbers. National saving rates can be given in two ways, either by comparing gross national saving with gross domestic product, or by subtracting depreciation from both sides and comparing net national saving with net domestic product. It turns out not to matter for this discussion--by either definition, national saving rates are at a post-World War II low. The numbers since the mid-1960s are shown in . As suggested in the preceding discussion, when national saving rates are this low, the nation suffers from some combination of low investment and high borrowing. The former is bad from the standpoint of future productivity, the latter is likely not sustainable. Neither situation is desirable. Sources Side National saving has dropped because private saving rates have dropped, especially those for households. Moreover, in recent years federal budget deficits have shot up. From a national saving point of view, the rise in deficits would not be particularly alarming if private saving rates were high, nor would the decline in private saving rates be particularly alarming if the budget were in surplus. But the combination of low private saving rates and deficits can lead to problems. While there are ways to influence private saving rates by policy measures, changes in national saving for the most part follow changes in fiscal policy. shows the historical path for fiscal policy, specifically the federal deficit (in effect consigning state and local governments to the private sector). The dotted line shows the primary deficit, which is the total federal deficit less interest payments, as a share of GDP. To stabilize the ratio of the stock of federal debt to GDP, this primary deficit should be kept close to zero. The solid line gives just this federal debt to GDP ratio. When viewed in a historical context the federal deficit picture does not look particularly troubling. The primary deficit ratio has cycled around zero, and the debt-GDP ratio has cycled between 25 and 50 percent. The debt-GDP ratio had a long downswing in the 1960s and early 1970s, followed by a long upswing in the 1980s. The United States ran fairly large primary surpluses in the 1990s, enough so to inspire talk of paying off the entire outstanding federal debt. But that brief period of good fortune has passed; primary deficits are back, and the debt-GDP ratio is rising again. For the intermediate future, the picture worsens somewhat. Recently, the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) made projections for the next decade. One of their scenarios took the so-called baseline budget, added in likely military spending for Iraq and Afghanistan, extended the recently enacted tax cuts, and adjusted the alternative minimum tax for inflation. Under these assumptions, the recent turn for the worse is likely to be reversed only slowly. The primary deficit averages around 2 percent of GDP for the next few years before gradually shrinking, and the debt-GDP ratio climbs back to about 45 percent by 2015. But these projections include only relatively certain budget obligations, and one can be forgiven for fearing that the actual numbers will turn out to be worse than the CBO projections, as they often do through no fault of the CBO. Hence, the medium-term projections do not give much reason for thinking that the downward pressure on overall national saving rates will be quickly reversed. If the medium term looks uncertain, the far future looks much worse. As is well known, the population of the United States is aging, and in a few decades a much larger share of the population will be in its retirement years, drawing on both Social Security and Medicare. The share of output devoted to these two programs will rise rapidly, putting even further downward pressure on national saving rates. The trends, especially for Medicare, are so alarming that these two programs alone could, in the space of little more than a decade, account for about half of federal spending. Changes have to be made in these large entitlement programs to avoid a real fiscal disaster. Of course changes can be made. While there are as yet not a great number of feasible ideas for significantly reducing the cost of Medicare, there are a number of proposals to reform Social Security. The President is touting a proposal, and ten years ago as chair of another Presidential advisory council on Social Security, I devised a proposal of my own. This is not the place to get into a full discussion of Social Security reform proposals, but one aspect of Social Security reform is important. Given the low national saving rates, and the fact that many American households do not save enough to avoid a big cut in their standard of living in retirement, it would seem desirable to have Social Security reforms that also raise national saving. One obvious and immediate way to do that would be to raise payroll taxes; another obvious, and perhaps less painful, way to do that would be to have individual accounts on top of Social Security. If these "add-on" individual accounts were to be mandated, as I proposed, those households who already save amply could reduce their other individual accounts while those who do no private saving for retirement would be forced to do more. Hence national saving would be increased, and increased for just those households who presently do little saving. Other types of Social Security reform seem less promising from a national saving point of view. If, for example, the individual accounts were to be "carved out" of present payroll tax payments, as President Bush has recently proposed, household saving would go up but government saving, in the first instance, would go down by the same amount, meaning that the initial impact on overall national saving would be nil. But carve-out individual accounts might eventually reduce saving because households getting individual accounts who are already saving for retirement might cut back on their pre-existing saving. Hence carve-out individual accounts seem more likely to reduce than increase national saving. This is not the only criterion for judging between add-on and carve-out individual accounts, but I think it is an important one. There may also be some way to compromise between mandatory add-on individual accounts that raise national saving but could be a tough sell politically, and carve-out individual accounts that are not likely to raise national saving. Some have suggested raising employee pension contribution rates by automatic default options for employer defined-contribution account. Under such a plan employees would be automatically enrolled in the employer's plan and would have to "opt out" to reject participation. Moreover, firms could be forced to carry employer defined-contribution accounts, as is done in Ireland. Other measures that might raise national saving are tax incentives to increase private saving, such as Individual Retirement Accounts (IRAs). These essentially reduce or eliminate the taxation of interest income and hence provide a price inducement for households to save more. While such measures are often advertised as ways to increase saving, one must be very careful. On one side, many households can easily claim the tax advantages by diverting existing assets into IRAs and not saving any more. On the other side, IRAs entail a federal revenue loss and a rise in deficits. Since national saving is defined as private saving less deficits, the larger deficits can actually make national saving decline in response to a measure that purports to increase national saving. If the private saving effect were large enough and the revenue loss small, it is also possible that IRAs would have the anticipated effect of increasing national saving. One cannot give a purely theoretical answer to the question--it depends on how the numbers come out. For years the economics profession has been engaged in a strenuous debate about these numbers, but it should be noted that overall household and national saving rates have declined significantly since IRA-type provisions were first introduced to the tax code. Even the mortgage interest deduction can enter in to the question. Through this deduction, households can borrow, add to their mortgage, reduce their taxes, and invest the proceeds in IRAs. Hence the mere presence of the mortgage interest deduction means that IRA-type measures, or consumption tax measures, that purport to increase private saving will, in fact, not increase private saving and could reduce national saving. That is why consumption-tax reform measures that omit treatment of the mortgage interest deduction are unlikely to promote national saving. Uses Side We have seen that national saving is likely to continue to be low, the result of a combination of low personal saving in the presence of possibly persisting budget deficits. As was mentioned, this sets up a difficult quandary--either investment will have to decrease, lowering future productivity, or international borrowing will have to continue at high levels, raising international liability ratios. The real question is whether the large-scale borrowing is sustainable. The historical record for the United States, presented in a form similar to that for budget deficits, is shown in . Again, the dotted line is the primary deficit ratio, which in the case of international accounts is just the trade deficit. The solid line is the ratio of net international liabilities to domestic GDP, a measure of the nation's ability to afford its liabilities. As recently as 1985, net U.S. liabilities to foreigners were zero. But since 1990 the United States has embarked on a long-term period of high trade deficits, and now the international liability rate is close to 25 percent of GDP and rising sharply. International wealth portfolios are getting increasingly heavy in dollar-denominated assets. How long can this process continue? We can first examine the international record. The international deficit that determines the growth or decline in a country's international liability ratio is the trade deficit, and there are few cases of countries running large-scale trade deficits for more than four or five years. By this standard, the U.S. borrowing spurt should have ended a long time ago. In line with this record, many authors have been predicting for some time that the combination of interest rates, income, prices, and exchange rates would adjust to end the U.S. trade deficits. But the deficits have not ended, and international economists are searching for reasons to explain the situation. Perhaps the simplest explanation is that the current situation meets the apparent needs of many countries. Under this view, which has been labeled the "co-dependency" view, the United States is permitted to overconsume through the combination of its inability to cut budget deficits and its unwillingness to save much privately. Other countries are permitted to support their export industries by keeping the dollar strong and their own currencies weak. These countries in effect create reserves by buying and holding stocks of U.S. Treasury debt. These international open-market purchases keep the dollar strong, the home currencies weak, and export industries competitive. Were countries trying to keep their own currencies strong, they would run out of the foreign assets to sell to support their own currency. But in keeping the dollar strong, all central banks have to do is to create reserves, and central banks can create reserves. Another possibility is that other countries, in Europe and much of Asia, have populations that are aging more rapidly than those in the United States. They may want to build up a stock of assets to prepare for their own retirement spending crises. Largely because of the productivity revolution here, these countries have been able to get better returns on their assets in this country than in their own, and they have been putting great quantities of saving in world capital markets, perhaps explaining the present low level of world long-term real interest rates. As a result, foreigners may be quite willing to accumulate dollar-denominated assets, and may appreciate the low U.S. national saving rate. A third possibility is that the so-called "home bias" in international saving-investment choices is gradually eroding. In this view, globalization has generally reduced the barriers to international asset diversification, and we are witnessing a rebalancing of wealth portfolios which, in the transition, can lead to persisting current account deficits or surpluses. It is very difficult to tell which of these explanations, or some combination of them, is on the mark and whether there are unknown fourth or fifth explanations. In each case there is an international self-interest argument to explain the situation, and it is difficult to assess the durability of this self-interest. The co-dependency view could have a natural stopping point when foreign central banks begin to worry about their heavy asset concentration in dollar-denomination assets and diversify their stock. The world-saving view could have a natural stopping point when the populations of the accumulating countries begin to retire, run down their assets, and sell their dollar-denominated assets to support the consumption of retirees. The disappearing-home-bias view could have a natural stopping point when wealth portfolios are rebalanced. This is all new and unexplored territory. But determining what explanation may be correct and stable may also be somewhat beside the point. However stable the underlying phenomena, it is much more stable for the United States to increase its own national saving and finance its own investment. This approach would support investment in the short run and make this investment more profitable in the long run, because the returns on capital would not be sent abroad. Other countries may still invest their saving here, but the United States would have a higher base of its self-financed investment. This situation would seem to be far and away the preferred course from a risk-management standpoint. Under such an approach, which I will term co-independence, the United States would gradually cut its budget deficit. Doing so would reduce aggregate demand and hence require other changes to preserve full employment. One such change would be that currency rates might shift in the direction of increasing U.S. net exports. To the extent that stimulation of net exports did not offset the fiscal actions fully, there is always monetary accommodation. One of the key mandates of the Federal Reserve is to preserve sustainable employment levels, and the Fed certainly could do that. In this strategy, other countries would have two requirements. To the extent that currency rates might need to adjust to restore international balance, foreign central banks should permit normal market readjustments. And to the extent that foreign net exports might decline as the United States cut its own trade deficits, foreign countries may need to stimulate their own economies, which they could do with some combination of monetary and fiscal policy. The result would be to preserve full employment around the world but with reduced capital account imbalances. Conclusion The message here could be worrisome but is really designed to provoke action. In the short run, output growth is healthy and inflation rates are stable. Investment shares are reasonable, but that is largely because the United States is borrowing such a huge amount from world capital markets. The key question is whether this borrowing is sustainable. However sustainable it is, the United States would seem well-advised to minimize risks by raising its own national saving to finance its own investment. That would stabilize investment in the short run and increase profitability in the long run. It could raise national saving with some combination of fiscal tightening and measures to raise private saving, coupled with other measures, here and abroad, to increase demand throughout the world economy. Footnotes The precise proposition is that the primary, or noninterest, component of both budget and current account deficits must remain close to zero to stabilize the ratio of debt to national output. For a demonstration see Edward M. Gramlich (2004), " ," speech delivered at the Euromoney Bond Investors Congress, February 25, 2005. Leonard Nakamura (2005), The Personal Saving Rate and the Future of Consumption , Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, February, demonstrates a systematic tendency for personal saving rates to be revised upward. If this is so, it is possible that some of the recent dip will be revised away. Economists have a Ricardian equivalence exception--national saving rates do not follow changes in fiscal policy if private households offset fiscal actions with their own saving. In general, the evidence does not support this proposition. See Douglas W. Elmendorf and N. Gregory Mankiw (1999), "Government Debt," in J.B. Taylor and M. Woodford, eds., Handbook of Macroeconomics , (Elsevier). Shown in Gramlich, "Budget and Trade Deficits." See Congressional Budget Office (2005), , January 25. Edward M. Gramlich (1998), Is It Time to Reform Social Security? (University of Michigan Press). The fall 1996 issue of the contained several articles summarizing empirical work on this question. See, for example, articles in C. Fred Bergsten, ed. (2005), The United States and the World Economy (Washington: Institute for International Economics). The co-dependency term was coined by Catherine L. Mann (2004), " " Business Economics , vol. 39 (July). The home bias term originally stemmed from results in a paper by Martin Feldstein and Charles Horioka (1980), " ," Economic Journal, vol. 90.
Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan The tax system Before the President’s Advisory Panel on Federal Tax Reform, Washington, D.C. March 3, 2005 The President has assembled a very able panel to address an issue that is both important and exceptionally challenging. The U.S. economy is the world's most dynamic and flexible, and the federal government's system for raising revenue must not hinder the processes generating that economic success. However, since the exemplary 1986 reform, the tax code has drifted back to be overly complicated and burdened by higher marginal rates and by many special provisions that have undesirably narrowed the tax base. Changes since the 1986 act have been largely incremental without the appropriate all-encompassing context that broad reform brings to the table. It is perhaps inevitable that, every couple of decades, drift needs to be addressed and reversed. I believe some useful lessons can be learned by examining earlier systematic reforms of the tax code, such as those of 1954, 1969, and 1986. Among those reforms, the 1986 effort is widely regarded as having been the most successful of the post-war era. This success was achieved, in large measure, I believe, because the reform hewed to an explicit set of principles. I am not suggesting that today's reform should follow the specifics of the 1986 reform. Both the economic and fiscal conditions, as well as the existing state of the tax system, have changed in important ways since that time, and some aspects of the framework that worked well in 1986 may be inappropriate today. Nevertheless, I believe that a number of the principles underlying that reform are still applicable. A defining feature of the 1986 reform was the broadening of the tax base and the lowering of tax rates, and it is widely believed that these changes enhanced economic efficiency. High tax rates (whether the base is income or consumption) exacerbate the distortions that taxes invariably create. Moreover, distortions arise when similar activities are subject to different tax treatments. Such distortions reduce economic efficiency as households and businesses respond to the tax code rather than to underlying economic fundamentals. Lowering tax rates by broadening the tax base generally will reduce the costs of such distortions, which are approximately proportional to the square of the tax rate. Over the years, economists have disagreed about the size of the efficiency gains that might be achieved from a broader base and lower rates, but there can be little doubt regarding their positive effect. The 1986 reform also strove to achieve a measure of comity in the tax code, by treating taxpayers in similar circumstances in a roughly comparable manner and by maintaining progressivity in the tax system. In addition, the 1986 reform broadly applied the constraints of revenue and distributional neutrality, which appear to have facilitated bipartisan coalition building. Setting rough distributional neutrality as a rule of the game limited the number of losers created and likely made sacrifices in the name of efficiency easier for different groups of taxpayers who knew that losses would be relatively limited. Of course, public views about the fairness of proposed changes to the tax code will surely play a significant role in the current debate, and these views will be driven by perceptions of the fairness of the current tax system. The standards by which the public judges fairness are deeply rooted in judgments of whether, and which, incomes are the consequence of individual effort. The contours of economic policy since the nation's founding have closely followed changing standards of fairness over time. Simplification of an overly complex structure was another important accomplishment of the 1986 reform. Unfortunately, tax code drift since 1986 has evolved to a point where taxpayers are again confronted with great complexity. Indeed, an individual taxpayer may have difficulty even knowing his or her marginal tax rate because of the overlapping web of deductions and exemptions and the provisions that attempt to limit those deductions and exemptions. And many taxpayers are now required to compute their liability under two systems--the regular income tax and the alternative minimum tax. Such challenges also affect lower-income households, who face the complexities of the Earned Income Tax Credit. A simpler tax code would reduce the considerable resources devoted to complying with current tax laws, and the freed-up resources could be used for more productive purposes. Thus, greater simplicity would, in and of itself, engender a better use of resources. A principle that I believe is important now--but appears not to have weighed so heavily on those involved in the earlier reforms--is predictability in the tax code. By this I mean creating a tax system in which households and businesses can look into the future and have some reasonable degree of certainty about the future tax implications of decisions made today. Just as price stability facilitates economic decisionmaking by limiting the potential distortions from unanticipated changes in the price level, some semblance of predictability in the tax code also would facilitate better forward-looking economic decisionmaking by households and businesses. Given the expertise on this panel and the ultimate responsibility of the Congress and the President for the tax system, I would not presume to suggest the best specific path for reforming the tax system. However, past experience suggests that as the panel's work gets under way, one of the first decisions that you will confront is the choice of tax base; possibilities include a comprehensive income tax, a consumption tax, or some combination of the two, as is done in many other countries. As you know, many economists believe that a consumption tax would be best from the perspective of promoting economic growth--particularly if one were designing a tax system from scratch--because a consumption tax is likely to encourage saving and capital formation. However, getting from the current tax system to a consumption tax raises a challenging set of transition issues. In 1986, tax reformers considered a consumption tax base and, despite the arguments in favor of such a system, they decided to enhance the comprehensiveness of the income tax system then in place. Circumstances are different today, and the right choice will require assessing anew the tradeoffs between complexity, fairness, and economic growth. The choice of the tax base and other provisions of the code must also be taken in light of coming demographic changes. I believe that, as the baby boom generation begins to retire in a few years, it will become increasingly important for the nation to boost resources available in the future through greater national saving and enhanced incentives for participation in the labor force. The tax system has the potential to contribute importantly to those goals, and, at a minimum, tax reform should not hinder the achievement of those objectives. Finally, fundamental, thoroughgoing tax reform will require tradeoffs among competing objectives and will create both winners and losers. In the past, these difficult choices were facilitated by bipartisan cooperation. In the 1954 reform, congressional support was bipartisan, and President Eisenhower signed the legislation. In the 1969 reform, efforts were started under President Johnson but were completed during the Nixon Administration. Similarly, in 1986, President Reagan worked with Democratic congressional leaders to see reform through. I am confident that this panel can lay the groundwork for another historic reform and can get this process started off on the right foot. Thank you for the opportunity to share some thoughts with you today. I look forward to the results of your deliberations.
Remarks by Ben S. Bernanke At a Finance Committee luncheon of the Executives’ Club of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois March 8, 2005 The Economic Outlook In my remarks today I will share my thoughts on the U.S. economic outlook for this year, focusing particularly on the prospects for economic growth and inflation. I will then turn to some implications of the outlook for current monetary policy. As always, my comments are my responsibility alone and do not necessarily reflect the views of my colleagues at the Federal Reserve. The U.S. economy has certainly come a long way in the past two years. As of spring 2003, nearly a year and a half after the formal end of the 2001 recession, the expansion seemed at risk of petering out. During 2002 and the first half of 2003, although consumer spending and residential construction remained reasonably strong, businesses seemed exceptionally reluctant to make new capital investments or hire new workers. Capital investment and economic growth finally took off in the second half of 2003, responding to powerful injections of monetary and fiscal stimulus. But the recovery remained "jobless" throughout 2003, in large part because of remarkable gains in labor productivity, which allowed firms to meet the growing demands for their output without expanding their workforces. The economic recovery became more balanced in 2004. Real gross domestic product (GDP) continued to expand, growing at a vigorous 3-3/4 percent clip last year despite sharp increases in energy prices and a significant drag from net exports. But perhaps more importantly, the labor market finally began to show signs of life despite continuing gains in the efficiency of business operations and some remaining caution on the part of employers. The national unemployment rate, which stood at 6.3 percent in June 2003, had declined to 5.4 percent by December 2004, where it currently stands. In 2004, monetary and fiscal stimulus once again aided growth; but for the first time since the 2001 recession, the expansion began to take on a self-sustaining character last year, as increases in profits, employment, wage income, and household wealth became the principal drivers of rising spending. Headline inflation picked up noticeably in 2004 because of a continuing surge in energy prices, but core inflation (that is, inflation excluding the direct effects of food and energy prices) rose only modestly from the unusually low levels seen in 2003. Core inflation as measured by the chain price index for personal consumption expenditures (core PCE inflation) was a moderate 1.6 percent last year. Economic activity appears to be off to a solid start in 2005. The data surprises in recent months have tended toward the upside, and real GDP growth in the vicinity of 3-3/4 to 4 percent looks attainable this year despite the ongoing reduction in monetary and fiscal stimulus. In stark contrast to the situation of a couple of years ago, both business investment and hiring should support growth in 2005. Business investment, which finished 2004 on a high note, promises to remain strong, buoyed by favorable financing rates, sound corporate balance sheets, and rising business confidence in the durability of the recovery. Notably, the available data suggest that the expiration of partial expensing provisions at the end of 2004 has done little to reduce the momentum of investment. The pace of hiring also strengthened toward the end of last year, following a summertime lull, and I expect healthy employment gains in the coming quarters, albeit with possibly large month-to-month variations. Despite the growth in employment, however, the unemployment rate should decline relatively slowly, as a strengthening job market attracts people back into the labor force. Consumer spending has been well maintained both during and after the recession, as I mentioned earlier, and continued growth in household expenditure should complement expected increases in business spending in 2005. Some observers have expressed concern about rising levels of household debt, and we at the Federal Reserve follow these developments closely. However, concerns about debt growth should be allayed by the fact that household assets (particularly housing wealth) have risen even more quickly than household liabilities. Indeed, the ratio of household net worth to household income has been rising smartly and currently stands at 5.4, well above its long-run average of about 4.8. With real disposable income having risen over the past few quarters, most consumers are in good financial shape--a positive indication for household spending. One caveat for the future is that the recent rapid escalation in house prices--11 percent in 2004, according to the repeat-transactions index constructed by the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight--is unlikely to continue. A plausible scenario is that house prices will either move sideways or rise more slowly during the next few years, eventually bringing the rate of return on housing in line with the relatively low prospective rates of return that we currently observe on virtually all assets, both real and financial. If the increases in house prices begin to moderate as expected, the resulting slowdown in household wealth accumulation should lead ultimately to somewhat slower growth in consumer spending. That said, residential construction should remain reasonably strong in 2005, supported by a growing population, rising employment and incomes, and mortgage rates that remain historically low. However, homebuilders will be hard pressed to much exceed the record level of starts seen in 2004. Thus, residential investment seems likely to make a diminishing contribution to overall economic growth. Investment in nonresidential structures, such as office buildings and industrial and commercial space, appears poised to improve this year after several years in the doldrums, though a full recovery in this sector will have to await further declines in office vacancy rates and increases in factory utilization rates. You may have heard the story of the fellow who, when asked why he was hitting himself on the head with a hammer, replied that he did it because it felt so good when he stopped. A couple of hammers that pounded the U.S. economy in 2004 (not at our volition, of course) were the sharp increase in energy prices and the widening trade deficit, each of which subtracted a significant amount from growth last year. High energy prices and a large trade deficit will very likely remain with us in 2005, unfortunately. However, some small comfort may be taken from the likelihood that these problems will not worsen this year at the rate that they did last year. By the magic of output growth accounting, so long as the energy and trade situations do not deteriorate substantially further this year, as I do not expect they will, the net effect will be to provide a boost to this year's growth relative to last year's. On the energy front, increased non-OPEC production, a more moderate rate of increase in oil consumption in China, and (I say this with my fingers crossed) some possible reduction in geopolitical uncertainties may help to limit further increases in crude oil prices this year. Moreover, although natural gas prices have risen recently, inventories of natural gas appear plentiful, and major shortfalls do not appear imminent. With respect to trade, we may reasonably hope that cumulative past declines in the real exchange value of the dollar plus economic growth abroad will at least begin to stabilize the U.S. trade balance. The inflation forecast presents its own challenges. My own guess is that core PCE inflation in 2005 will be slightly higher than its 2004 rate of 1.6 percent, though likely remaining within what I think of as the "comfort zone" of 1 to 2 percent. I will briefly comment on some of the factors that bear on the inflation forecast. First, although core inflation excludes the direct effects of energy prices, energy prices exert some indirect effects on the core inflation rate by raising costs in non-energy industries, such as air travel and trucking. Rising commodity prices and increases in import prices (the result of a weaker dollar) likewise raise costs of production as well as some prices paid directly by consumers. These factors all contributed to the pickup in core inflation in 2004. I expect the net inflationary effect of these cost drivers to be less in 2005 than in 2004. Specifically, although energy and commodity prices will probably remain high , they are unlikely to continue rising at last year's pace, and they consequently should contribute less to core inflation this year than they did last year. (The principle here is the same as that illustrated by the man who stops hitting himself on the head with a hammer or, at least, hits himself more gently.) Another consideration is that producers' markups of prices over costs remain relatively high, leaving some scope for firms to absorb any further cost increases. The course of the dollar is likewise very challenging--probably impossible--to predict. However, despite the decline in the dollar of the past two years, core import prices excluding fuels rose only 2-1/2 percent in the second half of 2004 and increases could well continue to be moderate. The pass-through of the effects of the declining dollar on import prices has remained remarkably low, all things considered. Although moderating rates of increase in nonwage costs should help on the inflation front in 2005, I acknowledge the considerable uncertainty that surrounds this prediction. The potential volatility of energy prices, commodity prices, and (to a lesser extent) import prices has been dramatically demonstrated in recent years and so unexpectedly rapid increases--or decreases, for that matter--in producers' nonwage costs can by no means be ruled out. Cost increases that are both large and sustained would, of course, create inflationary pressure. Lagged effects on inflation of the nonwage cost increases that occurred in 2004 are also possible, particularly if the firming of demand increases pricing power and the ability of producers to pass on their higher costs. I can assure you that the Federal Reserve will monitor closely any developments affecting producers' costs. The second principal factor affecting the inflation outlook is the degree of slack in the economy--the so-called output gap. Research at the Board and elsewhere suggests that measuring the output gap in real time can be quite a treacherous undertaking, particularly when the economy is near full employment. The natural rate of unemployment is probably better thought of as a zone rather than as a single number, however. In particular, inflation does not appear to rise sharply or discontinuously when the economy reaches a specific rate of unemployment or capacity utilization but instead responds more gradually to variations in the degree of resource utilization (in economics lingo, the Phillips curve is fairly flat). Thus, relatively modest errors in estimating the output gap may not prove too harmful. My own judgment is that some slack remains in the U.S. economy, although that slack is diminishing as growth continues above its long-run trend. Evidence that the labor market is not yet at its potential includes subdued wage growth, the failure thus far of labor participation rates to increase from cyclical lows, the relatively large number of people who say they are working part-time for economic reasons, and the impression gleaned from surveys and anecdotes that the supply of potential employees in most occupations remains plentiful. Measures of industrial capacity utilization below historical norms are also consistent with the presence of underutilized resources. As resource slack is progressively eliminated, however, and as labor productivity growth settles in near its longer-run trend of 2 to 2-1/2 percent, increases in unit labor costs may begin to put some upward pressure on prices, offsetting possible moderation in nonwage costs. A third factor determining inflation is long-term inflation expectations. If inflation expectations are well anchored, in the sense that the public has confidence that inflation will remain low in the long run, the central bank's task of actually keeping inflation low becomes easier. For example, presumably because of well-anchored inflation expectations, the increases in oil prices last year appear to have had few second-round effects--that is, firms and households apparently viewed the inflation bulge associated with the oil price increases as temporary and did not build a higher expected inflation rate into wages and prices. Likewise, stable inflation expectations probably help to explain the low observed rate of exchange-rate pass-through into domestic prices. Of course, the benefits that flow from well-anchored inflation expectations make keeping inflation low (and thus validating those expectations) all the more important. On the whole, inflation expectations do appear to be stable. For example, according to the University of Michigan's Surveys of Consumers, since 2003 median expected inflation for the next five to ten years has fluctuated in a narrow range. On the other hand, the spread between ten-year nominal and ten-year inflation-indexed bond yields, known as inflation compensation, has risen some 30 to 35 basis points since this time last year. I am inclined to believe that this rise in inflation compensation does signal some near-term increase in expectations of headline inflation, although part of the increase may also reflect changes in risk and liquidity premiums in the market for inflation-indexed debt. Worth noting also is that inflation compensation for the period five to ten years in the future--a measure of long-run inflation expectations--has remained essentially flat during the past year. In summary, with all the caveats mentioned today firmly in mind, I look for 2005 to be a good year for the U.S. economy: real growth at 3-3/4 percent or slightly better, core PCE inflation in the range of 1-1/2 to 2 percent, and a slowly declining unemployment rate. Private-sector forecasters are a bit more pessimistic than I am, but not by much. For example, the Blue Chip consensus forecast released yesterday looks for real growth of 3.6 percent this year, a bit below my projection, and for overall inflation, as measured by the consumer price index (CPI), of 2.2 percent. If we adjust for the distinction between overall and core inflation and for the fact that, for technical reasons, CPI-based inflation measures tend to be higher than those based on the PCE price index, the Blue Chip inflation forecast is only slightly higher than mine. Indeed, these differences in projections are hardly meaningful given the wide error bands on economic forecasts in general--which leads us naturally to the question of what could go wrong with the relatively sunny outlook I have described today. Unfortunately, unless we are prepared to extend the meeting for several more hours, I cannot give a detailed analysis of all the risks to this forecast. Many things could go wrong, of course, and as Murphy warned us, something almost certainly will. Some of the more obvious possibilities include oil supply disruptions that send the price of crude much higher, a slowdown in foreign economic growth that reduces the demand for U.S. exports, or the realization that less economic slack remains than I currently believe, which would increase the risk of higher inflation. Not all risks to the forecast are adverse, of course; for example, the growth rate of labor productivity has surprised us to the upside almost every year of the past decade and could do so again. The lesson here is that economic forecasts, and consequently policy plans, can be only provisional. New events and new data must trump preconceived notions about the future evolution of the economy and of policy. I will conclude with some comments about monetary policy, reminding you once again that I speak only for myself and not for other members of the Federal Open Market Committee. As I have discussed today, the baseline forecast for the U.S. economy in 2005 and indeed beyond this year appears quite favorable. In particular, in the past few quarters the evidence that the recovery is self-sustaining has become more persuasive, while inflation pressures appear contained. The labor market has not yet reached its potential, but the improvement on that front in the past year and a half has been substantial, and slack in resource utilization continues to be reduced, albeit slowly. For some time now, the Federal Open Market Committee has indicated that it expects to remove policy accommodation at a pace that is likely to be measured. The "measured pace" language was always intended to indicate the Committee's provisional view of how policy was likely to evolve, given the economic forecast made at each meeting and our understanding of the transmission mechanism of monetary policy. In short, this language was always meant to convey a policy forecast, not a policy commitment. However, in the event, the Committee's policy expectations have largely been realized, and in my view the results have been good. With the economy strengthening, with inflation stable, and with the federal funds rate still at a relatively low level, at this point my expectation is that the Committee will continue to remove policy accommodation in a measured way. Of course, in light of the imprecision of economic forecasts and the certainty that the economy will face new shocks, the pace at which the policy interest rate is normalized will of necessity be sensitive to unexpected events and data. Because well-anchored inflation expectations are critical to achieving both of the Federal Reserve's mandated goals of maximum sustainable employment and price stability, I think it particularly important that policy react as needed to maintain price stability. One may reasonably ask when this process of removing policy accommodation will stop. This question is not straightforward to answer. In particular, it is not helpful, in my view, to imagine the existence of some fixed target for the funds rate toward which policy should inexorably march. Instead, the correct procedure for setting policy requires the FOMC to continually update its forecast for the economy, conditional on all relevant information and on a provisional future path for monetary policy. The funds rate will have reached an appropriate and sustainable level when, first, the outlook is consistent with the Committee's economic goals and, second, the slope of the term structure of interest rates is approximately normal, as best as can be determined. With this definition in mind, one can search for indications of where the "neutral" funds rate is likely to be at a given point in time. For example, the fact that far future short-term interest rates have recently declined fairly significantly suggests that, in the view of the markets at least, the neutral funds rate may be somewhat lower today than it was in the past. The most important lesson, however, is that the neutral policy rate depends on both current and prospective economic conditions. Accordingly, the neutral rate is not a constant or a fixed objective but will change as the economy and economic forecasts evolve. Footnotes I thank Board staff members and for excellent assistance. As defined, core import prices exclude semiconductors and computers, whose prices tend to fall rapidly, as well as energy. The one-year nominal rate nine years ahead implied by the Treasury term structure has fallen about 1-1/4 percentage points since its recent peak in May 2004, to about 5-1/2 percent today. This rate may be thought of as the sum of the market's expectation of the short-term interest rate nine years from now plus a variable term premium. Disentangling the two components is difficult, and indeed some part of the downward trend in far future short rates plausibly reflects a decline in the term premium. Overall, however, it seems likely that the market expectation of the future short-term rate has declined during the past few years.
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan Globalization At the Council on Foreign Relations, New York, New York March 10, 2005
Joint Press Release Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Office of the Comptroller of the Currency For Immediate Release March 11, 2005 Federal Banking Agencies Publish Proposed Revisions to Community Reinvestment Act Regulations The federal banking agencies today published a joint notice of proposed rulemaking in the Federal Register that would revise certain provisions in their regulations implementing the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA). The revisions are intended to reduce regulatory burden on community banks while making CRA evaluations more effective in encouraging banks to meet community development needs. The comment period for this joint notice of proposed rulemaking closes on May 10, 2005. The Federal Register notice is attached. # # # Contacts: Federal Reserve Susan Stawick (202) 452-2955 FDIC David Barr (202) 898-6992 OCC Dean DeBuck (202) 874-5770
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan Bank regulation Before the Independent Community Bankers of America National Convention, San Antonio, Texas (via videoconference) March 11, 2005
Remarks by Governor Susan Schmidt Bies At the Institute of International Bankers Annual Washington Conference, Washington, D.C. March 14, 2005 Bank Secrecy Act and Capital Compliance Issues Good morning. I want to thank you for the invitation to speak at the Institute's annual Washington conference. International banking organizations are playing an increasingly important role in the U.S. financial sector. Foreign banking organizations hold more than $3.5 trillion in banking and nonbanking financial assets in the United States--making these organizations some of the biggest financial holding companies operating in this country. For two broad reasons, U.S. banking supervisors give a great deal of thought to the foreign banking organizations here. First, the management of complex international banking businesses creates inherent risks, which must be mitigated through sophisticated enterprise-wide risk management and internal controls. International organizations face difficult questions of management and control across their geographically dispersed offices. They often operate in new and unfamiliar financial terrain, which poses strategic challenges. And they are vulnerable to terrorist financing, money laundering, and other customer fraud issues that tend to involve cross-border transactions. Second, international banking organizations are regulated by supervisors in various national jurisdictions that have different legal, regulatory, and supervisory frameworks. Thus, the supervision and regulation of these organizations requires the continuous coordination and cooperation of host- and home-country supervisors. While banks operate globally, supervisory and regulatory responsibility for the various operating units of the organizations is still based on laws and regulations of sovereign states. Complying with diverse laws and regulations can be complex and costly for global banking organizations. Today, I want to touch on two regulatory issues that are currently high on the list of both bankers and supervisors: Bank Secrecy Act compliance and Basel II implementation. Compliance with the Bank Secrecy Act Since the passage of the USA Patriot Act in 2001, which significantly amended the Bank Secrecy Act, compliance in this area has been a major concern for the banking industry. In large part, bankers' concerns center on the increased burden of complying with the amended Bank Secrecy Act, the apparent lack of consistency in oversight and supervision, and law enforcement issues. The Federal Reserve recognizes that banking organizations have devoted significant resources to helping the government identify and prosecute those who are involved with money laundering, the funding of terrorist activities, and other crimes. But some recent events are affecting bankers' perceptions about their role in this critical area, and have raised serious questions about what bank regulators and other government authorities--most notably law enforcement agencies--expect of bankers. Today, I want to provide some background information and describe what the Federal Reserve is doing, in coordination with the Justice and Treasury departments, to clarify expectations and dispel misconceptions about compliance with the Bank Secrecy Act. But first I want to emphasize an important point about the Bank Secrecy Act: Implementation of the act has traditionally been accomplished through a partnership among banks, supervisors, and law enforcement authorities. The law requires reports and recordkeeping that is useful to all these entities. Further, the law capitalizes on the role of banks in payment systems. As collectors of financial information, banks are in a good position to identify questionable or suspicious payments or activities. For the past decade, the key obligation of banks within this partnership has been the filing of Suspicious Activity Reports, or SARs, in accordance with regulations issued by the U.S. Department of the Treasury and all of the federal banking and thrift regulators. The agencies' rules require banking organizations to file SARs to alert law enforcement authorities and federal bank supervisors about a known or suspected violation of law, or about any suspicious activity being conducted at, by, or through a bank, thrift, or credit union. By filing SARs, banking organizations put critical information into the hands of the proper law enforcement authorities in a timely and effective manner. Since the SAR system was started in 1996, banking organizations have filed more than 1.7 million SARs. That is an enormous amount of cooperation and information sharing. However, recent criminal investigations and prosecutions based on Bank Secrecy Act and SAR reporting violations have attracted significant industry attention. Most importantly, these cases have generated complaints from the financial industry about the increased burden of Bank Secrecy Act compliance, as well as the uncertainty of future requirements--particularly for the filing of SARs. Believing that regulators and law enforcement authorities have set a zero-tolerance level for SAR-filing deficiencies, banking organizations are concerned that in certain situations failing to file a SAR could result in a criminal prosecution. Bankers are telling us that regulatory criticism and criminal prosecutions based on SAR-filing deficiencies can produce collateral consequences. For example, banks are tending to avoid customers, such as money transmitters and check cashers, who present perceived heightened risks. Yet the closing of accounts for these types of businesses is effectively a denial of banking services to many categories of legitimate customers. Banking organizations have also begun to file "defensive" SARs in an effort to avoid any criticism of their judgment about whether some activity is illegal or suspicious, and to avoid sanctions for failing to file particular SARs. The Treasury Department's Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) has reported that these defensive filings threaten to clutter the SAR database with information that cannot be properly analyzed due to the volume. Bank regulators and FinCEN recognize that no process for fraud or money laundering detection and control can reasonably be expected to perfectly detect every transaction. But, financial institutions are expected to have a sound anti-money-laundering compliance program. This must include well-defined processes to identify suspicious activities, and those processes should be tailored to the risk and complexity of each business line. Banks should provide sufficient training to line staff, compliance officers, internal auditors, and legal staff to keep employees on the alert for suspicious activities. Further, when questionable activity is detected, the bank must respond promptly and effectively, and work with appropriate law enforcement authorities and bank regulators. I am sure that you are aware by now of the interagency efforts to develop and issue new, enhanced Bank Secrecy Act examination guidelines and procedures within the next few months. The Federal Reserve and the other federal banking supervisors, with the active participation of FinCEN, are drafting these more-detailed uniform examination guidelines and procedures. We are reaching out to the industry during this stage of the project. Once the procedures are completed, we will work hard to educate our examination forces and the industry about the guidelines and procedures. These efforts are intended to better ensure consistency in the Bank Secrecy Act and anti-money-laundering supervision programs of the bank regulators and FinCEN--the entity within the U.S. Treasury that is statutorily responsible for the implementing the Bank Secrecy Act. In addition, the Federal Reserve and the other federal bank supervisory agencies recently signed a Memorandum of Understanding with FinCEN to share critical information about banking organizations' compliance with the Bank Secrecy Act. By providing pertinent Bank Secrecy Act information to FinCEN, which is adding additional staff to fulfill its responsibilities, the Federal Reserve and the other regulators can now better coordinate their supervision and enforcement efforts, thus further reducing the potential for unwarranted compliance burdens. FinCEN is also committed to providing both bankers and regulators information about emerging money-laundering schemes and guidance for continually improving Bank Secrecy Act compliance. The Federal Reserve is also working with senior Justice and Treasury officials to ensure they understand the efforts of banks and the regulators to ensure compliance with the Bank Secrecy Act. We want awareness of these compliance efforts to be consistent throughout the criminal justice system so that the industry and its regulators can continue building partnerships with law enforcement authorities. I would now like to move on to a discussion of Basel II implementation. Basel II Implementation Basel II represents a fundamental change in how bank capital is determined for regulatory purposes. The advanced approaches require banking organizations to make significant investments to improve risk-management processes and measurement so that minimum regulatory capital better reflects each institution's unique business mix, risk appetite, and control structure. Internationally active banking organizations, in particular, have understandable concerns about the prospect of each national supervisor across the expanse of their global operations asking a multitude of questions about Basel II implementation, demanding considerable amounts of data, applying the framework differently, or taking other actions that increase costs. Inevitably, some of you will find your institutions calculating capital under different approaches in the various jurisdictions in which you operate. To help national supervisors coordinate and achieve greater consistency in the implementation of Basel II within their individual countries, the Basel Committee, as you all know, has established the Accord Implementation Group (AIG), headed by our colleague Nick Le Pan, Canada's superintendent of financial institutions and the vice chairman of the Basel Committee. Nick is here today and will be addressing the recent efforts of the AIG and the greater issue of home-host supervisory coordination in some depth. I want to assure you that U.S. supervisors are sensitive to the need to coordinate their efforts. We will do our best to make compliance manageable for global banking organizations and to improve our coordination efforts with foreign supervisors. These initiatives include entering into written supervisory cooperation and information-sharing arrangements with financial institutions' supervisors in countries that share cross-border banking operations with the United States. However, while we can strive to minimize the burden on regulated institutions, we cannot eliminate it. A critical point for this audience, and this is true for Bank Secrecy Act issues as well, is that we as regulators are committed to applying the same rules to foreign-owned organizations that we apply to domestic ones. Foreign-owned U.S. bank holding companies, banks, and thrifts that meet the criteria for mandatory Basel II institutions will be required to follow the advanced approaches. U.S. bank holding companies, banks, and thrifts owned by foreign organizations that do not meet these criteria--including the great majority of institutions represented in this audience--will have a choice to either follow our current capital framework in the United States or to "opt in" to the advanced Basel II approaches. If you decide to opt in, you will have to meet the same qualification requirements as domestic organizations. The new Basel II rules are expected to take effect on January 1, 2008. To qualify by that date, both supervisors and bankers have substantial work to accomplish. Currently, we are reviewing the submissions received from various banking organizations as part of a quantitative impact study, QIS-4, to assess the effects of Basel II rules on bank capital levels. This summer, the agencies will issue a notice of proposed rulemaking (NPR) for Basel II. We will also issue for comment, amendments to the existing capital framework. Thus, bankers will be able to compare the two alternatives and to evaluate which is appropriate for their U.S. operations. In the run-up to 2008, institutions subject to the new rules will be required to conduct a year of parallel calculations; that is, institutions will have to perform a dress rehearsal, if you will, to demonstrate not only that the design of the Basel II systems is sound but also that the rules can be practically implemented. As you know, the federal banking agencies in the United States have stated that a small number of large, internationally active banking organizations will be required to follow the advanced approaches of calculating capital under Basel II. A year and a half ago, we proposed setting the threshold at $250 billion or more in total banking assets or $10 billion or more in foreign banking assets. The criteria in the forthcoming notice of proposed rulemaking are unlikely to differ materially from those levels. At the same time, U.S. regulators--especially those among us who spent the greater part of our careers as bankers--are very sensitive to the competitive implications of having two sets of rules for the banking industry. Regulators recognize that Basel I can be enhanced and that the Basel II standardized approach is not well suited to the needs of our domestic-focused community banking organizations. Accordingly, we are now seriously considering making some targeted adjustments to our existing regulatory capital rules and looking for ways to enhance their risk sensitivity without increasing regulatory burden. The staffs of the agencies are drafting an advance notice of proposed rulemaking (ANPR) suggesting possible changes to our existing capital rules. This advance notice will be published close to the publication of the Basel II notice of proposed rulemaking. Finally, those institutions considering adoption of the advanced approaches at the earliest possible date should begin defining the details of their own implementation plans, while identifying gaps and placeholders for further discussion with supervisors. In this regard, the U.S. banking agencies recently issued guidance describing how we expect the implementation process will work in the United States and some steps that banking organizations could consider. To be sure, several important implementation issues still need to be worked out, but the focus on enhanced risk management in Basel II (especially in the advanced approaches) means that banking organizations should not view Basel II preparations with a checklist mentality. Rather, they should be moving ahead on many fronts, looking at how to make the fundamental changes needed for better risk identification, measurement, management, and control. By doing so, banking organizations can position themselves to succeed in implementing the accord on a timely basis. Throughout the process, it will be critical that you regularly communicate with your primary supervisor about whether you plan to "opt-in" to the advanced approaches and about your timeframe for compliance. Regular communication can help the supervisor allocate resources to support the qualification process. It can also help the supervisor focus on your implementation efforts, identify issues that need to be addressed, and provide prompt responses to your questions.
Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan Future of the Social Security program and economics of retirement Before the Special Committee on Aging, U.S. Senate March 15, 2005 Mr. Chairman, Senator Kohl, and members of the Committee, I am pleased to be here today to discuss the issues of population aging and retirement. In so doing, I would like to emphasize that the views I will express are my own and do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board. The economics of retirement are straightforward: Enough resources must be set aside over a lifetime of work to fund consumption during retirement. At the most rudimentary level, one could envision households actually storing goods purchased during their working years for use during retirement. Even better, the resources that would have otherwise gone into producing the stored goods could be diverted to the production of new capital assets, which would produce an even greater quantity of goods and services for later use. In the latter case, we would be raising output per worker hour, our traditional measure of productivity. The bottom line in the success of all retirement programs is the availability of real resources at retirement. The financial systems associated with retirement plans facilitate the allocation of resources that supply retirement consumption of goods and services; they do not produce goods and services. A useful test of a retirement system for a society is whether it sets up realistic expectations as to the future availability of real resources and, hence, the capacity to deliver postwork consumption without overly burdening the standard of living of the working-age population. In 2008, the leading edge of what must surely be the largest shift from work to retirement in our nation's history will become evident as some baby boomers become eligible for Social Security. According to the intermediate projections of the Social Security trustees, the population 65 years of age and older will be approximately 26 percent of the adult population in 2030, compared with 17 percent today. This huge change in the structure of our population will expose all our financial retirement systems to severe stress and will require adjustments for which there are no historical precedents. Indeed, retirement, generally, is a relatively new phenomenon in human history. Average American life expectancy a century ago, for example, was only 47 years. Relatively few of our citizens were able to enjoy many postwork years. One consequence of the sizable baby boom cohort moving from the workforce to retirement is an inevitable slowing in the growth of gross domestic product per capita relative to the growth of output per worker. As the ratio of workers to population declines, so too must the ratio of output to population, assuming no change in the growth of productivity. That result is simply a matter of arithmetic. The important economic implication of that arithmetic is that, with fewer workers relative to dependents, each worker's output will have to support a greater number of people. Under the intermediate population projections of the Social Security trustees, for example, the ratio of workers to total population will shrink about 7 percent by 2030. This shrinkage means that, by 2030, total output per person will be 7 percent lower than it would be if the current population structure were to persist. The fact that a greater share of the dependents will be elderly rather than children will put an additional burden on society's resources, as the elderly consume a relatively large share of per capita resources, whereas children consume relatively little. This inevitable drop in the growth rate of per capita GDP relative to the growth of productivity could be cushioned by an increase in labor force participation, which would boost the ratio of workers to population. Increasing labor force participation seems a natural response to population aging, as Americans not only are living longer but are also generally living healthier. Rates of disability for the elderly have been declining, reflecting both improvements in health and changes in technology that accommodate the physical impairments that are associated with aging. In addition, work is becoming less physically strenuous and more demanding intellectually, continuing a century-long trend toward a more conceptual and a less physical economic output. Despite the improving feasibility of work at older ages, Americans have been retiring at younger and younger ages. For example, in 1940, the median age of retirement for men was 69; today, the median age is about 62. In recent years, labor force participation among older Americans has picked up somewhat, but it is far too early to determine the underlying causes of this increase. Rising pressures on retirement incomes and a growing scarcity of experienced labor could induce further increases in the labor force participation of the elderly and near-elderly in the future. In addition, policies that specifically encourage greater labor force participation would also lessen the necessary adjustments to consumption. Workers nearing retirement have accumulated many years of valuable experience, so extending labor force participation by just a few years could have a sizable impact on economic output. Another way to boost future standards of living is to increase saving. We need the additional saving in the decades ahead if we are to finance the construction of a capital stock that will produce the additional real resources needed to redeem the retirement claims of the baby boomers without having to severely raise claims on tomorrow's workers. However, by almost any measure, the required amount of saving that would be necessary is sufficiently large to raise serious questions about whether we will be able to meet the retirement commitments already made. Much has been made of shortfalls in our private defined-benefit plans, but the gross underfunding currently at $450 billion, although significant as a percentage of the $1.8 trillion in assets of private defined-benefit plans, is modest compared with the underfunding of our publically administered pensions. At present, the Social Security trustees estimate the unfunded liability over the indefinite future to be $10.4 trillion. The shortfall in Medicare is calculated at several multiples of the one in Social Security. These numbers suggest that either very large tax increases will be required to meet the shortfalls or benefits will have to be pared back. Because benefit cuts will almost surely be at least part of the resolution, it is incumbent on government to convey to future retirees that the real resources currently promised to be available on retirement will not be fully forthcoming. We owe future retirees as much time as possible to adjust their plans for work, saving, and retirement spending. They need to ensure that their personal resources, along with what they expect to receive from government, will be sufficient to meet their retirement goals. Conventional advice from personal-finance professionals is that one should aim to accumulate sufficient resources to provide an overall replacement rate of about 70 percent to 80 percent in retirement. Under current law, Social Security promises a replacement rate of about 42 percent for workers who earn the economywide-average wage each and every year through their careers and about 56 percent for low-wage workers who earn 45 percent of the economywide-average wage. Assuming that taxes are capped at the current 12.4 percent of payroll, revenues will be sufficient to pay only about 70 percent of current-law benefits by the middle of this century. Thus, for the average worker, a replacement rate of only about 30 percent would be payable out of contemporaneous revenues, assuming that benefit reductions are applied proportionately across the board. For a low-wage worker, the payable replacement rate would be about 40 percent. Assuming that the goal is still to replace 70 percent to 80 percent of pre-retirement income, average workers by the middle of this century should be aiming to replace about 45 percent of their pre-retirement income, rather than today's 33 percent, out of some combination of private employer pension benefits and personal saving. The required increases in private saving would be less to the extent that Social Security tax increases are part of the solution. However, to avoid any changes in replacement rates, the Social Security tax rate would have to be increased from the current 12.4 percent to about 18 percent at the middle of the century. *** Once we have determined the level of benefits that we can reasonably promise, we must ensure that we will have the real resources in the future to fulfill those promises. When we evaluate our ability to meet those promises, focusing solely on the solvency of the financial plan is, in my judgment, a mistake. Focusing on solvency within the Social Security system, without regard to the broader macroeconomic picture, does not ensure that the real resources to fulfill our commitments will be there. For example, if we build up the assets in the Social Security trust fund, thereby achieving solvency, but offset those efforts by reducing saving elsewhere, then the real resources required to meet future benefits will not be forthcoming from our economy. In the end, we will have accomplished little in preparing the economy to meet future demands. Thus, in addressing Social Security's imbalances, we need to ensure that measures taken now to finance future benefit commitments represent real additions to national saving. We need, in effect, to make the phantom "lock-boxes" around the trust fund real. For a brief period in the late 1990s, a common commitment emerged to do just that. But, regrettably, that commitment collapsed when it became apparent that, in light of a less favorable economic environment, maintaining balance in the budget excluding Social Security would require lower spending or higher taxes. Last year, Social Security tax revenues plus interest exceeded benefits by about $150 billion. If those funds had been removed from the unified budget and "locked up" and Congress had not made any adjustments in the rest of the budget, the unified budget deficit would have been $564 billion. A reasonable hypothesis is that the Congress would, in fact, have responded by taking actions to pare the deficit. In that case, the end result would have been lowered government dissaving and correspondingly higher national saving. A simple reshuffling from the unified accounts to the lock-boxes would not have, in itself, added to government savings; but higher taxes or lower spending would have accomplished that important objective. The major attraction of personal or private accounts is that they can be constructed to be truly segregated from the unified budget and, therefore, are more likely to induce the federal government to take those actions that would reduce public dissaving and raise national saving. But it is important to recognize that many varieties of private accounts exist, with significantly different economic consequences. Some types of accounts are virtually indistinguishable from the current Social Security system, and the Congress would be unlikely to view them as truly off-budget. Other types of accounts actually do transfer funds into the private sector as unencumbered private assets. The Congress is much more likely to view the transfer of funds to these latter types of accounts as raising the deficit and would then react by taking measures to lower it. *** Failure to address the imbalances between our promises to future retirees and our ability to meet those promises would have severe consequences for the economy. The most recent projections by the Office of Management and Budget show that spending on Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid will rise from about 8 percent of GDP today to about 13 percent by 2030. Under existing tax rates and reasonable assumptions about other spending, these projections make clear that the federal budget is on an unsustainable path, in which large deficits result in rising interest rates and ever-growing interest payments that augment deficits in future years. But most important, deficits as a percentage of GDP in these simulations rise without limit. Unless the trend is reversed, at some point these deficits would cause the economy to stagnate or worse. Closing the gap solely with rising tax rates would be problematic; higher tax rates rarely achieve a comparable rise in tax receipts, and the level of required taxation could in itself severely inhibit economic growth. In light of these sobering projections, I believe that a thorough review of our commitments--and at least some adjustment in those commitments--is urgently needed. The necessary adjustments will become ever more difficult and larger the longer we delay. No changes will be easy. All programs in our budget exist because a majority of the Congress and the President considered them of value to our society. Adjustments will thus involve making tradeoffs among valued alternatives. The Congress must choose which alternatives are the most valued in the context of limited resources. In doing so, you will need to consider not only the distributional effects of policy changes but also the broader economic effects on labor supply, retirement behavior, and national saving. The benefits to taking sound, timely action could extend many decades into the future. Footnotes Additionally, we could borrow from abroad, which would build up the capital stock. In so doing, however, we would also build up a liability to foreigners that we would have to finance in the future. The replacement rate is the ratio of Social Security benefits to wages in the year preceding retirement. The projections for Medicare and Medicaid should be viewed as highly uncertain. Health spending has been growing faster than the economy for many years, the growth fueled, in large part, by significant increases in technology. How long this trend will continue is extremely difficult to predict. We know very little about how rapidly medical technology will continue to advance and how those innovations will translate into future spending. Technological innovations can greatly improve the quality of medical care and can, in some instances, reduce the costs of existing treatments. But because technology expands the set of treatment possibilities, it also has the potential to add to overall spending--in some cases, a great deal. In implementing policy, we need to be cognizant that the uncertainties--especially our inability to identify the upper bound of future demands for medical care--counsel significant prudence in policymaking. The critical reason to proceed cautiously is that new programs quickly develop constituencies willing to fiercely resist any curtailment of spending or tax benefits. As a consequence, our ability to rein in deficit-expanding initiatives, should they later prove to have been excessive or misguided, is quite limited. Thus, policymakers need to err on the side of prudence when considering new budget initiatives. Programs can always be expanded in the future should the resources for them become available, but they cannot be easily curtailed if resources later fall short of commitments.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the issuance of a consent Order of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty against the First Interstate Bank, Billings, Montana, a state member bank. First Interstate Bank, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order in connection with its alleged violations of the Board's Regulations implementing the National Flood Insurance Act. The Order requires First Interstate Bank to pay a civil money penalty of $15,750, which will be remitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency for deposit into the National Flood Mitigation Fund. A copy of the Order is attached.
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan At the 2005 National Community Reinvestment Coalition Conference, Washington, D.C. March 18, 2005 Empowering Communities, Attracting Development Capital, and Creating Opportunities
No content found
Joint Press Release Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Office of the Comptroller of the Currency Office of Thrift Supervision For Immediate Release March 23, 2005 Federal Bank and Thrift Regulatory Agencies Jointly Issue Interagency Guidance on Response Programs for Security Breaches The federal bank and thrift regulatory agencies have jointly issued Interagency Guidance on Response Programs for Unauthorized Access to Customer Information and Customer Notice . The guidance interprets the agencies' customer information security standards and states that financial institutions should implement a response program to address security breaches involving customer information. The response program should include procedures to notify customers about incidents of unauthorized access to customer information that could result in substantial harm or inconvenience to the customer. The guidance provides that, "when a financial institution becomes aware of an incident of unauthorized access to sensitive customer information, the institution should conduct a reasonable investigation to promptly determine the likelihood that the information has been or will be misused." "If the institution determines that misuse of its information about a customer has occurred or is reasonably possible, it should notify the affected customer as soon as possible," the guidance states. However, notice may be delayed if an appropriate law enforcement agency determines that notification will interfere with a criminal investigation. Under the guidance, a financial institution should notify its primary federal regulator of a security breach involving sensitive customer information, whether or not the institution notifies its customers. The guidance is being issued by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Office of Thrift Supervision. The Federal Register notice is attached. Contacts: Federal Reserve Susan Stawick (202) 452-2955 FDIC David Barr (202) 898-6992 OCC Kevin Mukri (202) 874-5770 OTS Erin Hickman (202) 906-6677
No content found
Joint Press Release Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Office of the Comptroller of the Currency Office of Thrift Supervision For Immediate Release March 28, 2005 Comments Requested on Proposed Classification of Commercial Credit Exposures The federal bank and thrift regulatory agencies requested comment today on proposed changes to the supervisory framework for the classification of commercial credit exposures. The proposed guidance would replace the current commercial loan classification system categories--"special mention," "substandard," and "doubtful"--with a two-dimensional framework. The two-dimensional rating system has one dimension that measures the risk of the borrower defaulting (borrower rating) and a second focused on the loss severity the institution would likely incur in the event of the borrower's default (facility rating). Facility ratings would be required only for those borrowers rated default, typically a very small proportion of all commercial exposures. The proposed framework would increase consistency among the agencies in assessing the credit risk in an institution's commercial loan portfolio. It also more closely aligns the determination of a facility's accrual status with an institution's allowance for loan and lease loss methodology and rating assessment process. Comments on the proposed guidance are requested by June 30, 2005. Specific information on how to file a comment is contained in the Federal Register notice. The interagency Federal Register notice is attached. ### Contacts: Federal Reserve Andrew Williams (202) 452-2955 FDIC David Barr (202) 898-6992 OCC Kevin Mukri (202) 874-5770 OTS Erin Hickman (202) 906-6677
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced its approval of the application filed pursuant to the Bank Holding Company Act by Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria, S.A., Bilbao, Spain, to acquire all of the outstanding shares of Laredo National Bancshares, Inc., Laredo, Texas; Laredo National Bancshares of Delaware, Inc., Wilmington, Delaware; and The Laredo National Bank and South Texas National Bank of Laredo, both of Laredo, Texas. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
Remarks by Governor Ben S. Bernanke At the Redefining Investment Strategy Education Symposium, Dayton, Ohio March 30, 2005 Implementing Monetary Policy Among the most important of my duties at the Federal Reserve is serving on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), the body that makes U.S. monetary policy. Nineteen men and women--the seven members of the Board of Governors and the Presidents of the twelve Reserve Banks--gather in Washington eight times each year to participate in FOMC deliberations on the course of monetary policy. If necessary, the FOMC can also convene by conference call between regularly scheduled meetings. The FOMC's decisions are guided by the dual mandate given to the Federal Reserve by the Congress, which enjoins the Committee to use its powers to pursue both price stability and maximum sustainable employment. To achieve its mandated objectives, the FOMC must influence the course of the U.S. economy, helping it to grow rapidly enough to make full use of available resources but not so rapidly as to stoke inflation. How, specifically, does the Committee exert this influence? The person in the street might tell you that the Fed "controls interest rates." That statement is not literally accurate. In fact, the Fed has little or no direct influence over the interest rates that matter most for the economy, such as mortgage rates, corporate bond rates, or the rates on Treasury securities. Instead, the Fed affects these key rates, as well as the prices of financial assets such as stocks, only indirectly. Since many of you plan to work in the financial markets, I thought that you might find it interesting to hear some of the details of how U.S. monetary policy is actually implemented and how policy decisions affect asset prices and yields. I will begin by discussing how the Federal Reserve influences the federal funds rate, the one market interest rate over which it has fairly direct control. I will then discuss the effects of changes in the federal funds rate on the asset prices and yields that matter the most for economic activity and inflation. Monetary Policy and the Federal Funds Rate Broadly speaking, the Federal Open Market Committee's principal task is to determine the degree of financial stimulus needed to steer the economy onto a desirable path and then to set monetary policy so as to provide that amount of stimulus. "Financial stimulus" is not a precisely measured concept, but in general, financial conditions are stimulative to the extent that the asset prices and yields prevailing in financial markets induce households and firms to spend more freely. For example, low mortgage rates promote increased spending on new homes, low auto-financing rates tend to increase the sales of new cars, and low corporate bond yields and high stock prices generally induce firms to invest in new capital goods, such as factories and machines, at a faster pace. When the economy is growing too sluggishly to fully employ its capital and labor resources, and if insufficient aggregate demand is the cause of slow growth, increased financial stimulus can help return the economy to full employment by expanding the aggregate demand for goods and services. Similarly, if the economy is growing at an unsustainably quick rate, more-restrictive financial conditions (in the form of higher mortgage rates, auto financing rates, and corporate bond rates, for example) can help to restrain spending and reduce the risk of an inflationary overshoot. Although the FOMC's ultimate objective is to provide the appropriate degree of financial stimulus to the economy, the Committee has no direct control over the key interest rates and asset prices that jointly determine the extent of financial stimulus, as I have already noted. Instead, the FOMC's monetary policy decision is expressed in terms of the Committee's target value for an otherwise obscure short-term interest rate, the federal funds rate. For example, the FOMC's current target for the federal funds rate, as established at its meeting last week, is 2.75 percent. What is the federal funds rate (often called the funds rate for short)? The funds rate is the interest rate prevailing in the market for borrowing and lending reserve balances, also called the federal funds market. Reserve balances are deposits held at the Federal Reserve by commercial banks and other depository institutions. Banks hold reserve balances at the Fed for several reasons. First, balances at the Fed can be used to satisfy banks' legal requirement to hold reserves in proportion to the level of their own customers' transactions deposits (checking accounts, for example). A bank's legal reserve requirement is calculated based on the average level of deposits held by the bank's own customers over a two-week period, called the computation period, and must be satisfied by having sufficient reserves on average over a subsequent two-week period, called the maintenance period. Second, banks can choose to hold what are called contractual clearing balances. Unlike balances held at the Fed for reserve purposes, which pay no interest, contractual clearing balances earn implicit interest in the form of earnings credits. Banks can use these credits to pay for services provided by the Federal Reserve, such as check clearing and the use of the Fedwire, the Federal Reserve's electronic large-value payment system. Together, balances held at the Fed to satisfy reserve requirements and contractual clearing balances are referred to as required balances. Total required balances in recent years have been around $20 billion, divided roughly equally between required reserves and contractual clearing balances. Banks may also choose to hold balances at the Fed in excess of their required balances. These so-called excess balances are costly for banks because they earn no interest and do not satisfy legal reserve requirements. Nevertheless, a bank may hold them to facilitate financial transactions with other institutions. Whenever a bank makes or receives large payments electronically over Fedwire, either as a result of its own activities or those of its depositors, reserves are shifted out of the account of the paying bank into the reserve account of the receiving bank. Payments made by check also result in a transfer of reserves between banks. Trillions of dollars of reserves are transferred between banks every day as a result of these financial settlements, which end each day at 6:30 p.m. ET when the Fed closes its Fedwire system. Payments flows may be exceptionally large on certain days, such as major tax dates and days on which the purchases of bonds in Treasury auctions are settled. In the face of large and often unpredictable payments flows, a financially-active bank must confront the problem of managing its reserve account both to meet its reserve requirement for the period and also to avoid ending any day with its account at the Fed overdrawn (which may carry a financial penalty). At the same time, banks try to accumulate as few excess reserves as possible, because holding non-interest-paying excess reserves instead of interest-bearing securities is costly. A bank that finds itself short of reserve balances on a given day can borrow in the federal funds market from other institutions that happen to hold more balances at the Fed than they need on that day. The interest rate that banks pay when they borrow in the federal funds market is the aforementioned funds rate. Banks generally contract to borrow fed funds on an unsecured basis and for very short periods, typically overnight. Loans of fed funds can be made through brokers whose business is to arrange such transactions, or they can be made directly between institutions. Of late, the daily volume of overnight fed funds transactions handled by brokers has ranged between $60 billion and $80 billion, an amount several times greater than the total level of reserves in the banking system. The volume of direct (that is, non-brokered) transactions is not reported but is estimated to be of similar magnitude. The funds rate is a market rate, not an administered rate set by fiat--that is, the funds rate is the rate needed to achieve equality between the demand for and the supply of reserves held at the Fed. As I have already discussed, the demand for reserve balances arises both because banks must hold required reserves and because reserve balances are useful for facilitating transactions. Because of the scale of and volatility in daily payments flows, the demand for reserve balances can vary substantially from one day to the next. The supply of reserve balances is largely determined by the Federal Reserve--at the operational level, by the specialists at the Federal Reserve's Open Market Desk, located in the Federal Reserve Bank of New York in the New York financial district. For example, to increase the supply of reserves, the Open Market Desk purchases securities (usually government securities) on the open market, crediting the seller with an increase in reserve balances on deposit at the Fed in the amount of the purchase. Thus, a purchase of a billion dollars' worth of securities by the Open Market Desk increases the supply of funds available to lend in the fed funds market by the same amount. Similarly, sales of securities from the Fed's financial portfolio result in debits against the accounts of commercial banks with the Fed and thus serve to drain reserve balances from the system. Collectively, these transactions are called open-market operations. Factors outside the control of the Open Market Desk can also affect the supply of reserve balances. For example, when the Federal Reserve receives an order for currency from a bank, it debits the reserve account of the bank in payment when the currency is shipped, thereby reducing reserve supply. When deciding upon open market operations to control the supply of reserves, the Open Market Desk must take account of these external factors. In practice, the Open Market Desk uses several methods of performing open-market operations. In some cases it purchases securities outright, that is, with the intention of holding the securities in its portfolio indefinitely. Outright purchases are used to offset long-lasting changes in factors affecting the demand for and supply of reserves. For example, long-term increases in the private sector's demand for currency have largely been met by outright purchases of securities. Over the years, the Fed has accumulated a portfolio of more than $700 billion of Treasury securities, mostly as an offset to its issuance of currency. In contrast, in cases in which variations in the demand for reserves or in external factors affecting reserve supply appear likely to be temporary, the Desk typically prefers to conduct open-market operations through short-term or long-term repurchase agreements, known as repos. Under a repurchase agreement, the buyer and seller of a security agree to reverse the transaction after a certain fixed period. Thus, when the Open Market Desk purchases securities under a repo agreement, the resulting increase in reserve balances lasts only until the time at which the transaction is reversed. Over the course of a year, the value of repos on the Fed's books on any given day may range from a few billion dollars to $30 billion or more. In the period before the millennium date change (Y2K), when the demand for currency was temporarily very high, the daily value of repos peaked at nearly $150 billion. The manager of the Open Market Desk and his team bear the responsibility of adjusting the supply of fed funds to maintain the funds rate at or near the target established by the FOMC. Meeting this objective on a daily basis is technically challenging. To hit the funds rate target, the Desk staff must forecast the daily demand for balances as well as changes in external factors affecting reserves supply. Open-market operations are then set in motion to balance the supply of and demand for reserves at the target funds rate. Shortly after 9 a.m. each morning, the Desk staff and staff members at the Board of Governors confer over the phone to discuss their respective estimates of the day's demand for balances as well as to consider factors that may affect supply. The Desk manager and his staff also keep in close touch with fed funds brokers and other market participants so as to be able to assess general market conditions. The Desk's market contacts are useful not only for controlling the funds rate but also for obtaining broader financial-market information for the use of Fed policymakers. At 9:20 a.m., a conference call is held between the Desk staff, Board staff, and the President of a Reserve Bank. The Desk staff summarize the projections for reserves demand and supply, report on conditions in the federal funds market and global financial market developments, and present to the President their plans for open-market operations for his or her comment. Open-market operations will be arranged shortly after this "call," and the results are disclosed to the public generally within a few minutes. The Desk is in the market on most business days, adding from $2 billion to $10 billion in reserves to keep the funds rate near the FOMC's target. As an additional means for managing the fed funds, the Federal Reserve stands ready to lend reserves to depository institutions that request them. Financially sound banks are eligible to borrow from the Fed at what is called the primary credit rate, which to date has been set at 100 basis points (1 percentage point) above the target funds rate. Historically, reserve shortages occasionally caused the funds rate to "spike" well above its target, once even hitting 100 percent (in 1991). The primary credit facility is designed to avoid such spikes by providing an elastic supply of reserves at a rate not far above the funds rate target. Since the introduction of the primary credit facility, the rate has exceeded the primary credit rate only in a few unusual circumstances, such as the power outage in the eastern United States in August 2003. The Federal Reserve's multiple means of injecting reserves into the banking system--a belt-and-suspenders approach--was shown in its best light following the September 11 terrorist attacks. With a significant part of the financial system inoperative and with many payments not being made as scheduled, the banking system's demand for reserve balances rose sharply. Those reserve needs were met initially through large amounts of direct borrowing from the Fed. As market functioning improved, needed reserves were provided by means of open-market operations. The increase in the supply of reserves topped $80 billion by the end of the week. The Funds Rate and Other Market Rates I have discussed at some length how the Federal Reserve manages the federal funds rate, the most direct instrument of monetary policy. As I have already hinted, however, monetary policy is effective only to the extent that Federal Reserve actions can affect a wide range of interest rates and asset prices. What is the link between the funds rate and these key financial variables? The interest rates most closely linked to the funds rate are those prevailing in short-term money markets. Financial market participants are able to trade short-term liquid funds in a number of markets, including, for example, the market for repurchase agreements based on Treasury securities (the repo market). The federal funds market is tied particularly closely to the so-called Eurodollar market. Technically, Eurodollar deposits are dollar-denominated deposits held at non-U.S. banks, but regulatory and technological developments have made these deposits easily tradable even by U.S. banks and by many nonbank institutions not eligible to participate in the fed funds market. Accessible to a wide range of borrowers and lenders and operating virtually around the clock, the Eurodollar market has grown rapidly and become highly liquid. Because large banks can trade in either the federal funds market or the Eurodollar market and because fed funds and Eurodollars are easily substitutable forms in which to hold short-term liquidity, it should not be surprising that overnight Eurodollar interest rates line up closely with the funds rate, even within the day (Bartolini, Gudell, Hilton, and Schwarz, 2005). Were that not the case, then banks could profit by borrowing in the cheaper market and lending in the market in which the rate is higher. As a consequence of this potential arbitrage, the FOMC's target for the funds rate effectively determines other very short-term rates as well. This linkage establishes one important connection between the FOMC's target funds rate and interest rates more broadly. As I have noted, however, to affect overall financial conditions, the FOMC's actions must affect not only very short-term rates but also longer-term yields and asset prices, including mortgage rates, corporate bond rates, and stock prices. Considerable empirical evidence suggests that monetary-policy actions do affect these longer-term yields and asset prices as well as very short-term rates. But what is the mechanism? To keep things simple, we can focus on the relationship between the FOMC's actions and the yield on longer-term Treasury securities, such as five-year or ten-year Treasury notes. If monetary policy can affect Treasury yields, then clearly it can affect other yields and asset prices as well. For example, mortgage rates are closely linked to long-term Treasury yields, the spread between the two rates being explained largely by factors such as the risk of default on mortgage loans and the so-called prepayment risk (that is, the risk that homeowners will choose to pay off their mortgages early). Likewise, changes in Treasury yields affect stock prices by affecting both the profit prospects of publicly traded companies as well as the rate at which expected future profits are discounted to the present. Basic financial theory suggests that any long-term interest rate, such as a five-year or ten-year Treasury rate, is the sum of two components: a weighted average of expected short-term interest rates and a term premium, which in turn depends on risk, liquidity, and other factors affecting the desirability of the financial instrument in question. Monetary policy probably influences the term premium on Treasury securities to some extent. However, in all likelihood, the more important means by which monetary policy affects Treasury yields is through the effect of policy on the expected future path of short-term interest rates, and I will focus on that channel. Expected short-term interest rates influence long-term rates because any investor has the choice of holding either a long-term security or a series of short-term securities, re-investing his or her funds in a new short-term security as the old short-term security matures. All else being equal, the choice between the two strategies depends on the expected return. If, on the one hand, short-term rates are expected to be higher on average than the long-term rate that spans the same period, investors will choose the strategy of rolling over short-term securities. If, on the other hand, the long-term rate exceeds the average of expected future short-term rates, the long-term security will be the more attractive. Since both short-term and long-term Treasury securities are willingly held in the marketplace, investors must be roughly indifferent between short-term and long-term securities, implying that (on average and abstracting from any term premiums) expected future short-term rates must be similar to the current long-term yield. You may be beginning to understand at this point why making monetary policy is not a simple matter--and, in particular, why the Fed has only very indirect control over long-term yields and asset prices. The Fed controls very short-term interest rates quite effectively, but the long-term rates that really matter for the economy depend not on the current short-term rate but on the whole trajectory of future short-term rates expected by market participants. Thus, to affect long-term rates, the FOMC must somehow signal to the financial markets its plans for setting future short-term rates. How can this be done? The most direct method is through talk. The FOMC's post-meeting statement, the minutes released three weeks after the meeting, and speeches and congressional testimony by the Chairman and other Federal Reserve officials all provide information to the markets and the public about the near-term economic outlook, the risks to that outlook, and the appropriate course for monetary policy. With the aid of this information, financial market participants make estimates of the likely future path of short-term interest rates, which in turn helps them to price longer-term bonds. FOMC talk probably has the greatest influence on expectations of short-term rates a year or so into the future, as beyond that point the FOMC has very little, if any, advantage over market participants in forecasting the economy or even its own policy actions. Influencing policy expectations for the more distant future may be more difficult. However, the FOMC has two general ways to help financial market participants divine the long-run course of policy. First, to the extent practical, the FOMC strives to be consistent in how it responds to particular configurations of economic conditions and transparent in explaining the reasons for its response. By building a consistent track record, the FOMC increases its own predictability as well as public confidence in its policies. Second, more generally, comments by FOMC officials about the Committee's general policy framework, including the Committee's economic objectives and members' views about the channels of monetary policy transmission and the structure of the economy, help the public deduce how policy is likely to respond to future economic circumstances. Importantly, FOMC members do not have to guess about the effects of their words and actions on the public's expectations of future policy actions. Information about those expectations is revealed in a number of ways in financial markets. For example, market prices on actively-traded futures contracts on the funds rate or on the Eurodollar rate tell us a great deal about the funds rate that market participants expect to prevail at various dates in the future. Options on fed funds and Eurodollar futures are also actively traded; the prices of these options provide useful information about the degree of uncertainty that market participants have about future monetary policy. By watching financial markets and listening to the views of market participants, FOMC members are able to know with considerable accuracy what the markets expect for monetary policy. This information helps Committee members deduce how their own actions and statements are likely to affect asset prices and yields. To conclude, the FOMC controls very short-term interest rates fairly directly. However, as I have emphasized today, the Committee's control over longer-term yields and over the prices of long-lived financial assets depends crucially on its ability to influence market expectations about the likely future course of policy. In the past decade or so, the Federal Reserve has become substantially more transparent and open in its communication with the public. Growing appreciation of the fact that greater openness makes monetary policy more effective is, I believe, an important reason for this welcome trend. References Bartolini, Leonardo, Svenja Gudell, Spence Hilton, and Krista Schwarz (2005). "Intra-Day Behavior of the Federal Funds Market," Federal Reserve Bank of New York, working paper (February). Bernanke, Ben and Kenneth Kuttner (2004). " ," Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2004-16 (March). Gürkaynak, Refet, Brian Sack, and Eric Swanson (2002). " ," Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2002-40 (September). Kuttner, Kenneth (2001). " ," Journal of Monetary Economics , vol. 47, pp. 523-44. Piazzesi, Monika, and Eric Swanson (2004). " ," National Bureau of Economic Research working paper no. 10547 (June). Footnotes Though nineteen policymakers participate in FOMC deliberations, only twelve vote at any given meeting. The seven members of the Board and the President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York have a permanent vote. The remaining eleven Presidents vote on a rotating basis. As always, my remarks today reflect my own views and not necessarily those of my Federal Reserve colleagues. I thank for excellent assistance. For convenience, from now on I will refer to banks and other depository institutions collectively as "banks." Banks holdings of vault cash also count toward meeting legally required reserves. Reserve requirements are established by the Federal Reserves . Banks contract with their regional Federal Reserve Banks to hold a specified level of these balances on average over an ensuing two-week maintenance period. They are free to change their contractual balances between periods. Strictly speaking, contractual clearing balances are not "reserves" in the legal sense. However, balances held at the Fed to satisfy a reserve requirement are indistinguishable from contractual clearing balances; for simplicity, both types of balances are referred to as "reserve balances." The Federal Reserve permits institutions some flexibility to carry forward a limited amount of their reserve surpluses or deficiencies to the next maintenance period. With this flexibility, some institutions are able to reduce the average level of their excess balances nearly to zero. But for the system as a whole, excess balances typically average $1.5 billion to $2 billion. Current data on reserve holdings and other assets and liabilities of the Federal Reserve are available at . Large banks dealing in high volumes of fed funds typically use brokers, whereas a small bank is more likely to borrow directly from a larger bank with which it has an ongoing relationship. If the seller is not a bank, the Fed credits the reserve account of the sellers correspondent bank. Typically, the counterparties to the Open Market Desk are large private securities dealers, called primary dealers. Actual sales of securities in the open market have been rare. In practice, when the Fed wishes to drain reserves, it usually lets some securities mature without replacing them. To be eligible to participate, the President must be a current voting member of the FOMC, other than the President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. See, for example, Bernanke and Kuttner (2004) for evidence that monetary policy actions affect stock prices. Kuttner (2001) estimates the effects of monetary policy on Treasury yields at different maturities. For example, if monetary policy were such as to create highly volatile inflation, the risk of holding conventional Treasury securities (as opposed to Treasury securities that are indexed to inflation) would rise, increasing required compensation for risk and thus the term premium. Gürkaynak, Sack, and Swanson (2002) provide evidence on the predictive power of various futures contracts for monetary policy. Piazzesi and Swanson (2004) show that more-distant futures prices must be adjusted for risk in order to provide good policy forecasts.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the issuance of a Cease and Desist Order against Eagle National Holding Company, Doral, Florida, a registered bank holding company that owns and controls the Eagle National Bank of Miami, Doral, Florida. A copy of the Cease and Desist Order is attached.
No content found