Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan Energy Before the National Petrochemical and Refiners Association Conference, San Antonio, Texas (via satellite) April 5, 2005 Markets for oil and natural gas have been subject to a degree of strain over the past year not experienced for a generation. Increased demand and lagging additions to productive capacity have combined to absorb a significant amount of the slack in energy markets that was essential in containing energy prices between 1985 and 2000. This tendency has been especially pronounced for oil. Although the recent price of light sweet crude oil is only a bit above the highs of last October, overall market prices of recent weeks, in fact, have been much more elevated. The prices of heavier, sour grades, which make up a significant part of the world production mix, are notably higher than in October. Dubai crude for instance, at yesterday's close, sold for more than $12 per barrel above its October price level. Moreover, although the price of six-year futures for light sweet crude did not match the overall run-up of oil prices last fall, in recent weeks it has largely kept pace with spot prices, leading to record levels for contracts maturing in 2011. Reflecting a low short-term elasticity of demand, higher prices in recent months have slowed the growth of oil demand, but only modestly. The slowdown in the growth of demand coupled with expanded production, which the price firmness has induced, has required markets to absorb an increased pace of inventory investment. The markets' response has been a shift in the spread between spot prices and near-term futures that has facilitated inventory hedging. Futures prices for delivery of both West Texas Intermediate and Brent crudes for the summer exceed spot prices. That will likely support increased inventories of crude oil. If sustained, these market technicals could encourage enough of an inventory buffer to damp the current price frenzy. Natural gas prices, seasonally adjusted, have not returned to their peak of last October, but remain significantly above the levels at year-end 2004. Working levels of gas inventories are seasonally moderate, but domestic dry gas production plus net imports has not expanded sufficiently over the past few years to prevent a marked rise in price. The inexorable rise in residential and utility use has priced the more marginal industrial gas users partially out of the market and has induced significant gains in gas efficiency among a number of gas users such as petroleum refineries, steel mills, and paper and board mills. Industrial gas use overall in the United States has declined 12 percent since 1998. *** The longer-term outlook for oil and gas is, if anything, more conjectural. Much will depend on the response of demand to price over the longer run. Prices of spot crude oil and natural gas have risen sharply over the past year in the face of constrained supply and the firming of overall demand. But if history is any guide, should higher prices persist, energy use will over time continue to decline, relative to GDP. Long-term demand elasticities have proved noticeably higher than those that are evident short term. Altering the magnitude and manner of U.S. energy consumption will significantly affect the path of the U.S. economy over the long term. For years, long-term prospects for oil and gas prices appeared benign. When choosing capital projects, businesses in the past could mostly look through short-run fluctuations in oil and natural gas prices to moderate prices over the longer haul. The recent shift in expectations, however, has been substantial enough and persistent enough to bias business-investment decisions in favor of energy-cost reduction. Of critical importance will be the extent to which the more than 200 million light vehicles on U.S. highways, which consume 11 percent of total world oil production, become more fuel efficient as vehicle buyers choose the lower fuel costs of lighter or hybrid vehicles. *** Aside from uncertain demand, the resolution of current major geopolitical uncertainties will materially affect oil prices in the years ahead. That, in turn, will significantly influence the levels of investments over the next decade in raising crude oil productive capacity and, only slightly less importantly, investment in refining facilities. Because of the geographic concentration of proved reserves, much of the investments in crude oil productive capacity will need to be made in countries where foreign investment is prohibited or restricted. Unless those policies are changed, a greater proportion of the cash flow of producing countries will be needed for oil reinvestment if capacity is to keep up with projected world demand. Concerns about potential shortfalls in investment certainly have contributed to current record-high long-term futures prices. To be sure, world oil supplies and productive capacity continue to expand. Major advances in recovery rates from existing reservoirs have enhanced proved reserves despite ever-fewer new discoveries of major oil fields. But investment to convert reserves to productive capacity has fallen short of the levels required to match unexpected recent gains in demand, especially gains in China. Besides feared shortfalls in crude oil capacity, the status of world refining capacity has become worrisome as well. Of special concern is the need to add adequate coking and desulphurization capacity to convert the average gravity and sulphur content of the world's crude oil to the lighter and sweeter needs of product markets, which are increasingly dominated by transportation fuels that must meet ever-more stringent environmental requirements. *** U.S. natural gas prices have historically displayed greater volatility than prices of crude oil, doubtless reflecting, in part, the less-advanced development of price-damping global trade in natural gas. Over the past few years, notwithstanding markedly higher drilling activity, the U.S. natural gas industry has been unable to noticeably expand production, or to increase imports from Canada. Significant pressure on prices ensued. North America's limited capacity to import liquefied natural gas (LNG) has effectively restricted our access to the world's abundant gas supplies. Because international trade in natural gas has been insufficient to equalize prices across markets, U.S. natural gas prices since late 2002 have been notably higher, on average, than prices abroad, thereby putting significant segments of the North American gas-using industry in a weakened competitive position. Indeed, ammonia and fertilizer plants in the United States have been particularly hard hit as the costs of domestic feedstocks have risen relative to those abroad. The difficulties associated with inadequate domestic supplies will eventually be resolved as consumers and producers react to the signals provided by market prices. Indeed, the process is already under way. As a result of substantial cost reductions for liquefaction and transportation of LNG, significant global trade in natural gas is developing. This activity has accelerated sharply over the past few years as profitable arbitrage has emerged in natural gas prices across international markets. At the liquefaction end of the process, new investments are in the works across the globe. In Qatar alone, five large-scale projects have begun construction or are at advanced stages of development. In January, Egypt exported its first LNG cargo. Enormous tankers to transport LNG are being constructed, even without being dedicated to specific long-term delivery contracts. The increasing availability of LNG around the world should lead to much greater flexibility and efficiency in the allocation of energy resources. According to tabulations of BP, worldwide imports of natural gas in 2003 were only 24 percent of world consumption, compared with 59 percent for oil. Clearly, the gas trade has significant margin to exercise its price-damping opportunities. In the United States, import terminals in Georgia and in Maryland have reopened after having been mothballed for more than two decades. The added capacity led to a noticeable increase in LNG imports last year, but LNG imports still accounted for less than 3 percent of U.S. consumption. Additional import facilities, both onshore and offshore, are being developed. According to the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, the number of approved and proposed new or expanded LNG import terminals in the United States stood at thirty-two as of last month with a capacity to import 15 trillion cubic feet annually, far in excess of any pending needs. Clearly, not all of these projects will come to fruition. Some will be abandoned for economic and business considerations, and others will fail because of local opposition, motivated by environmental, safety, and other concerns. The larger question, of course, is what will increased world trade in LNG and expanded U.S. import capacity do to currently uncompetitive natural gas prices in the United States? During the past couple of years, when U.S. prices of natural gas hovered around $6 million Btu, import prices of LNG in Europe have ranged between $2 and $4 per million Btu, and those in Japan and Korea have generally been between $3 and $5 per million Btu. Estimates of production and delivery costs of LNG to North America appear to hover around $3 per million Btu. In the short run, exporters to the United States are likely to receive our domestic price, currently above $7 per million Btu. But unless world gas markets tighten aggressively, competitive pressures will arbitrage the U.S. natural gas price down, possibly significantly, through increased imports. In addition to increased supplies from abroad, North America still has numerous unexploited sources of gas production. Significant quantities of recoverable gas reserves are located in Alaska and the northern territories of Canada. Negotiations over the construction of pipelines connecting these northern supplies to existing delivery infrastructure are currently under way. *** To be sure, the dramatic changes in technology in recent years have made existing oil and natural gas reserves stretch further while keeping energy costs lower than they otherwise would have been. Seismic imaging and advanced drilling techniques are facilitating the discovery of promising new reservoirs and are enabling the continued development of mature fields. But because of inexorably rising demand, these improved technologies have been unable to prevent the underlying long-term prices of oil and natural gas in the United States from rising. Conversion of the vast Athabasca oil sands reserves in Alberta to productive capacity has been slow. But at current market prices they have become competitive. Moreover, new technologies are facilitating U.S. production of so-called unconventional gas reserves, such as tight sands gas, shale gas, and coalbed methane. Production from unconventional sources has more than doubled since 1990 and currently accounts for roughly one-third of U.S. dry gas production. According to projections from the Energy Information Administration, the majority of the growth in the domestic supply of natural gas over the next twenty years will come from unconventional sources. In many respects, the unconventional is increasingly becoming the conventional. In the more distant future, perhaps a generation or more, lies the potential to develop productive capacity from natural gas hydrates. Located in marine sediments and the Arctic, these ice-like structures store immense quantities of methane. Although the size of these potential resources is not well measured, mean estimates from the U.S. Geological Survey indicate that the United States alone may possess 200 quadrillion cubic feet of natural gas in the form of hydrates. To put this figure in perspective, the world's proved reserves of natural gas are on the order of 6 quadrillion cubic feet. *** In the decades ahead, natural gas and oil will compete in the United States with coal, nuclear power, and renewable sources of energy. As the manner in which energy is produced and consumed evolves, it is not unreasonable to expect that, in the long run, the prices per unit of energy from various sources would tend to converge. At present, long-term futures prices for natural gas are, on a Btu-equivalent basis, notably less expensive than those for crude oil. Clearly, limited substitution possibilities across fuels have resulted in persistent cost differentials, but those very differentials inspire the technologies that, over time, reduce such limitations. A clear example is gas-to-liquids (GTL) technology, which converts natural gas to high-quality naphtha and to diesel fuel. Given the large-scale production facilities that are currently being contemplated (and some that have already begun construction), GTL is poised to become an increasingly important component of the world's energy supply. Current projections of production however remain modest. GTL promises to add a good measure of flexibility in the way natural gas resources are utilized. In addition, given the concerns over the long-term adequacy of liquid production capacity from conventional oil reserves, GTL may provide an attractive, competitively priced, option for making use of stranded gas, which, for lack of access to transportation infrastructure, cannot be brought to market. *** We are unable to judge with certainty how technological possibilities will play out in the future, but we can say with some assurance that developments in energy markets will remain central in determining the longer-run health of our nation's economy. The experience of the past fifty years--and indeed much longer than that--affirms that market forces play the key role in conserving scarce energy resources, directing those resources to their most highly valued uses. Adequate productive capacity, of course, is driven also by nonmarket and policy considerations. To be sure, energy issues present policymakers and citizens with difficult decisions and tradeoffs to make outside the market process. But those concerns, one hopes, will be addressed in a manner that, to the greatest extent possible, does not distort or stifle the meaningful functioning of our markets. We must remember that the same price signals that are so critical for balancing energy supply and demand in the short run also signal profit opportunities for long-term supply expansion. Moreover, they stimulate the research and development that will unlock new approaches to energy production and use that we can now only scarcely envision. Footnotes The energy intensity of the United States economy has been reduced by about half since the early 1970s in response to sharply higher prices. Much of the displacement was achieved by 1985. Progress in reducing energy intensity has continued since then, but at a lessened pace. This more-modest rate of decline in intensity should not be surprising, given the generally lower level of real oil prices that prevailed between 1985 and 2000. With real energy prices again on the rise, more rapid decreases in the intensity of use in the years ahead seem virtually inevitable. U.S. natural gas consumption in 2004 amounted to 22.3 trillion cubic feet.
No content found
Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan Consumer Finance At the Federal Reserve Systems Fourth Annual Community Affairs Research Conference, Washington, D.C. April 8, 2005
No content found
On most dimensions the U.S. economy appears to be performing well. Output growth has returned to healthy levels, the labor market is firming, and inflation appears to be well controlled. However, one aspect of U.S. economic performance still evokes concern among economists and policymakers: the nation's large and growing current account deficit. In 2004, the U.S. external deficit stood at $666 billion, or about 5-3/4 percent of the U.S. gross domestic product (GDP). Corresponding to that deficit, U.S. citizens, businesses, and governments on net had to raise $666 billion on international capital markets. The current account deficit has been on a steep upward trajectory in recent years, rising from a relatively modest $120 billion (1.5 percent of GDP) in 1996 to $414 billion (4.2 percent of GDP) in 2000 on its way to its current level. Most forecasters expect the nation's current account imbalance to decline slowly at best, implying a continued need for foreign credit and a concomitant decline in the U.S. net foreign asset position. Why is the United States, with the world's largest economy, borrowing heavily on international capital markets--rather than lending, as would seem more natural? What implications do the U.S. current account deficit and our consequent reliance on foreign credit have for economic performance in the United States and in our trading partners? What policies, if any, should be used to address this situation? In my remarks today I will offer some tentative answers to these questions. My answers will be somewhat unconventional in that I will take issue with the common view that the recent deterioration in the U.S. current account primarily reflects economic policies and other economic developments within the United States itself. Although domestic developments have certainly played a role, I will argue that a satisfying explanation of the recent upward climb of the U.S. current account deficit requires a global perspective that more fully takes into account events outside the United States. To be more specific, I will argue that over the past decade a combination of diverse forces has created a significant increase in the global supply of saving--a global saving glut--which helps to explain both the increase in the U.S. current account deficit and the relatively low level of long-term real interest rates in the world today. The prospect of dramatic increases in the ratio of retirees to workers in a number of major industrial economies is one important reason for the high level of global saving. However, as I will discuss, an important source of the global saving glut has been a remarkable reversal in the flows of credit to developing and emerging-market economies, a shift that has transformed those economies from borrowers on international capital markets to large net lenders. To be clear, in locating the principal causes of the U.S. current account deficit outside the country's borders, I am not making a value judgment about the behavior of either U.S. or foreign residents or their governments. Rather, I believe that understanding the influence of global factors on the U.S. current account deficit is essential for understanding the effects of the deficit and for devising policies to address it. Of course, as always, the views I express today are not necessarily shared by my colleagues at the Federal Reserve. The U.S. Current Account Deficit: Two Perspectives We will find it helpful to consider, as background for the analysis of the U.S. current account deficit, two alternative ways of thinking about the phenomenon--one that relates the deficit to the patterns of U.S. trade and a second that focuses on saving, investment, and international financial flows. Although these two ways of viewing the current account derive from accounting identities and thus are ultimately two sides of the same coin, each provides a useful lens for examining the issue. The first perspective on the current account focuses on patterns of international trade. You are probably aware that the United States has been experiencing a substantial trade imbalance in recent years, with U.S. imports of goods and services from abroad outstripping U.S. exports to other countries by a wide margin. According to preliminary data, in 2004 the United States imported $1.76 trillion worth of goods and services while exporting goods and services valued at only $1.15 trillion. Reflecting this imbalance in trade, current payments from U.S. residents to foreigners (consisting primarily of our spending on imports, but also including certain other types of payments, such as remittances, interest, and dividends) greatly exceed the analogous payments that U.S. residents receive from abroad. By definition, this excess of U.S. payments to foreigners over payments received in a given period equals the U.S. current account deficit, which, as I have already noted, was $666 billion in 2004--close to the $617 billion by which the value of U.S. imports exceeded that of exports. When U.S. receipts from its sales of exports and other current payments are insufficient to cover the cost of U.S. imports and other payments to foreigners, U.S. households, firms, and governments on net must borrow the difference on international capital markets. Thus, essentially by definition, in each period U.S. net foreign borrowing equals the U.S. current account deficit, which in turn is closely linked to the imbalance in U.S. international trade. That the nation's imports currently far exceed its exports is both widely understood and of concern to many Americans, particularly those whose livelihoods depend on the viability of exporting and import-competing industries. The extensive attention paid to the trade imbalance in the media and elsewhere has tempted some observers to ascribe the growing current account deficit to factors such as changes in the quality or composition of U.S. and foreign-made products, changes in trade policy, or unfair foreign competition. However, I believe--and I suspect that most economists would agree--that specific trade-related factors cannot explain either the magnitude of the U.S. current account imbalance or its recent sharp rise. Rather, the U.S. trade balance is the tail of the dog; for the most part, it has been passively determined by foreign and domestic incomes, asset prices, interest rates, and exchange rates, which are themselves in turn the products of more fundamental driving forces. Instead, an alternative perspective on the current account appears likely to be more useful for explaining recent developments. This second perspective focuses on international financial flows and the basic fact that a country's saving and investment need not be equal in each period. In the United States, as in all countries, economic growth requires investment in new capital goods and the upgrading and replacement of older capital. Examples of capital investment include the construction of factories and office buildings and firms' acquisition of new equipment, ranging from drill presses to computers to airplanes. Residential construction--the building of new homes and apartment buildings--is also counted as part of capital investment. All investment in new capital goods must be financed in some manner. In a closed economy without trade or international capital flows, the funding for investment would be provided entirely by the country's national saving. By definition, national saving is the sum of saving done by households (for example, through contributions to employer-sponsored 401(k) accounts) and saving done by businesses (in the form of retained earnings) less any budget deficit run by the government (which is a use rather than a source of saving). As I say, in a closed economy investment would equal national saving in each period; but, in fact, virtually all economies today are open economies, and well-developed international capital markets allow savers to lend to those who wish to make capital investments in any country, not just their own. Because saving can cross international borders, a country's domestic investment in new capital and its domestic saving need not be equal in each period. If a country's saving exceeds its investment during a particular year, the difference represents excess saving that can be lent on international capital markets. By the same token, if a country's saving is less than the amount required to finance domestic investment, the country can close the gap by borrowing from abroad. In the United States, national saving is currently quite low and falls considerably short of U.S. capital investment. Of necessity, this shortfall is made up by net foreign borrowing--essentially, by making use of foreigners' saving to finance part of domestic investment. We saw earlier that the current account deficit equals the net amount that the United States borrows abroad in each period, and I have just shown that U.S. net foreign borrowing equals the excess of U.S. capital investment over U.S. national saving. It follows that the country's current account deficit equals the excess of its investment over its saving. To summarize, I have described two equivalent ways of interpreting the current account deficit, one in terms of trade flows and related payments and one in terms of investment and national saving. In general, the perspective one takes depends on the particular analysis at hand. As I have already suggested, most economists who have offered explanations of the high and rising level of the U.S. current account deficit and the country's foreign borrowing have emphasized investment-saving behavior rather than trade-related factors (and I will do the same today). Along these lines, one commonly hears that the U.S. current account deficit is the product of a precipitous decline in the U.S. national saving rate, which in recent years has fallen to a level that is far from adequate to fund domestic investment. For example, in 1985 U.S. gross national saving was 18 percent of GDP, and in 1995 it was 16 percent of GDP; in 2004, by contrast, U.S. national saving was less than 14 percent of GDP. Those who emphasize the role of low U.S. saving often go on to conclude that, for the most part, the U.S. current account deficit is "made in the U.S.A." and is independent (to a first approximation) of developments in other parts of the globe. That inadequate U.S. national saving is the source of the current account deficit must be true at some level; indeed, the statement is almost a tautology. However, linking current-account developments to the decline in saving begs the question of why U.S. saving has declined. In particular, although the decline in U.S. saving may reflect changes in household behavior or economic policy in the United States, it may also be in some part a reaction to events external to the United States--a hypothesis that I will propose and defend momentarily. One popular argument for the "made in the U.S.A." explanation of declining national saving and the rising current account deficit focuses on the burgeoning U.S. federal budget deficit, which in 2004 drained more than $400 billion from the national saving pool. I will discuss the link between the budget deficit and the current account deficit in more detail later. Here I simply note that the so-called twin-deficits hypothesis, that government budget deficits cause current account deficits, does not account for the fact that the U.S. external deficit expanded by about $300 billion between 1996 and 2000, a period during which the federal budget was in surplus and projected to remain so. Nor, for that matter, does the twin-deficits hypothesis shed any light on why a number of major countries, including Germany and Japan, continue to run large current account surpluses despite government budget deficits that are similar in size (as a share of GDP) to that of the United States. It seems unlikely, therefore, that changes in the U.S. government budget position can entirely explain the behavior of the U.S. current account over the past decade. The Changing Pattern of International Capital Flows and the Global Saving Glut What then accounts for the rapid increase in the U.S. current account deficit? My own preferred explanation focuses on what I see as the emergence of a global saving glut in the past eight to ten years. This saving glut is the result of a number of developments. As I will discuss in more detail later, one well-understood source of the saving glut is the strong saving motive of rich countries with aging populations, which must make provision for an impending sharp increase in the number of retirees relative to the number of workers. With slowly growing or declining workforces, as well as high capital-labor ratios, many advanced economies outside the United States also face an apparent dearth of domestic investment opportunities. As a consequence of high desired saving and the low prospective returns to domestic investment, the mature industrial economies as a group seek to run current account surpluses and thus to lend abroad. Although strong saving motives on the part of many industrial economies contribute to the global saving glut, the saving behavior of these countries does not explain much of the increase in desired global saving in the past decade. Indeed, in a number of these countries--Japan is one example--household saving has declined recently. As we will see, a possibly more important source of the rise in the global supply of saving is the recent metamorphosis of the developing world from a net user to a net supplier of funds to international capital markets. Table 1 provides a basis for a discussion of recent changes in global saving and financial flows by showing current account balances for different countries and regions, in billions of U.S. dollars, for the years 1996 (just before the U.S. current account deficit began to balloon), 2000, and 2004. I should note that these current account balances of necessity reflect realized patterns of investment and saving rather than changes in the rates of investment and saving desired from an ex ante perspective. Nevertheless, changes in the pattern of current account balances together with knowledge of changes in real interest rates should provide useful clues about shifts in the global supply of and demand for saving. Table 1. Global Current Account Balances, 1996, 2000, and 2004 (Billions of U.S. dollars) Countries 1996 2000 2004 Industrial 41.5 -331.4 -400.3 United States -120.2 -413.4 -665.9 Japan 65.7 119.6 171.8 Euro Area 78.5 -71.7 53.0 France 20.5 18.3 -5.1 Germany -14.1 -29.3 104.3 Italy 39.6 -5.7 -13.7 Spain 0.5 -19.3 -49.4 Other 17.5 34.2 40.8 Australia -15.8 -15.4 -39.6 Canada 3.4 19.6 25.9 Switzerland 21.3 30.6 46.0 United Kingdom -10.8 -36.2 -46.9 Developing -90.4 131.2 326.4 Asia -40.6 86.8 179.5 China 7.2 20.5 55.5 Hong Kong -2.6 7.1 16.0 Korea -23.1 12.3 27.6 Taiwan 10.9 8.9 19.0 Thailand -14.4 9.3 7.3 Latin America -39.4 -47.9 8.5 Argentina -6.8 -9.0 3.0 Brazil -23.2 -24.2 11.7 Mexico -2.5 -18.5 -8.6 Middle East and Africa 1.1 74.5 116.4 E. Europe and the former Soviet Union -13.5 16.8 12.0 Statistical Discrepancy 48.9 200.2 73.9 Figures for 2000 and 2004 taken from the European Central Bank Monthly Bulletin , various issues, and converted to dollars. Figure for 1996 calculated as sum of member country current accounts. Figure for 2004 taken from the IMF World Economic Outlook , April 2005. The table confirms the sharp increase in the U.S. current account deficit, about $546 billion between 1996 and 2004. In principle, the current account positions of the world's nations should sum to zero (although, in practice, data collection problems lead to a statistical discrepancy, shown in the last row of table 1). The $546 billion increase in the U.S. current account deficit between 1996 and 2004 must therefore have been matched by a shift toward surplus of equal magnitude in other countries. Which countries experienced this change? As we can infer from table 1, most of the swing toward surplus did not occur in the other industrial countries as a whole (although some individual industrial countries did experience large moves toward surplus, as we will see). The collective current account of the industrial countries declined more than $441 billion between 1996 and 2004, implying that, of the $548 billion increase in the U.S. current account deficit, only about $106 billion was offset by increased surpluses in other industrial countries. As table 1 shows, the bulk of the increase in the U.S. current account deficit was balanced by changes in the current account positions of developing countries, which moved from a collective deficit of $90 billion to a surplus of $326 billion--a net change of $416 billion-- between 1996 and 2004. This remarkable change in the current account balances of developing countries raises at least three questions. First, what events or factors induced this change? Second, what causal relationship (if any) exists between this change and current-account developments in the United States and in other industrial countries? Third, to the extent that the movement toward surplus in developing-country current accounts has had a differential impact on the United States relative to other industrial countries, what accounts for the difference? In my view, a key reason for the change in the current account positions of developing countries is the series of financial crises those countries experienced in the past decade or so. In the mid-1990s, most developing countries were net importers of capital; as table 1 shows, in 1996 emerging Asia and Latin America borrowed about $80 billion on net on world capital markets. These capital inflows were not always productively used. In some cases, for example, developing-country governments borrowed to avoid necessary fiscal consolidation; in other cases, opaque and poorly governed banking systems failed to allocate those funds to the projects promising the highest returns. Loss of lender confidence, together with other factors such as overvalued fixed exchange rates and debt that was both short-term and denominated in foreign currencies, ultimately culminated in painful financial crises, including those in Mexico in 1994, in a number of East Asian countries in 1997-98, in Russia in 1998, in Brazil in 1999, and in Argentina in 2002. The effects of these crises included rapid capital outflows, currency depreciation, sharp declines in domestic asset prices, weakened banking systems, and recession. In response to these crises, emerging-market nations either chose or were forced into new strategies for managing international capital flows. In general, these strategies involved shifting from being net importers of financial capital to being net exporters, in some cases very large net exporters. For example, in response to instability of capital flows and the exchange rate, some East Asian countries, such as Korea and Thailand, began to build up large quantities of foreign-exchange reserves and continued to do so even after the constraints imposed by the halt to capital inflows from global financial markets were relaxed. Increases in foreign-exchange reserves necessarily involve a shift toward surplus in the country's current account, increases in gross capital inflows, reductions in gross private capital outflows, or some combination of these elements. As table 1 shows, current account surpluses have been an important source of reserve accumulation in East Asia. Countries in the region that had escaped the worst effects of the crisis but remained concerned about future crises, notably China, also built up reserves. These "war chests" of foreign reserves have been used as a buffer against potential capital outflows. Additionally, reserves were accumulated in the context of foreign exchange interventions intended to promote export-led growth by preventing exchange-rate appreciation (Dooley, Folkerts-Landau, and Garber, 2004). Countries typically pursue export-led growth because domestic demand is thought to be insufficient to employ fully domestic resources. Following the 1997-98 financial crisis, many of the East Asian countries seeking to stimulate their exports had high domestic rates of saving and, relative to historical norms, depressed levels of domestic capital investment--also consistent, of course, with strengthened current accounts. In practice, these countries increased reserves through the expedient of issuing debt to their citizens, thereby mobilizing domestic saving, and then using the proceeds to buy U.S. Treasury securities and other assets. Effectively, governments have acted as financial intermediaries, channeling domestic saving away from local uses and into international capital markets. A related strategy has focused on reducing the burden of external debt by attempting to pay down those obligations, with the funds coming from a combination of reduced fiscal deficits and increased domestic debt issuance. Of necessity, this strategy also pushed emerging-market economies toward current account surpluses. Again, the shifts in current accounts in East Asia and Latin America are evident in the data for the regions and for individual countries shown in table 1. Another factor that has contributed to the swing toward current-account surplus among the non-industrialized nations in the past few years is the sharp rise in oil prices. The current account surpluses of oil exporters, notably in the Middle East but also in countries such as Russia, Nigeria, and Venezuela, have risen as oil revenues have surged. For example, as table 1 shows, the collective current account surplus of the Middle East and Africa rose more than $115 billion between 1996 and 2004. In short, events since the mid-1990s have led to a large change in the collective current account position of the developing world, implying that many developing and emerging-market countries are now large net lenders rather than net borrowers on international financial markets. Of course, developing countries as a group can increase their current account surpluses only if the industrial countries reduce their current accounts accordingly. How did this occur? Little evidence supports the view that the motivation to save has declined substantially in the industrial countries in recent years; indeed, as I have noted already, demographic factors should lead the industrial countries to try to save more, not less. Instead, the requisite shift in the collective external position of the industrial countries was facilitated by adjustments in asset prices and exchange rates, although the pattern of asset-price changes was somewhat different before and after 2000. From about 1996 to early 2000, equity prices played a key equilibrating role in international financial markets. The development and adoption of new technologies and rising productivity in the United States--together with the country's long-standing advantages such as low political risk, strong property rights, and a good regulatory environment--made the U.S. economy exceptionally attractive to international investors during that period. Consequently, capital flowed rapidly into the United States, helping to fuel large appreciations in stock prices and in the value of the dollar. Stock indexes rose in other industrial countries as well, although stock-market capitalization per capita is significantly lower in those countries than in the United States. The current account positions of the industrial countries adjusted endogenously to these changes in financial market conditions. I will focus here on the case of the United States, which bore the bulk of the adjustment. From the trade perspective, higher stock-market wealth increased the willingness of U.S. consumers to spend on goods and services, including large quantities of imports, while the strong dollar made U.S. imports cheap (in terms of dollars) and exports expensive (in terms of foreign currencies), creating a rising trade imbalance. From the saving-investment perspective, the U.S. current account deficit rose as capital investment increased (spurred by perceived profit opportunities) at the same time that the rapid increase in household wealth and expectations of future income gains reduced U.S. residents' perceived need to save. Thus the rapid increase in the U.S. current account deficit between 1996 and 2000 was fueled to a significant extent both by increased global saving and the greater interest on the part of foreigners in investing in the United States. After the stock-market decline that began in March 2000, new capital investment and thus the demand for financing waned around the world. Yet desired global saving remained strong. The textbook analysis suggests that, with desired saving outstripping desired investment, the real rate of interest should fall to equilibrate the market for global saving. Indeed, real interest rates have been relatively low in recent years, not only in the United States but also abroad. For example, in the United States, the ten-year real interest rate implied by the prices of inflation-indexed government bonds has fallen from 4.3 percent in March 2000 to about 1.8 percent today. In the United Kingdom, France, and Japan, the analogous real rates are currently about 1.8 percent, 1.4 percent and 0.4 percent, respectively. From a narrow U.S. perspective, these low long-term rates are puzzling; from a global perspective, they may be less so. The weakening of new capital investment after the drop in equity prices did not much change the net effect of the global saving glut on the U.S. current account. The transmission mechanism changed, however, as low real interest rates rather than high stock prices became a principal cause of lower U.S. saving. In particular, during the past few years, the key asset-price effects of the global saving glut appear to have occurred in the market for residential investment, as low mortgage rates have supported record levels of home construction and strong gains in housing prices. Indeed, increases in home values, together with a stock-market recovery that began in 2003, have recently returned the wealth-to-income ratio of U.S. households to 5.4, not far from its peak value of 6.2 in 1999 and above its long-run (1960-2003) average of 4.8. The expansion of U.S. housing wealth, much of it easily accessible to households through cash-out refinancing and home equity lines of credit, has kept the U.S. national saving rate low--and indeed, together with the significant worsening of the federal budget outlook, helped to drive it lower. As U.S. business investment has recently begun a cyclical recovery while residential investment has remained strong, the domestic saving shortfall has continued to widen, implying a rise in the current account deficit and increasing dependence of the United States on capital inflows. According to the story I have sketched thus far, events outside U.S. borders--such as the financial crises that induced emerging-market countries to switch from being international borrowers to international lenders--have played an important role in the evolution of the U.S. current account deficit, with transmission occurring primarily through endogenous changes in equity values, house prices, real interest rates, and the exchange value of the dollar. One might ask why the current-account effects of the increase in desired global saving were felt disproportionately in the United States relative to other industrial countries. The attractiveness of the United States as an investment destination during the technology boom of the 1990s and the depth and sophistication of the country's financial markets (which, among other things, have allowed households easy access to housing wealth) have certainly been important. Another factor is the special international status of the U.S. dollar. Because the dollar is the leading international reserve currency, and because some emerging-market countries use the dollar as a reference point when managing the values of their own currencies, the saving flowing out of the developing world has been directed relatively more into dollar-denominated assets, such as U.S. Treasury securities. The effects of the saving outflow may thus have been felt disproportionately on U.S. interest rates and the dollar. For example, the dollar probably strengthened more in the latter 1990s than it would have if it had not been the principal reserve currency, enhancing the effect on the U.S. current account. Most interesting, however, is that the experience of the United States in recent years is not so nearly unique among industrial countries as one might think initially. As shown in table 1, a number of key industrial countries other than the United States have seen their current accounts move substantially toward deficit since 1996, including France, Italy, Spain, Australia, and the United Kingdom. The principal exceptions to this trend among the major industrial countries are Germany and Japan, both of which saw substantial increases in their current account balances between 1996 and 2004. A key difference between the two groups of countries is that the countries whose current accounts have moved toward deficit have generally experienced substantial housing appreciation and increases in household wealth, while Germany and Japan--whose economies have been growing slowly despite very low interest rates--have not. For example, since 1996 wealth-to-income ratios have risen by 14 percent in France, 12 percent in Italy, and 27 percent in the United Kingdom; each of these countries has seen their current account move toward deficit, as already noted. By contrast, wealth-to-income ratios in Germany and Japan have remained flat. The evident link between rising household wealth and a tendency for the current account to shift toward deficit is consistent with the mechanism that I have described today. Economic and Policy Implications I have presented today a somewhat unconventional explanation of the high and rising U.S. current account deficit. That explanation holds that one of the factors driving recent developments in the U.S. current account has been the very substantial shift in the current accounts of developing and emerging-market nations, a shift that has transformed these countries from net borrowers on international capital markets to large net lenders. This shift by developing nations, together with the high saving propensities of Germany, Japan, and some other major industrial nations, has resulted in a global saving glut. This increased supply of saving boosted U.S. equity values during the period of the stock market boom and helped to increase U.S. home values during the more recent period, as a consequence lowering U.S. national saving and contributing to the nation's rising current account deficit. From a global perspective, are these developments economically beneficial or harmful? Certainly they have had some benefits. Most obviously, the developing and emerging-market countries that brought their current accounts into surplus did so to reduce their foreign debts, stabilize their currencies, and reduce the risk of financial crisis. Most countries have been largely successful in meeting each of these objectives. Thus, the shift of these economies from borrower to lender status has provided at least a short-term palliative for some of the problems they faced in the 1990s. In the longer term, however, the current pattern of international capital flows--should it persist--could prove counterproductive. Most important, for the developing world to be lending large sums on net to the mature industrial economies is quite undesirable as a long-run proposition. Relative to their counterparts in the developing world, workers in industrial countries have large quantities of high-quality capital with which to work. Moreover, as I have already noted, the populations of most of these countries are both growing slowly and aging rapidly, implying that ratios of retirees to workers will rise sharply in coming decades. For example, in the United States, for every 100 people between the ages of 20 and 64, there are currently about 21 people aged 65 or older. According to United Nations projections, by 2030 the population of the United States will include about 34 people aged 65 or over for each 100 people in the 20-64 age range; for the Euro area and Japan, the analogous numbers in 2030 will be 46 and 57, respectively. Over the remainder of the century, the populations of other major industrial countries will age much more quickly than that of the United States. In 2050, for example, the number of retirees for each 100 working-age people in the United States should be about the same as in 2030, about 34, but the number of retirees per 100 working-age people is projected to increase to about 60 in the Euro area and about 78 in Japan. We see that many of the major industrial countries--particularly Japan and some countries in Western Europe--have both strong reasons to save (to help support future retirees) and increasingly limited investment opportunities at home (because workforces are shrinking and capital-labor ratios are already high). In contrast, most developing countries have younger and more-rapidly growing workforces, as well as relatively low ratios of capital to labor, conditions that imply that the returns to capital in those countries may potentially be quite high. Basic economic logic thus suggests that, in the longer term, the industrial countries as a group should be running current account surpluses and lending on net to the developing world, not the other way around. If financial capital were to flow in this "natural" direction, savers in the industrial countries would potentially earn higher returns and enjoy increased diversification, and borrowers in the developing world would have the funds to make the capital investments needed to promote growth and higher living standards. Of course, to ensure that capital flows to developing countries yield these benefits, the developing countries would need to make further progress toward improving conditions for investment, as I will discuss further in a bit. A second issue concerns the uses of international credit in the United States and other industrial countries with external deficits. Because investment by businesses in equipment and structures has been relatively low in recent years (for cyclical and other reasons) and because the tax and financial systems in the United States and many other countries are designed to promote homeownership, much of the recent capital inflow into the developed world has shown up in higher rates of home construction and in higher home prices. Higher home prices in turn have encouraged households to increase their consumption. Of course, increased rates of homeownership and household consumption are both good things. However, in the long run, productivity gains are more likely to be driven by nonresidential investment, such as business purchases of new machines. The greater the extent to which capital inflows act to augment residential construction and especially current consumption spending, the greater the future economic burden of repaying the foreign debt is likely to be. A third concern with the pattern of capital flows arises from the indirect effects of those flows on the sectoral composition of the economies that receive them. In the United States, for example, the growth in export-oriented sectors such as manufacturing has been restrained by the U.S. trade imbalance (although the recent decline in the dollar has alleviated that pressure somewhat), while sectors producing nontraded goods and services, such as home construction, have grown rapidly. To repay foreign creditors, as it must someday, the United States will need large and healthy export industries. The relative shrinkage in those industries in the presence of current account deficits--a shrinkage that may well have to be reversed in the future--imposes real costs of adjustment on firms and workers in those industries. Finally, the large current account deficit of the United States, in particular, requires substantial flows of foreign financing. As I have discussed today, the underlying sources of the U.S. current account deficit appear to be medium-term or even long-term in nature, suggesting that the situation will eventually begin to improve, although a return to approximate balance may take some time. Fundamentally, I see no reason why the whole process should not proceed smoothly. However, the risk of a disorderly adjustment in financial markets always exists, and the appropriately conservative approach for policymakers is to be on guard for any such developments. What policy options exist to deal with the U.S. current account deficit? I have downplayed the role of the U.S. federal budget deficit today, and I disagree with the view, sometimes heard, that balancing the federal budget by itself would largely defuse the current account issue. In particular, to the extent that a reduction in the federal budget resulted in lower interest rates, the principal effects might be increased consumption and investment spending at home rather than a lower current account deficit. Indeed, a recent study suggests that a $1.00 reduction in the federal budget deficit would cause the current account deficit to decline less than $0.20 (Erceg, Guerrieri, and Gust, 2005). These results imply that even if we could balance the federal budget tomorrow, the medium-term effect would likely be to reduce the current account deficit by less than one percentage point of GDP. Although I do not believe that plausible near-term changes in the federal budget would eliminate the current account deficit, I should stress that reducing the federal budget deficit is still a good idea. Although the effects on the current account of reining in the budget deficit would likely be relatively modest, at least the direction is right. Moreover, there are other good reasons to bring down the federal budget deficit, including the reduction of the debt obligations that will have to be serviced by taxpayers in the future. Similar observations apply to policy recommendations to increase household saving in the United States, for example by creating tax-favored saving vehicles. Although the effect of saving-friendly policies on the U.S. current account deficit might not be dramatic, again the direction would be right. Moreover, increasing U.S. national saving from its current low level would support productivity and wealth creation and help our society make better provision for the future. However, as I have argued today, some of the key reasons for the large U.S. current account deficit are external to the United States, implying that purely inward-looking policies are unlikely to resolve this issue. Thus a more direct approach is to help and encourage developing countries to re-enter international capital markets in their more natural role as borrowers, rather than as lenders. For example, developing countries could improve their investment climates by continuing to increase macroeconomic stability, strengthen property rights, reduce corruption, and remove barriers to the free flow of financial capital. Providing assistance to developing countries in strengthening their financial institutions--for example, by improving bank regulation and supervision and by increasing financial transparency--could lessen the risk of financial crises and thus increase both the willingness of those countries to accept capital inflows and the willingness of foreigners to invest there. Financial liberalization is a particularly attractive option, as it would help both to permit capital inflows to find the highest-return uses and, by easing borrowing constraints, to spur domestic consumption. Other changes will occur naturally over time. For example, the pace at which emerging-market countries are accumulating international reserves should slow as they increasingly perceive their reserves to be adequate and as they move toward more flexible exchange rates. Domestic investment in East Asia and in other emerging markets will eventually recover from depressed post-crisis levels, reducing surplus saving. The various factors underlying the U.S. current account deficit--both domestic and international--are likely to unwind only gradually, however. Thus, we probably have little choice except to be patient as we work to create the conditions in which a greater share of global saving can be redirected away from the United States and toward the rest of the world--particularly the developing nations. References Dooley, Michael, David Folkerts-Landau, and Peter Garber (2004). " ," National Bureau of Economic Research working paper 10626 (July). Erceg, Christopher, Luca Guerrieri, and Christopher Gust (2005). " " International Finance Discussion Paper 2005-825. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (January). Greenspan, Alan (2005). " ." Speech at Advancing Enterprise 2005 Conference, London, February 4. Footnotes As U.S. capital outflows in 2004 totaled $818 billion, gross financing needs exceeded $1.4 trillion. I thank , , Linda Kole, and of the Board's staff for excellent assistance. For simplicity, I will use the term "net foreign borrowing" to refer to the financing of the current account deficit, though strictly speaking this financing involves the sale of foreign and domestic assets as well as the issuance of debt securities to foreigners. As illustrated by the data in footnote 1, U.S. gross foreign borrowing is much larger than net foreign borrowing, as gross borrowing must be sufficient to offset not only the deficit in current payments but also U.S. capital outflows. This definition of capital investment ignores many less tangible forms of investment, such as research and development expenditures. It also ignores investment in human capital, such as educational expenses. Using a more inclusive definition of investment could well change our perceptions of U.S. saving and investment trends quite substantially. I will leave that topic for another day. The Bureau of Economic Analysis treats government investment--in roads or schools, for instance--as part of national saving in the national income accounts. Thus, strictly speaking, national saving is reduced by the government deficit net of government investment, not by the entire government deficit. The difference between domestic investment and national saving is not affected by this qualification, however, as government investment and the implied adjustment to national saving cancel each other out. By "high desired saving" I mean a supply schedule for saving that is shifted far to the right. Actual or realized saving depends on the equilibrium values of the real interest rate and other economic variables. Capital overhang, weak corporate balance sheets, and high levels of nonperforming bank loans--products of the financial crises--help to explain the decline in domestic investment in much of East Asia. In pointing out the possible effects of strong global saving on real interest rates, I do not mean to rule out other factors. For example, a lowering of risk premiums resulting from increased macroeconomic and monetary stability has likely played some role. Greenspan (2005) notes a strong correlation between U.S. mortgage debt and the U.S. current account deficit. These data are from Annex Table 58, OECD , vol. 76, 2004, p. 226. The latest year for which data are available is 2003 for Germany and the United Kingdom, 2002 for France, Italy, and Japan. China is an important exception to the generalization that developing countries have young populations. The country's fertility rate has declined since the 1970s, and its elderly dependency ratio is expected to exceed that of the United States by midcentury. Industrial 41.5 -331.4 -400.3 United States -120.2 -413.4 -665.9 Japan 65.7 119.6 171.8 Euro Area 78.5 -71.7 53.0 France 20.5 18.3 -5.1 Germany -14.1 -29.3 104.3 Italy 39.6 -5.7 -13.7 Spain 0.5 -19.3 -49.4 Other 17.5 34.2 40.8 Australia -15.8 -15.4 -39.6 Canada 3.4 19.6 25.9 Switzerland 21.3 30.6 46.0 United Kingdom -10.8 -36.2 -46.9 Developing -90.4 131.2 326.4 Asia -40.6 86.8 179.5 China 7.2 20.5 55.5 Hong Kong -2.6 7.1 16.0 Korea -23.1 12.3 27.6 Taiwan 10.9 8.9 19.0 Thailand -14.4 9.3 7.3 Latin America -39.4 -47.9 8.5 Argentina -6.8 -9.0 3.0 Brazil -23.2 -24.2 11.7 Mexico -2.5 -18.5 -8.6 Middle East and Africa 1.1 74.5 116.4 E. Europe and the former Soviet Union -13.5 16.8 12.0 Statistical Discrepancy 48.9 200.2 73.9
No content found
No content found
Remarks by Governor Susan Schmidt Bies At the Canisius College Richard J. Wehle School of Business Community Business Luncheon, Buffalo, New York April 18, 2005 The Economy and Managing Personal Finances I am very pleased to join you. Today I want to begin with a brief assessment of the economic outlook before discussing financial conditions of businesses and households in more detail. Then, I will turn to some issues related to the management of personal credit and savings and the greater need that consumers have to improve their understanding of financial services and providers as the financial marketplace has expanded. I also need to add that I am expressing my own opinions, which are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors or on the Federal Open Market Committee. The Economic Outlook As you know, the economy has been expanding at a solid pace lately. Real gross domestic product grew at an annual rate of 3-3/4 percent in the fourth quarter and growth in the first quarter looks to have remained solid. Labor markets have continued to improve, albeit at a slow pace, with private nonfarm payroll employment posting moderate gains in 2004 and in the first three months of this year. Business outlays for capital equipment grew robustly in the past two quarters. Consumer spending also has continued to expand, although higher energy prices may be crimping household purchases recently. Consumer and business confidence remain favorable, despite a slight dip in consumer sentiment in early April, and, with accommodative financial conditions, I expect that the economy will continue to expand at a solid pace this year. On the inflation front, broad measures of consumer inflation have risen somewhat faster than they did in the year-earlier period, boosted by higher energy prices. Focusing on the core price index, which excludes food and energy, it too has been a bit higher than it was the year before, likely reflecting the indirect effects of rising energy prices and the falling dollar. Productivity is slowing from its exceptional pace of the past couple years and unit labor costs are again increasing. Though inflation pressures have risen somewhat in recent months, longer-term inflation expectations appear to have remained well contained. I believe that, while underlying inflation is expected to continue to be low, the Federal Reserve must be more alert to monitoring incoming data, and continue to remove policy accommodation at a measured pace, consistent with the incoming data and its commitment to maintain price stability. Financial Conditions of Businesses Business expansion solidified last year and continued growth by businesses will depend in part on their financial conditions. So let me take a few minutes to review the financial position of the business sector, and especially the dramatic improvement from a few years ago. Since 2001, firms have improved their balance sheet liquidity, reduced leverage, and restructured their liabilities, responding in part to investors' concerns arising from some high-profile unanticipated meltdowns in the early part of this decade. In addition, firms have significantly cut costs through dramatic gains in productivity, which has boosted profits. In my view, even with a rise in interest rates and some moderation in profit growth, the business sector should remain financially strong and continue to expand. The improvement in corporate balance sheets in the past few years has been substantial. Most noteworthy are the gains achieved in balance sheet liquidity. Firms have taken advantage of low long-term interest rates to pay down short-term debt with longer-maturity debt. At the same time, firms have built up their cash positions to extraordinary levels. At the end of last year, the ratio of cash and equivalents to short-term debt at nonfinancial corporations stood at about twice its average level since the 1950s. In addition, many firms have taken advantage of low long-term interest rates to refinance high-cost debt, and others have used profits from operations or asset sales to retire debt. As a result, interest expense burdens have declined on balance and nonfinancial corporate debt has grown only modestly in recent years, its slowest pace since the early 1990s. These repairs to balance sheets have also reduced the exposure of many firms to rising interest rates, especially in the near term. In particular, the replacement of short-term debt by long-term bonds means that less debt will have to be rolled over in the near term at higher rates. In addition, because much of the long-term debt has a fixed rate, interest payments typically are unaffected over the life of the bond. Moreover, research by the Board staff suggests that firms that rely more on floating-rate debt, and for that reason might be more vulnerable to rising rates, have in recent years tended to use derivatives to hedge some of their exposure to interest rate risk. Thus, for many firms, the effect of rising interest rates will be mitigated and spread out over time. Also, as we learned from the episode of policy tightening in 1994, rising interest rates have little detrimental effect on the financial health of the corporate sector when the rate increases occur in the context of an expanding economy. Indeed, corporate credit quality improved on balance after 1994 with the pickup in economic activity and corporate profits. Some of the improvement in financial conditions among businesses is due to significant belt-tightening by many firms. Over the past few years, the drive to cut costs and boost efficiency has generated rapid productivity gains. Fuller utilization of the capabilities of capital already in place, ongoing improvements in inventory management, and streamlined production processes requiring fewer workers, to name but a few examples of efficiency enhancements, have boosted corporate profitability. The pickup in revenue growth since mid-2002, combined with outsized productivity gains, has produced a dramatic recovery in overall corporate profitability. The profits of nonfinancial corporations as a share of sector output continued to climb and reached almost 12 percent in the fourth quarter of last year, up from its cyclical trough of 7 percent in 2001. This share lies well above its long-run average over the past few decades. To be sure, the profit share likely will slip a bit from its high level as the expansion gains steam and businesses hire new workers more aggressively. But some decline in the profit share is to be expected and will not, in my view, significantly impair the financial health of companies. This favorable view is reflected in risk spreads on corporate bonds and credit default swaps, which have dropped dramatically from their historic highs in the fall of 2002. Household Financial Conditions In the household sector, some analysts have expressed concern about the rapid growth in household debt in recent years and the decline in the household saving rate. They fear that households have become overextended and will need to rein in their spending to keep their debt burdens under control. My view is considerably more sanguine. Although pockets of financial stress exist among households, the sector as a whole appears to be in good shape. It is true that households have taken on quite a bit of debt over the past several years. According to the latest available data, total household debt grew at an annual rate of about 10 percent between 1999 and 2004; in comparison, after-tax household income increased at a rate of about 5 percent over this period. This rapid growth in household debt largely reflects a surge in mortgage borrowing, which has been fueled by historically low mortgage interest rates, strong growth in house prices, and an increasing share of households owning their home rather than renting. Indeed, many homeowners have taken advantage of low interest rates to refinance their mortgages, some having done so several times over the past couple years. Survey data suggest that homeowners took out cash in more than one-half of these "refis," often to pay down loans having higher interest rates. On net, the resulting drop in the average interest rate on household borrowings, combined with the lengthening maturity of their total debt, has damped the monthly payments made by homeowners on their growing stock of outstanding debt. The Federal Reserve publishes two data series that quantify the burden of household obligations. The first series, the debt-service ratio, measures the required payments on mortgage and consumer debt as a share of after-tax personal income. The second series, the financial-obligations ratio, is a broader version of the debt-service ratio that includes required household payments on rent, auto leases, homeowners insurance, and property taxes. Both ratios rose during the 1990s, and both reached a peak in late 2002. Since then, however, the debt-service ratio has been stable and the financial obligations ratio has receded a bit, an indication that households, in the aggregate, have been keeping an eye on their financial commitments. Consistent with these patterns, delinquency rates for a wide range of household loans either have drifted down over the past year or held about steady at levels below recent highs. The low interest rates of the past few years, however, will give way as the economy continues to expand, and we have already seen an increase in mortgage rates and on some other consumer loans during this past year. To be sure, some households will be pressured by the higher rates, but I believe that concerns about their effect on repayment burdens can be overstated. First, most household debt--mortgage and consumer debt combined--carries a fixed interest rate, which slows the adjustment of interest costs to rising rates. Second, although interest rates on some variable-rate loans will rise quickly, the adjustment for a large number of variable-rate loans could occur rather slowly. For example, many adjustable-rate mortgages start off with a fixed rate for several years, providing households with some protection from rising rates. Another concern is that house prices will reverse and erase a considerable amount of home equity built up in recent years. Recent gains in house prices have been notable: the average house price rose 11 percent in 2004, and cumulative gains since 1997 now top 65 percent. Despite a rise in mortgage debt, the current loan-to-value ratio for outstanding mortgages is estimated to be around 45 percent, roughly the level that has prevailed since the mid-1990s. It is true that some households have considerably less equity in their homes, and these households tend to have lower income and fewer other financial assets to cushion shocks. Based on the 2001 Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF), a small share, 7 percent, of households had a loan-to-value ratio of 90 percent or more. Unfortunately, we cannot characterize the current share as accurately, at least not until the 2004 survey becomes available later this year, but it is unlikely that the share has risen by a lot. While new originations of mortgages with high loan-to-value ratios in recent years would push this share up, the substantial house price appreciation in that same period likely improved the financial positions of the households with high loan-to-value ratios in 2001. However, we are beginning to see signs that housing prices may be reaching a peak in some markets. An increasing share of new mortgages is being taken out by investors rather than by occupants of the property. Some borrowers are stretching to buy their new homes using adjustable-rate, interest-only mortgages. Not only will these households face higher monthly payments as interest rates rise, they are also not building equity in their homes as quickly as they would with a traditional amortizing mortgage. Some analysts have also expressed concerns about the decline in the personal saving rate. Aggregate personal saving, measured by the Bureau of Economic Analysis, averaged just above 1 percent of disposable income in 2004, more than 6 percentage points lower than the average that has prevailed since the early 1960s. The saving rate, measured by the Board's flow of funds accounts, is higher, at 4 percent of disposable income, though it, too, is significantly lower than its average level in the past. Analysis by Board staff using data from the SCF indicate that households in the top income quintile can account for nearly all of the decline in the aggregate saving rate since 1989. Given that these higher-income households have more financial resources to weather shocks, the significant decline in savings is less troublesome than if it had occurred in the lower part of the income distribution. This comparison points out two different perspectives on household financial health. While analysts usually focus on the saving rate as a share of current income and funds flow, some argue that a more relevant measure of saving adequacy is not the portion of current income set aside for saving but rather the change in net worth. And in this regard, the picture of household saving looks more favorable than suggested by the saving rate. The ratio of net worth-to-disposable income has come down from its peak in 2000, but remains at a high level relative to the past few decades, because capital appreciation on household assets, such as equities and real estate, has considerably outpaced income gains. This is a passive perspective on savings, though, where households rely on the markets to raise the value of their assets over time. But, to create these assets, households need to consistently set aside some of their current earnings to invest for their future needs. While the experience of the past few years of exceptionally low interest rates and lower expected stock returns encouraged a rational consumer to spend and not save, as the markets return to more long-term trends, we should see consumers moderate their behavior as well. Managing Personal Finances I now want to turn from an aggregate view of household finances to savings and credit at the individual level. In particular, I want to discuss issues relating to managing personal finances, including managing personal credit and saving for retirement, and the special importance of financial education. College graduates preparing to enter the labor force will soon assume a new level of responsibility for managing their finances. Personal financial management includes the strategic use of both credit and savings to enhance asset accumulation and financial well being. Just as the choices that students have made regarding their education play a vital role in determining career opportunities, the decisions they make and behaviors they establish regarding financial management in the coming years will also impact future opportunities and their ability to capitalize on them. Compared to a generation ago, the financial marketplace of today is significantly more complex. There is now an extensive range of consumer financial products and services, and providers of these goods and services. Advances in communications technologies and other technological tools have dramatically broadened the provision of financial services. For example, the development of sophisticated credit-scoring models permits lenders to more efficiently evaluate credit risk and underwrite loans and thus provide a broader array of loans to more closely meet the specific financial needs of different consumers. In addition, as workers have become more mobile and more likely to change jobs several times over the course of their careers, they have increased their demand for retirement savings vehicles that are portable and have benefits that are less tied to longevity at a single firm. These developments have increased the opportunity for consumers to build their asset base through education and home ownership, exercise greater control over their retirement savings, as well as acquire at lower cost the goods and services that enhance daily life. With this increased access and availability of financial products, consumers also have to assume greater personal responsibility for managing the use of credit and their financial outcomes. As I have already noted, in the aggregate, household debt has grown more rapidly than income in recent years. Of special relevance to this audience is that the increase in consumer debt loads in recent years is particularly apparent among younger adults. The majority of this increase is attributable to student loans, with a 2002 survey by Nellie Mae indicating a 66 percent increase in the average undergraduate student loan debt from 1997. Credit card debt is another factor contributing to the increased level of debt among young adults. The Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) data shows that 18-to-24 year olds experienced on average about a 100 percent increase in credit card debt between 1992 and 2001, albeit from a small base, but still substantially higher than the rate for other households. Moreover, there are indications that some of these younger households are having difficulty managing their debt successfully. The 2001 SCF indicates that delinquency rates (one debt payment more than 60 days past due) were twice as high among households headed by someone less than 35 years old than for households in the 35-to-44-year age group. Finally, surveys continue to indicate that many workers are not currently saving for retirement, and many that are saving, by their own calculations, are not saving enough. Clearly, these statistics are sobering and raise some concerns about financial security. In recognition of the reality of both the promises and pitfalls of the consumer finance market, there has been a heightened appreciation for consumer protection. Lawmakers and regulators are mindful of the possibility of abusive and fraudulent credit practices, commonly known as predatory lending, and have undertaken efforts to thwart such activity. In addition, employers have adopted strategies through plan design and education programs to encourage retirement savings of its workers. But consumers cannot rely solely on the efforts of others for financial security. They need to develop an understanding of the available options and be able to comprehend the implications of their financing and savings decisions. Indeed, lawmakers, regulators, and employers look to consumer savvy to promote efficiency in the consumer financial services industry. In recent years, surveys and other studies that evaluate the understanding of financial concepts have demonstrated the need for improved financial education, especially among younger consumers. One nonprofit organization dedicated to increasing financial education for youth, the Jump$tart Coalition, has conducted a survey of financial literacy of high school seniors every two years since 1997. Overall, the results have been disappointing: Results from the 2004 survey showed more than 65 percent of students failed the survey's questionnaire, with only 6 percent scoring a "C" or better. In terms of credit card usage by college students, a Government Accountability Office (GAO) study found that students were more likely than other borrowers to run up debts they could not pay because of financial inexperience. In recognition of this behavior, many credit card issuers provided access to financial education materials, and debt counseling services for students who faced repayment difficulties, but the GAO did not try to determine the effectiveness of these education efforts. Some preliminary research by others suggests some possible benefits from online credit education tutorials to college student cardholders, but it is possible that more responsible usage only reflects the type of student who would participate in the tutorial. Clearly, more research is needed to assess the efficacy of consumer education, and the Federal Reserve System has been an active promoter. In fact, the System hosted a conference in early April on consumer financial awareness, including a session on the efficiency of delivering financial education to consumers. So what resources are available to consumers to help them become sufficiently familiar with financial concepts to make sound financial decisions? Many public, private, and nonprofit organizations have developed a variety of financial education programs, and many are available on the Internet. These educational materials address the full range of personal financial management, from the essential fundamentals of creating a budget and defining specific savings plans to understanding more complex transactions, such as applying for mortgage credit. Valuable information on consumer protection matters is also available, concerning the rights of consumers if a credit or ATM card is stolen or if they are a victim of identity theft. Similarly, many federal agencies publish a variety of consumer protection and financial education materials. In fact, the Federal Reserve System offers a wide variety of consumer information relating to financial services on its web site. In addition, the Federal Reserve launched a national personal financial education campaign in 2001 to promote the importance of financial education, as well as to provide support for the wide variety of resources committed to this topic. In addition, in recognition of the importance of financial education, Congress established the Financial Literacy and Education Commission in 2003. This Commission, headed by the Treasury Department, is composed of the heads of twenty federal agencies, including the Federal Reserve Board, to encourage collaboration and coordination of government and private-sector efforts to promote financial literacy. The Commission is also charged with establishing a web site and toll-free number for obtaining financial education resources offered by the government resources, as well as for developing a national strategy for promoting financial literacy and education. Under the direction of the Treasury Department, interagency task forces have worked to streamline access to the wide variety of consumer information and financial education materials offered by government agencies. These resources are available on the Internet at . Consumers can also call 1-888-MYMONEY to obtain a tool kit of financial education information that can assist them in understanding credit, savings, and investment products before they become obligated, and provide a foundation for shopping for financial products and providers that are most appropriate for their circumstances and needs. By obtaining a firm grasp of the fundamentals of financial management, consumers can create savings and spending plans that are compatible with their earnings throughout their lives and that help them meet their short- and long-term life goals. Turning to retirement savings in particular, workers entering the labor force today will bear more of the risk of financial security later in life than workers of a generation ago. Far fewer workers will be covered by defined-benefit pension plans established by their employers, which provide pre-set benefits after retirement. Data from the SCF indicate that among workers with a retirement savings plan, nearly 60 percent of workers aged 25 to 34 were covered by a defined-benefit plan in 1989; by 2001, this share had declined to 31 percent. Instead the vast majority of employees with retirement benefits will be offered the opportunity to contribute to a defined-contribution pension plan, most likely a 401(k) plan, which allows workers to take their retirement assets with them as they change jobs over the course of their careers. Under a typical 401(k) plan, retirement wealth will depend primarily on workers' own contributions, often supplemented with some matching contributions by the employer, returns realized on the investments chosen, and what workers choose to do with balances when they change jobs. However, studies have found some troubling patterns related to individual savings in 401(k) plans that suggest that workers may not be giving adequate attention to their retirement savings. First, despite the tax advantages of 401(k) contributions, one-quarter of workers eligible for 401(k) plans do not participate at all, even if the employer would match a portion of their own contributions. These workers are effectively giving up a pay raise. And among those that contribute, many save just a little. In a survey last year, one-quarter of firms reported that their rank-and-file 401(k) participants saved an average of less than 4 percent of pay. Another concern relates to the way employees manage their 401(k) plans. Some participants simply invest contributions equally across the investment options or according to plan defaults, which in many cases is a low-risk, low-return money market fund. And, as has been publicized widely in recent years, many 401(k) participants invest heavily in employer stock. Among companies that offer company stock as an investment option, more than one-quarter of 401(k) balances are in company stock. This high concentration cannot be attributed entirely to an employer match that is required to be held in company stock. Instead, employees appear to voluntarily purchase and hold abundant amounts of company stock, despite the obvious risk of linking their current income and retirement wealth to the financial health of their employer. These patterns are troubling because they raise doubts about the financial security of workers in later life. Fortunately, new research in the discipline of behavioral finance provides some important insights into the behavior of 401(k) participants and suggests some promising changes that can lead workers to make savings choices that will leave them better prepared for retirement. Contrary to predictions of traditional finance theory, the way the retirement-plan options are framed affects the choices made by participants. Researchers have found that "opt-out" plans--those that automatically enroll workers unless they actively choose not to enroll--have substantially higher participation rates than plans in which employees must take the initiative to opt in. Moreover, when defaults are designated, many workers tend to enroll using the default contribution rates and investment options and to leave these in place for many years after enrollment, even though the default may be set too low to allow for the accumulation of sufficient retirement assets. If workers are influenced by how choices are offered, then employers can make changes to the plans to help participants make better decisions. For example, employers might set default contribution rates to rise as workers receive pay raises, or set the default investment option to a diversified portfolio that adjusts as the worker ages. In addition, employees have increasingly expressed interest in employer-provided financial education, and firms and lawmakers are responding. Congress has passed legislation that makes it easier for firms to provide investment advice with less fear of being held liable should such advice lead to losses. Some firms have started to provide access to a third-party who will advise employees about how much to contribute and how to invest their contributions. Moreover, a recent study by the Employee Benefit Research Institute (EBRI ) suggests that education about retirement planning provided by employers led to a substantial portion of employees altering their retirement savings. In closing, as credit availability and financial alternatives continue to expand, it has become ever-more important for consumers to develop the skills necessary to make informed financial choices. I encourage prospective graduates to place the same priority and attention to managing their personal finances as they do to developing their careers. Beginning early and remaining committed to thoughtful management of personal finances throughout one's life is an essential element to long-term financial success. Footnotes Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight . National Student Loan Survey - Results of the 2002 National Student Loan Survey, February 2003. Draut, Tamara and Silva, Javier, Demos: A Network for Ideas and Action, October 2004. Aizcorbe, Ana; Kennickell, Arthur, and Moore, Kevin, Employee Benefit Research Institute, April 2004. Government Accountability Office, June 2001. Kimberly Gartner and Richard M. Todd (2005), presented at Federal Reserve System Community Affairs Research Conference, April 7-8, 2005. Deloitte and Touche, Deloitte and Touche, 2003 401(k) Annual Benchmarking Survey. Nellie Liang and Scott Weisbenner (2001), FEDS Working Paper 2002-36 and NBER Working Paper W9131; James Choi, David Laibson, Brigitte Madrian, and Andrew Metrick (2001), NBER Working Paper W8651. Sarah Holden and Jack VanDerhei (2004), ICI Perspective (August). Brigitte Madrian and Dennis Shea (2001), Quarterly Journal of Economics. James Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte Madrian (2004), NBER Working Paper W10486. Shlomo Benartzi and Richard Thaler (2004), "Save More Tomorrow: Using Behavioral Economics to Increase Employee Saving," Journal of Political Economy.
No content found
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the approval of the application of Banco Financiera Comercial Hondureña, S.A., Tegucigalpa, Honduras, to establish a representative office in Miami, Florida. Attached is the Order relating to this action.
Testimony of Louise L. Roseman Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems Recent developments in the payments system Before the Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit, Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives April 20, 2005 Mr. Chairman, Ranking Minority Member, and Members of the Subcommittee, I appreciate the opportunity to discuss with you the initial implementation of the Check Clearing for the 21st Century Act (Check 21) and, more broadly, implications of the greater use of electronics in the nation's payments system. The backdrop for this discussion is the declining use of checks in the United States. I will focus my remarks on the implementation of Check 21 and how it relates to the maximum permissible hold periods banks may place on check deposits before making those funds available for withdrawal. Then I will discuss electronic check conversion and related consumer protection and education efforts that the Federal Reserve has undertaken. Finally, I will look at the responses of the Federal Reserve Banks and the industry to declining check volumes. The U.S. Payments System is Becoming Increasingly Electronic The United States is in the midst of a significant shift away from the use of paper checks and toward the much greater use of electronic payments. This change is clearly evident in the Federal Reserve's recent payments research, which shows that in 2003, for the first time ever, businesses and consumers made more payments electronically than by check. By contrast, only twenty-five years ago the vast majority of consumer and business noncash payments were made by check. We estimate that the number of checks used in the United States peaked during the mid-1990s at around 50 billion per year. By 2003, the number of checks had fallen by one-quarter, to around 37 billion. This decline is continuing. In contrast, electronic payments, such as payments made by credit and debit cards or through the automated clearinghouse (ACH), have tripled, from 15 billion in the mid-1990s to 45 billion in 2003 . As technology improves and scale economies are realized, the cost of electronic payment processing decreases relative to the cost of paper processing. For example, the Federal Reserve Banks realized significant operational-cost savings as a result of centralizing their electronic payment services. Today, the Reserve Banks' cost to process an ACH transaction is less than one-fifth that of processing a check. Because the number of noncash payment transactions in the U.S. economy exceeds 80 billion per year and is growing, even small savings in processing costs per payment may have large effects on overall payments system efficiency. Over the past decade, the reductions in the processing costs for ACH have allowed the Reserve Banks to cut approximately in half the fees they charge depository institutions for providing ACH services. Over the same period, the Reserve Banks have increased the price of their more labor-intensive paper check service approximately 50 percent. So we can expect that this shift to the use of electronic technology for making payments and away from the physical handling, processing, and transportation of paper checks will translate, over time, into a reduction in the overall costs of making payments. Check 21 will Eventually Change the Way Checks are Collected The declining use of checks is only a part of the ongoing change within the payments system. How checks are collected also will evolve as a result of Check 21. This is very important legislation, which will ultimately foster fundamental changes to the check collection system that will improve the efficiency of the nation's payments system. You will recall that one of the purposes of the law was to reduce legal barriers to the use of electronic imaging and networking technologies to collect checks and to return those that are not paid. Specifically, state laws governing check collection allow banks to demand that the original checks be physically presented for payment. Although state laws typically allow banks to agree to alternative presentment arrangements, the large number of banks in the United States has made the widespread adoption of electronic check collection through industry agreements extremely difficult. While Check 21 does not mandate that checks be presented electronically or change a bank's right to demand paper, it does facilitate the adoption of check truncation and electronic collection of checks through the action of market forces. When the paying bank does not agree to receive checks electronically and demands that presentment be made by paper checks, Check 21 allows the other banks to create and present paper substitute checks that are legally equivalent to the original checks. As banks increasingly send and receive checks electronically, this new authority will reduce the handling of paper checks and enable banks to reduce their paper-check infrastructure more easily. It also will reduce the number of checks that must be flown or driven around the country to be collected or returned, which reduces transportation and other operating expenses. Of course, each bank will determine for itself which makes good business sense: adopting new technologies for sending and receiving checks electronically or continuing to demand paper. In addition, we will be monitoring the banking industry's experience with the Board's regulations implementing Check 21. We believe it is important to ensure that these fairly detailed regulations are producing the desired improvements in our national check-collection system. As we gain greater experience with substitute checks and other elements of the law, we will revisit these rules over the next few years and determine whether any refinements are necessary. Adoption of Check 21 is an Evolutionary, not a Revolutionary, Process Like any significant operational and technological change, the adoption of electronics within the check-collection system will be gradual. This is an evolutionary, not a revolutionary, process. The check-collection system did not change materially last October 28, when Check 21 took effect. To date, relatively few banks have taken advantage of the opportunities provided by Check 21. The rate of adoption of Check 21 is not at all surprising; we did not anticipate that there would be an immediate, large shift in the way checks are collected. Still, there have been some important first steps that help enable banks to leverage the new Check 21 authority, such as agreement on technical standards for creating substitute checks. It is important to recognize, however, that while a critical impetus for change, banks will no longer need substitute checks for processing once they both collect and receive checks electronically. For the banking industry to realize the vision for the nation's check-collection system laid out in Check 21, additional steps must be taken. For example, software vendors and third-party check processors need to adapt their systems to support the creation of substitute checks and the exchange of digital check images. As these systems become more prevalent, additional banks will invest in them. Once banks make these investments, however, they will have to adjust their operations to make the best use of the new technologies. They also will need to verify that their updated systems are compatible with those of other banks and will permit them to exchange checks electronically. As banks improve their technological capabilities, they can reduce their reliance on air and ground transportation, especially shared transportation arrangements. The banks that remain tied to paper checks will continue to bear the costs of those arrangements. As a result, I believe pressures to reduce check transportation costs will be an important determinant of the pace at which banks make the transition to electronic check collection. The Federal Reserve Banks have long been at the forefront of encouraging the electronic collection of checks. As a result, even before Check 21 became law, one out of every five checks collected through the Federal Reserve Banks was being presented electronically. The Reserve Banks also have been leaders within the payments industry in making use of the authority granted by Check 21. They began offering Check 21 services as soon as the law became effective. These services allow for the acceptance of digital check images for deposit and the truncation of some large-dollar paper-check deposits, which are then transmitted to the Reserve Bank closest to the paying bank, thereby eliminating the need to transport physically paper checks between the Reserve Banks. The receiving Reserve Bank then prints substitute checks from the check images to present them to the paying bank, or provides electronic check information to paying banks that already accept the presentment of checks electronically. Although all types of depository institutions are among the initial Reserve Bank customers for these services, the volumes are still relatively small. The operational and technical preparations and testing requirements necessary to use these new payments services naturally limit the pace at which banks can take advantage of them. Out of the approximately 50 million checks that the Reserve Banks collect each business day, only 400,000, or less than 1 percent, involve the deposit of digital check images with the Reserve Banks or the printing of substitute checks to present to the paying bank. Looking across the entire banking industry, some banks, both large and small, have begun to take advantage of the opportunities created by Check 21. For the most part, they have done so within the context of cooperative agreements, through third-party processors, or, as I just mentioned, by sending check images to the Federal Reserve Banks. The banking industry's efforts are generally less extensive, at this time, than those of the Federal Reserve Banks. So six months after Check 21 went into effect, it is clear that much remains to be done before electronic check collection becomes widespread. I do believe, however, that we are laying the groundwork for widespread changes in the check-collection system. While the pace of change is not clear, I believe that a decade from now our check-collection system will look much different. Though we may still be writing checks, I would expect that their number will be substantially lower and that most will be collected electronically. The Federal Reserve is Monitoring the Need to Reduce Hold Periods In light of the potential for improvements that could speed check collection and return times, the Federal Reserve has been monitoring whether changes to the funds availability policies set out in Regulation CC may be warranted. As you know, Congress established the current funds availability rules for check deposits in 1987 through the Expedited Funds Availability Act, or EFAA, which the Federal Reserve Board implements through Regulation CC. EFAA sets the maximum permissible hold periods on funds deposited by check at levels that are intended to balance the desirability of providing consumers with timely access to their funds with banks' need to manage the risk of check fraud. Congress also recognized that when it comes to checks they accept for deposit, banks operate under the dictum of "no news is good news." A bank of first deposit does not receive any affirmative notice that another bank has paid a check. It only learns that a check will be returned unpaid when it receives the returned check or a notice that the check is being returned. Thus, under EFAA, the time needed to not only present a check to the paying bank but also return the unpaid check to the bank of first deposit is the statutory standard for determining whether reductions in the maximum permissible hold periods are warranted. Under the current funds availability schedule, next-business-day availability is required for checks considered low risk, such as Treasury checks, postal money orders, and cashier's checks. For local checks (that is, checks for which the paying bank and the bank of first deposit are located in the same Federal Reserve check-processing region), funds must be available for withdrawal no later than the second business day following deposit. For nonlocal checks (checks for which the paying bank and the bank of first deposit are located in different Federal Reserve check-processing regions), funds must be available for withdrawal no later than the fifth business day following deposit. Congress also provided safeguard exceptions to these maximum hold periods for certain types of accounts or deposits, such as new accounts or large-dollar check deposits, which may carry a greater risk of check fraud. The Federal Reserve's Responsibilities under EFAA Congress expected that as the check-collection system became more efficient, the amount of time it would take to return an unpaid check to the bank of first deposit would decrease. With that in mind, Congress specifically required the Federal Reserve Board to reduce, by regulation, the maximum hold periods to levels that are "equal to the period of time achievable under the improved check-clearing system for a receiving depository institution to reasonably expect to learn of the nonpayment of most items for each category of checks" (12 USC 4002(d)(1)). The EFAA's legislative history indicates that the term "most items" should be interpreted as at least two-thirds of unpaid checks in a given category, such as nonlocal checks. The Federal Reserve Board takes its responsibilities under EFAA very seriously. We monitor developments in the check-collection system on an ongoing basis to determine if the maximum permissible hold periods should be shortened. If we find sufficient improvement in check-collection and return times, we will reduce the Regulation CC availability schedule accordingly. Although developments have yet to show that changes to the Regulation CC availability schedules are warranted, that does not mean that banks routinely impose the maximum allowable hold periods before making funds available to their customers. Many banks regularly provide faster availability of funds to their customers. Some consumers also have been gaining faster access to funds from some of their deposited checks as a result of the Federal Reserve Banks' initiative to reduce their check-processing infrastructure in the face of declining check volumes. When Reserve Bank check-processing regions are combined--for example, the Pittsburgh and Cleveland check-processing regions--checks that were considered nonlocal in Cleveland because they were drawn on banks located in the Pittsburgh region became local and subject to the two-day rather than five-day maximum hold period. This means that consumers in Cleveland are receiving faster funds availability on deposited checks drawn on Pittsburgh banks. With the passage of Check 21, the Federal Reserve also is paying particularly close attention to how rapidly the banking industry embraces the use of electronics in collecting and returning checks. We monitor these developments in a number of ways. Because the Reserve Banks collect more than half of all checks that are drawn on a different bank than the one into which they are deposited (interbank checks), we closely monitor how quickly depository institutions are adopting the Reserve Banks' Check 21 services. We also monitor broader industry trends in the use of electronics to collect checks. As I noted earlier, change to date has been limited. Although we have yet to see material improvements in the speed with which banks learn that checks they had accepted for deposit have been returned unpaid as a direct result of Check 21, next year we will be studying the effects of Check 21's adoption on the banking industry. In particular, we will study how this law is affecting the check-collection system and the appropriateness of the current maximum permissible hold periods. We will report our findings to Congress no later than April 2007. If we discern significant improvements in the times needed to collect and return checks, we will accelerate the study. Given how little time will have elapsed since Check 21 came into force, this upcoming study may indicate that there has not been sufficient improvement to check-collection and return times to trigger reductions in the maximum permissible hold periods. But, as required by EFAA, the Board will continue to monitor check-return times and reduce the funds availability schedules in Regulation CC as changes in banking industry practices warrant. Check Conversion is not Check 21, but is a Means to Collect Funds Electronically Another important catalyst for change in the payments system is electronic check conversion--a rapidly growing means of collecting funds electronically from consumers' bank accounts using information that appears on their checks. Electronic check conversion does not involve the collection of checks or the use of the authority granted by Check 21. In 2004, approximately 1.5 billion checks were replaced by electronic check conversion. We expect these types of payments will continue to increase. Because electronic check conversion is sometimes mistakenly associated with Check 21, I think it may be helpful to explain what electronic check conversion is and how it works. Electronic check conversion involves using the routing, account, and serial numbers printed in magnetic ink on the bottom of a consumer's check as the source of information to create an electronic payment that is made using the ACH or a debit card network. Sometimes the conversion occurs at the cash register. More commonly, it occurs at so-called lock-box processing centers to which consumers mail checks to pay, for example, their credit card, mortgage, or utility bills. Check conversion and Check 21 are complementary and provide businesses and banks with choices regarding how to collect their customers' payments most efficiently. Check conversion allows merchants and so-called lock-box processing centers to collect funds electronically without ever using the check-collection system. The National Automated Clearing House Association's (NACHA) rules limit the use of check conversion, however, to checks written by consumers; checks drawn on business accounts are not now eligible to be converted, in part because many businesses arrange with their banks to block any ACH debits to their account. By contrast, Check 21 allows banks to collect any check electronically once it has entered the check-collection system. Whether the checks are converted in stores at the time of purchase or remotely at processing centers, the notice that is provided should enable consumers to understand that proceeding with payment authorizes the merchant or biller to electronically debit their accounts. For in-store transactions, consumers receive notice that a check will be converted to an electronic payment and authorize that conversion by signing an authorization slip and proceeding with the transaction. In the case of payments that are mailed, consumers receive notice with their bill that a check will be converted to an electronic payment and authorize the conversion by sending a check to the biller. NACHA rules permit consumers to opt out of electronic check conversion by their billers, that is, choose not to have their billers convert their checks to electronic payments. The Federal Reserve is Protecting Consumers and Educating the Public about Check Conversion and Check 21 The conversion of checks to electronic fund transfers initially raised questions about whether those transactions were covered by check law or electronic fund transfer law for the purposes of consumer rights and protections. In 2001, the Federal Reserve Board clarified that the Electronic Fund Transfer Act, as implemented by Regulation E, protects consumers for electronic payments made via check conversion (66 FR 15187, March 16, 2001). I would note, however, that the substantive rights of consumers are very similar whether they are derived from check or electronic fund transfer law. For example, as a general matter, in either case consumers have recourse for unauthorized transactions. The particular procedures for asserting a consumer's rights vary slightly depending on how the payment was made. The Board is now considering how to address concerns that have been raised about the notices consumers receive when their checks are converted to electronic payments. We have found that the quality of these notices varies widely and that consumers may be confused about what they are authorizing. The Board has requested comment on revisions to the Regulation E commentary to include specific language to be used in these consumer notices. The Board expects to take action on this proposal later this year. We are also considering whether to require by regulation, along the lines of current NACHA rules, a written, signed authorization by the consumer when a check is converted at a merchant location. The Federal Reserve also is actively working with consumer groups (particularly through the Board's Consumer Advisory Council), the banking industry, and the media to help inform the public about check conversion and Check 21. We are educating consumers about their rights in the event of an unauthorized transaction involving check conversion or a substitute check. Among our initiatives in this area was the publication of several brochures that help explain what check conversion, Check 21, and substitute checks are all about. These brochures are available on our web site ( ). We also have made available on our web site ( ) answers to frequently asked questions and other important information about Check 21. Transition to a More-Electronic Payments System Affects the Federal Reserve Banks and the Banking Industry Since 1999, the number of checks collected through the Reserve Banks has fallen nearly 20 percent, to less than 14 billion in 2004. We expect Reserve Bank check volumes to continue to fall as the total number of checks being written declines and as check conversion further reduces the number of checks collected. The Monetary Control Act of 1980 requires the Federal Reserve to set fees for providing certain payment services to depository institutions that, over the long run, recover all the direct and indirect costs of providing the services, as well as the imputed costs such as the income taxes that would have been paid and the profit that would have been earned had the services been provided by a private firm. As a result of the accelerating decline in the number of checks they collect, the Reserve Banks have not achieved their targeted level of profitability since 2001; but they have recovered, in aggregate, all their direct, indirect, and imputed costs of providing payment services. In response, the Reserve Banks have undertaken major initiatives to reduce check costs by standardizing their check systems and operations and by reducing the resources devoted to this service. The Reserve Banks have announced a reduction in the number of offices at which checks are processed, from the forty-five that existed at the beginning of 2003 to twenty-three by early 2006. I emphasize, however, that the reduction in the number of check-processing sites has not changed the Reserve Banks' commitment to making their check collection and other payment services available to depository institutions nationwide. As a result of the restructuring and other cost-reduction initiatives, the Reserve Banks expect that in 2005 they will recover fully all of their costs of providing check collection and other payments services, including the targeted return on equity or profit. As check volumes continue to decline, however, the Reserve Banks will need to take additional steps to reduce costs, including further restructuring of their processing operations. The challenges of a changing payments system are not unique to the Federal Reserve Banks. The entire banking industry faces similar cost and revenue pressures as check volumes decline. This is a particularly challenging environment for large banks that have made significant investments in physical check infrastructure. Over the coming years, many banks will need to decide how much longer to continue their paper-check-processing operations. At the same time, they must decide what investments to make in the technologies underlying Check 21 and check conversion and in technologies for making fully electronic payments. Conclusion In summary, the payments system in the United States is continuing to change and become increasingly efficient. However, the shift away from the use of paper checks does create challenges for the banking industry and the Federal Reserve Banks. To address these challenges, over the coming years the industry will be making important decisions about how best to incorporate the greater use of electronics into their payments operations while reducing their paper check-processing infrastructures. Although the implementation of Check 21 is expected to lead to a much more electronic and efficient check-collection system over the longer term, change will be evolutionary, not revolutionary. Banks will embrace the use of digital check images to present and return checks as the business case to make the necessary investments and improvements to their operations and systems becomes more compelling. This market-based approach to change was a fundamental principle underlying Check 21. Ongoing improvements in the check-collection system have not yet been extensive enough to warrant a reduction in the maximum permissible check-hold periods, but we will continue to monitor developments closely. Many banks, however, routinely provide customers with faster availability than required by Regulation CC; moreover, as the Reserve Banks adjust their check-processing regions, the maximum hold periods for some checks are effectively being reduced. But again, I want to emphasize the Board's commitment to reducing check-hold periods as developments warrant. I would be pleased to answer any questions that you may have. Annual Number of Noncash Payments in the United States Footnotes Check truncation is the removal of an original check from the forward-collection or return process by the bank of first deposit or an intermediary, such as a Federal Reserve Bank. In lieu of the original check, a substitute check or, by agreement, information relating to the original check, such as an electronic image of the original check, is then sent on for collection or return. Conference Report on H.R. 27 (H. Rept. 100-261), 100th Congress, 1st session, 179 (1987), pp. H6906-7. In the mid-1990s, we surveyed depository institutions to estimate the level of check fraud prevalent at that time and to quantify the average time it would take a bank of first deposit to receive or be provided notice of a returned check . We found that a reduction in the maximum permissible check-hold periods was not warranted at that time. Because the check service represents more than 80 percent of all priced services costs, its performance is the primary determinant of the Reserve Banks' overall profitability for payment services. The Reserve Banks have recovered fully the total costs, including imputed costs, and profits of each payment service other than check during this four-year period.
Remarks by Vice Chairman Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. To the Economics Club of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina April 20, 2005 U.S. Current Account Deficit: Causes and Consequences I would like to address an issue that is receiving increasing attention lately: the U.S. current account deficit. Not since joining the Federal Reserve Board have I seen this topic show up in the financial press as frequently--and so often with such ominous overtones--as it does these days. Several reasons for this come to mind. Most obviously, at about 6 percent of gross domestic product, the current account deficit is now larger than it has ever been in our nation's history; that, by itself, attracts attention. Also, because the current account deficit reflects the excess of our country's imports over our exports, the deficit's descent into record territory has helped crystalize fears that the economy is losing competitiveness and that U.S. jobs and incomes are suffering as a result. Finally, the larger the current account deficit becomes, the greater the number of observers who believe that a correction, and one with significant implications for the U.S. economy, is imminent. Such expectations have contributed to, and in turn have been reinforced by, the slide in the dollar over the past few years. Although views differ as to when a correction will take place, nearly all agree that the current trajectory of the U.S. current account deficit is unsustainable. This consensus reflects the simple logic that the deficit is causing the net indebtedness of the U.S. economy to rise more rapidly than U.S. income. In 1985, our foreign assets were about equal to our foreign liabilities, so that our net international investment position was roughly zero. By 1995, our investment position had deteriorated to negative 4 percent of GDP, and by 2004, we estimate this negative position to have reached about one-fourth of GDP. If current account deficits continue to boost the negative international investment position, eventually the cost of servicing that position, which so far has been quite modest, would rise to an unsustainable level. Obviously, the current account would have to adjust to ensure that excessive debt burdens are not maintained. If nearly all observers agree that an adjustment of the U.S. current account deficit is inevitable, few agree on when the adjustment will occur and what will cause it to happen. Many argue that U.S. households must raise to a more prudent level a saving rate that has fallen to less than 3 percent of disposable income in recent years. Others place the onus of adjustment on foreign economies to boost lackluster domestic demand and increase their purchases of U.S. exports. While some call upon coordinated governmental action to address the pattern of global external imbalances, others place their faith in market mechanisms to do the job. A large part of the reason that people disagree about what will be needed to bring about current account adjustment is that they disagree about what has led the deficit to become so large in the first place. If one believes that the expansion of the current account deficit has been caused by government policies, such as budget deficits, then it is natural to identify a reversal of those policies as the action that will bring about current account adjustment. Conversely, if the current account deficit primarily reflects developments in the private sector, it is more likely that the marketplace will be the source of subsequent correction. Surprisingly, researchers have made relatively few attempts to assess and compare the full range of explanations that have been proposed for the emergence of the large U.S. external deficit. In my remarks today, I would like to survey some of the factors that have been put forward to explain the deficit. As I do so, I will be referring to several macroeconomic model simulations, implemented by my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board's staff, that are designed to gauge the impact of these factors on the U.S. external imbalance. The proposed causes of the deficit are by no means mutually exclusive, of course. It is possible and even likely that the deficit is the outcome of several different developments. I should also note at the outset that the views I will express are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of my colleagues in the Federal Reserve System. Approaches to Characterizing the Current Account Before getting to these explanations, however, I'd like to take a few moments to clear up what--for some, at least--has been a prominent source of confusion. At least three approaches characterize the current account balance, and each of them shines the spotlight on different factors that may be influential. Perhaps most commonly, the current account balance is portrayed as the difference between a nation's exports, broadly defined, and its imports. From this perspective, the determinants of the current account balance are roughly the same as the determinants of the trade balance: exchange rates, prices, and incomes at home and abroad. Accordingly, the widening of the U.S. current account deficit is frequently attributed to the strengthening of the dollar since the mid-1990s, which led U.S. imports to be cheaper measured in dollars and U.S. exports to be more expensive in foreign currency. According to a second perspective, the current account balance is defined as the difference between a nation's saving and its investment. This definition highlights the decline in the ratio of national saving to GDP over the past ten years, even as investment rates have moved up a bit on balance, as the central cause of the widening of the U.S. current account deficit. Finally, because any excess of national spending over income must be financed by foreigners, the current account deficit is equivalent to the net inflow of capital from abroad. This approach points to the surge of capital inflows into our economy as the key development underlying the emergence of the large external deficit. These three approaches--the trade balance, the saving-investment balance, and net capital inflows--might, at first blush, appear to attribute the emergence of the large U.S. current account deficit to highly distinct factors. In reality, however, these approaches are merely three alternative means of characterizing the outcomes of the same underlying, fundamental developments. To see this more concretely, consider, for example, the effects of a rise in investor perceptions of the rate of return on investment in the United States. The rise will likely attract foreign capital inflows. It may also lead to a strengthening of the dollar, thereby weakening exports and strengthening imports. Finally, through various channels, the rise in the perceived rate of return may boost the investment rate and lower the saving rate. In this example, the fundamental shock causing the current account deficit to widen is the change in investor expectations. The other elements of the story--the inflow of capital, the strengthening of the dollar, and the movements in saving and investment rates--represent diverse aspects of the economy as they respond to that initial shock and lead, ultimately, to the larger deficit. The story can be played out using any of the three approaches to the current account that I have reviewed. To be sure, some approaches may be more helpful in highlighting certain types of shocks than others. But any compelling explanation of the current account deficit must identify not merely the proximate influences on the deficit--be they exchange rates, capital flows, or aggregate saving and investment--but also the fundamental, underlying sources of the imbalance. Explanations for the Large U.S. Current Account Deficit I would like now to address five different explanations for the large U.S. current account deficit, and even these do not exhaust the possibilities. The first three explanations focus primarily on domestic developments: the fiscal deficit, an autonomous drop-off in private saving rates, and the surge in productivity growth. The remaining explanations encompass developments abroad as well: the slowdown in foreign demand and the apparent rise in global financial intermediation. I will not discuss yet another factor that undoubtedly has contributed to the widening of the deficit--the rise in oil prices--but it is worth noting that our oil import bill has risen by about $110 billion, from $68 billion in 1999 to $180 billion in 2004, and most of this increase reflects higher oil prices. 1. Expansion of the fiscal deficit The view that the current account deficit arises from the widening U.S. budget deficit has received considerable attention of late and recalls the discussion of the mid-1980s, when the simultaneous emergence of fiscal and current account deficits in the United States gave rise to the "twin deficits" hypothesis. The simplest version of this hypothesis starts with the identity that the current account balance is equal to saving minus investment. Since the expansion of the fiscal deficit lowered public saving, the story runs, it must have lowered national saving and thus widened the current account balance to a similar extent. This version of the story is a bit too simple, however, as it assumes that private saving and investment remain constant, whereas in reality these quantities can and probably will change in response to a change in the fiscal balance. In the more sophisticated version of the story, a larger fiscal deficit boosts domestic demand, pushing up domestic interest rates relative to foreign rates; this, in turn, attracts investors and raises the value of the dollar, thereby leading to a larger current account deficit. In theory, the fiscal explanation of the current account deficit is entirely plausible. In practice, however, the support for this proposition is weak. The United States has had episodes in which the fiscal and current account balances moved together, but it has also had episodes in which they diverged. Most notably, the fiscal factor cannot explain the widening of the trade deficit in the late 1990s, when the U.S. budget moved into surplus. At the international level, countries such as Japan and Germany are running large current account surpluses even as their budget balances are substantially in deficit. More generally, research into the determinants of current account balances has produced only mixed support for the linkage between fiscal and current account deficits. Why don't the reductions in public saving associated with widening fiscal deficits lead more consistently to higher current account deficits? Most likely, larger budget deficits increase the government's draw on available credit and dampen private consumption and investment spending, thereby limiting the deterioration of the current account. This explanation is supported by a simulation of the Federal Reserve Board staff's macroeconomic model, to which I alluded earlier. The results of this simulation, depicted in , suggest that, compared with a scenario in which no fiscal expansion had taken place, the loosening of fiscal policy since 2001 boosted the rate of private saving and lowered the rate of private investment. Accordingly, the effect on the trade deficit is estimated to have been fairly small. Rather than crowding out net exports, fiscal expansion appears to have primarily crowded out private investment and consumption. In sum, the recent experience both of the United States and of other countries, as well as the results of model simulations, lead me to conclude that the budget deficit has probably been only a small factor in the emergence of the large U.S. external imbalance. Of course, even if it does not narrow the current account deficit by much, reducing the budget deficit would be highly desirable for other reasons: It would free up resources for private investment, and it would reduce the burden on future taxpayers of repaying the federal debt. 2. Decline in the private saving rate For observers who view the large current account deficit as an example of the profligacy of Americans, the sharp decline in private saving rates looms as large in their thinking as the sharp rise in the budget deficit. Since the mid-1990s, the personal saving rate has declined from roughly 5 percent of disposable income to less than 2 percent, and gross private saving (which includes corporate saving) has edged down from about 16 percent of GDP to less than 15 percent. As I noted earlier, it is important to distinguish between fundamental shocks affecting the current account and other developments which might merely represent economic responses to those shocks. On one hand, the decline in private saving could reflect a response to other developments in the economy--for example, a rise in the value of equity holdings and housing wealth, increases in expected future income, or declines in interest rates--and thus might not represent a fundamental cause of the U.S. current account deficit. On the other hand, the decline in saving rates could reflect a structural shift in household saving and spending behavior. Continued financial liberalization and innovation have made it easier for Americans to borrow, particularly against their real estate wealth, and this easing may have led to greater consumption. If Americans have experienced a structural decline in private saving rates, how much of the widening of the external imbalance could this explain? As shown in , the answer provided by our macroeconomic simulation model is: not much. The reason is virtually the same as in the case of a rise in fiscal deficits. According to our simulation, high private consumption boosts GDP growth and--all else equal--forces up interest rates; although the rise in interest rates strengthens the dollar, it leads to much lower investment spending. Accordingly, and as in the case of a fall in public saving, a fall in private saving appears to crowd out investment more than it crowds out net exports, and thus leads to little change in the trade balance. I should note, however, that just as a decline in the budget deficit is desirable even if it would not substantially reduce the trade deficit, a rise in private saving rates also would be helpful because it would strengthen private balance sheets and provide additional resources for investment and growth. 3. Productivity growth In both the fiscal story and the private-saving story, the large U.S. current account deficit implicitly is the outcome of a rise in consumption relative to income. The third story I'd like to discuss highlights a more impressive achievement of the U.S. economy, the surge in labor productivity growth from about 1-1/2 percent annually in the two decades preceding 1995 to roughly 3 percent in the period since then. This surge is viewed as having several important consequences. First, higher productivity growth boosted perceived rates of return on U.S. investments, thereby generating capital inflows that boosted the dollar. Second, these higher rates of return also led to a rise in domestic investment. Finally, expectations of higher returns boosted equity prices, household wealth, and perceived long-run income, and so consumption rose and saving rates declined. Under this explanation, all of these factors helped to widen the current account deficit. I find this story compelling. It links two key economic developments of the past decade: the rise in productivity growth and the widening of the current account deficit. It also helps to explain several other important developments, including the fall in U.S. saving rates and the 1990s boom in asset prices. In fact, a simulation of our macroeconomic model shown in suggests that the surge in productivity growth, while hardly explaining all of the deterioration in the trade balance since the mid-1990s, accounts for more of that deterioration than do the public and private saving shocks combined. Moreover, the effect of higher productivity growth on the trade balance could have been even larger than the simulation indicates because it likely worked through several channels that the model does not incorporate. The simulation does not fully take into account the rise in stock prices and household wealth--and hence, consumption--that would have been spurred by expectations of higher productivity growth. Also, because the simulation does not fully account for the effect of enhanced perceptions of equity returns on exchange rates, it does not produce the rise in the dollar that, in all likelihood, resulted from the productivity surge. 4. Slump in foreign domestic demand I would like to turn now to developments at the global level that may have helped to widen the U.S. current account deficit. Domestic demand growth has slumped in many foreign economies because of varying combinations of an increase in saving rates and a decline in investment. This weakening of foreign spending has enhanced the supply of capital available to the United States, put downward pressure on U.S. interest rates, and put upward pressure on the dollar. As I said before, I like the U.S. productivity surge story and find it compelling. However, I also like the foreign demand slump story, and I find it compelling. Some of the largest industrial economies in the world--Japan and the euro area--have been running current account surpluses while experiencing very subdued growth. In the developing world, the East Asian economies that went through financial crises in the late 1990s have seen a plunge in their investment rates even as their saving rates have remained extremely high; the weakness in domestic demand has likely motivated the authorities in these countries to keep their exchange rates competitive to promote export-led growth, a strategy that has also contributed to the U.S. external deficit. More generally, since 1999, the developing countries as a whole have been running current account surpluses--with the industrial countries, mainly the United States, necessarily running current account deficits--for the first time in many years. What does our macroeconomic simulation model say about the likely effect of a slump in foreign consumption and investment spending? The slump lowers the path of foreign GDP, which in turn limits U.S. export sales. Additionally, by depressing perceived rates of return abroad, the weakness in foreign demand explains a considerable portion of the run-up in the dollar, as shown in . Finally, weaker U.S. net exports reduce overall U.S. activity and depress interest rates a bit, thus raising domestic consumption and investment spending. Taken together, these factors contribute importantly to the widening of the trade deficit since the mid-1990s. 5. Improvements in global financial intermediation Another global factor that has been cited as contributing to the widening of the U.S. current account deficit has been an increase in global financial intermediation. Some suggest that home bias--the disinclination of investors to invest outside their own country--has been eroding and that this trend has permitted larger current account imbalances to be financed than would have been possible previously. This hypothesis is supported by the reduced correlation of national saving and investment rates in recent years, which implies that savings increasingly are being used to finance investment in other countries. Of course, an increased capacity of global financial markets to finance current account deficits does not, by itself, mean that it is the United States that would tap this enlarged capacity. However, observers suggest that the United States' unusually favorable investment climate, protections of investor rights, and prospects for rates of return made it likely that once international financing constraints were lifted, the U.S. economy would enjoy larger capital inflows. So, how much of the enlargement of the U.S. current account deficit can we attribute to improved international intermediation? This is difficult to answer because it is hard enough to measure a concept as amorphous as international financial intermediation, let alone to gauge its effect on the current account. As a step in this direction, however, we reasoned that any reduction in home bias by foreign investors toward the United States would show up as a decline in the risk premium these investors demand for holding U.S. assets. This decline in the risk premium, in turn, would lead to a greater demand for U.S. assets and a rise in the dollar. Based on an estimate of the decline in the risk premium that occurred since the mid-1990s, our macroeconomic model suggests, as shown in , that the decline contributed importantly to the rise in the dollar, and, therefore, to the widening of the trade deficit. Assuming that the lower risk premium can be attributed to growing international intermediation, this latter development apparently exerted an important influence on the U.S. current account. Putting It All Together I would now like to step back and consider the relative contributions to the trade deficit of each of the explanations I have discussed, as shown in . To the extent that the contributions of these shocks are reasonably well measured by the macroeconomic model simulations, the most important message I draw from them is that no single factor constitutes a dominant explanation of the deterioration in the U.S. current account balance. That said, our model accords the greatest roles to increased productivity growth, which has made the United States a magnet for foreign saving, and to the slump in foreign domestic demand, which has led to an excess of saving in those economies. The narrowing of the risk premium on dollar assets appears to explain a bit less of the widening of the trade deficit, with the loosening of fiscal policy and reduction of private saving making still-smaller contributions. Of course, these results are the product of our model-based analysis, with all of the strengths and weaknesses that model simulations entail; it would be useful to complement these findings with more direct historical and empirical analysis of the U.S. external imbalance. Attributing the historically unprecedented widening of the trade deficit, as well as the similarly unprecedented rise in our international indebtedness, to the coincidence of many random and unrelated developments would not make for a very satisfying story. However, my sense is that many of the developments that contributed to the U.S. trade deficit are not unrelated and may be part of a broader evolution of the global economy. The same types of liberalization and innovation that have improved financial intermediation within the United States, for example, have likely been instrumental in reducing home bias and increasing intermediation among countries. Improvements in financial markets, both at home and abroad, may have amplified the effects on the U.S. current account of other developments I have discussed, including the U.S. productivity surge and the perceived weakening of foreign investment opportunities. It is even possible that the expansion of the U.S. budget deficit would have been smaller had policymakers perceived global financial markets to be less willing to finance the gap. The view that the current account deficit stems from economic developments that are varied and yet intertwined has important implications for how the deficit will be corrected. Such a view suggests to me, first, that government policies such as budget-cutting or encouragement of private saving are unlikely, by themselves, to correct the current account deficit, much as they might be desirable for other reasons. Such policies probably do not address all or even most of the root causes of the current account deficit. However, the fact that I have deemphasized government policy as the source of the adjustment process does not mean that the public sector has no role to play. Reducing our budget deficit can ease the adjustment process by releasing resources that can be channeled into higher net exports, so that a reduced trade deficit does not require a curtailment of investment. The public sector in several nations has an important role in creating flexible markets for products, labor and financial assets. Appropriate macroeconomic and structural policies in many economies can contribute to the private-sector adjustment process by fostering an environment of innovation, increased productivity and more-rapid growth of domestic demand. Recognizing the role for public policy, the Group of Seven industrial nations recently stated that vigorous action is needed to address global imbalances and foster growth. The primary impetus toward adjustment of the U.S. current account deficit, when it occurs, likely will come from private markets. Here, however, the multiplicity of factors underlying the large U.S. current account deficit raises questions about how that adjustment will come about. Some of the developments that may have supported the expansion of the U.S. current account deficit might reverse themselves--foreign domestic demand could recover, U.S. private saving rates could rise. And some of the factors that boosted the U.S. trade deficit, such as higher productivity growth or financial innovations that support greater spending, may show up more fully in foreign economies. Notably, all of these developments would take time to restrain the deficit, and any one of them, by itself, might have only a small effect. A final possibility is that, as U.S. deficits widen and foreign claims on the United States mount, actions by investors to re-balance their accumulation of assets could lead to changes in exchange rates, interest rates, and other asset prices that might contribute to a reversal of the deficit. To the extent that the adjustment of the U.S. current account is driven by fundamental changes in the global economy, it is less likely, in my view, to be disruptive or disorderly. Our own experience with external adjustment in the 1980s was comparatively orderly, and so was the experience of many other industrial economies undergoing adjustment in recent decades. Of course, should adjustment prove disruptive to sustainable growth and stable prices, the Federal Reserve will certainly be prepared to act. However, my sense is that the implications of current account adjustment for U.S. economic growth and inflation will most likely be benign. Footnotes Analyses of the widening of the deficit include, among others, Catherine L. Mann (2002), Journal of Economic Perspectives , vol. 16 (Summer), pp.131-52; and Nouriel Roubini and Brad Setser (2004), unpublished paper. Much has been written on the relationship between the fiscal and current account balances. Recent work include Edwin M. Truman (2004), paper presented at the Annual Research Conference, held at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, June 14-16; Mathieu Bussiere, Marcel Fratzscher, and Gernot J. Muller (2004), "Productivity Shocks, Budget Deficits and the Current Account," unpublished paper, European Central Bank, November; and Christopher J. Erceg, Luca Guerrieri, and Christopher Gust (2005), International Finance Discussion Paper 2005-825 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January). The trade balance accounts for nearly all of the deterioration in the current account balance and is the component of the current account that is most reliably analyzed by the model. The other components of the current account balance consist of net investment income, other income flows, and transfers. This result is consistent with other model-based analyses of the effect of fiscal policy on the current account, including Erceg, Guerrieri, and Gust, "Expansionary Fiscal Shocks." Investment rates in some of the major East Asian developing economies, excluding China, plunged more than 10 percentage points of GDP after their peak in the mid-1990s and generally stayed depressed thereafter. A desire to offset this loss of domestic demand, as well as to rebuild their foreign exchange reserves, are likely reasons that authorities in the region intervened to stem upward pressures on their currencies. See Steven B. Kamin (2005), paper presented at the conference "The Revived Bretton Woods System: A New Paradigm for Asian Development?" held at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, February 4. Declines in the correlation of investment and saving across countries are documented in Olivier Blanchard and Francesco Giavazzi (2002), "Current Account Deficits in the Euro Area: The End of the Feldstein-Horioka Puzzle?" Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2:2002, pp. 147-209; and Joseph Gruber (2004), "Increased Current Account Dispersion: Differential Growth, Demographic Dispersion, or Greater Financial Integration?" unpublished paper, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, December. The contributions to the trade deficit shown in figure 6 do not precisely match those shown in figures 1 through 5 because of the non-linearity of the model. See Hilary Croke, Steven B. Kamin, and Sylvain Leduc (2005), International Finance Discussion Paper 2005-827 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February).
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the issuance of a consent Order of Assessment of a Civil Money Penalty against The Bank, Warrior, Alabama, a state member bank. The Bank, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order in connection with its alleged violations of the Board's Regulations implementing the National Flood Insurance Act. The Order requires The Bank to pay a civil money penalty of $46,050, which will be remitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency for deposit into the National Flood Mitigation Fund. A copy of the Order is attached.
Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan Budget process reforms Before the Budget Committee, U.S. Senate April 21, 2005 Mr. Chairman, Senator Conrad, and members of the Committee, I am pleased to be here today to offer my views on the federal budget and related issues. I want to emphasize that I speak for myself and not necessarily for the Federal Reserve. The U.S. economy delivered a solid performance in 2004, and thus far this year, activity appears to be expanding at a reasonably good pace. However, the positive short-term economic outlook is playing out against a backdrop of concern about the prospects for the federal budget, especially over the longer run. Indeed, the unified budget ran a deficit equal to about 3-1/2 percent of gross domestic product in fiscal 2004, and federal debt held by the public as a percent of GDP has risen noticeably since it bottomed out in 2001. To be sure, the cyclical component of the deficit should narrow as the economic expansion proceeds and incomes rise. And the recent pace of the ramp-up in spending on defense and homeland security is not expected to continue indefinitely. But, as the latest projections from the Administration and the Congressional Budget Office suggest, our budget position is unlikely to improve substantially in the coming years unless major deficit-reducing actions are taken. In my judgment, the necessary choices will be especially difficult to implement without the restoration of a set of procedural restraints on the budget-making process. For about a decade, the rules laid out in the Budget Enforcement Act of 1990 and in the later modifications and extensions of the act provided a framework that helped the Congress establish a better fiscal balance. However, the brief emergence of surpluses in the late 1990s eroded the will to adhere to these rules, which were aimed specifically at promoting deficit reduction rather than at the broader goal of setting out a commonly agreed-upon standard for determining whether the nation was living within its fiscal means. Many of the provisions that helped restrain budgetary decisionmaking in the 1990s--in particular, the limits on discretionary spending and the PAYGO requirements--were violated ever more frequently; finally, in 2002, they were allowed to expire. Reinstating a structure like the one provided by the Budget Enforcement Act would signal a renewed commitment to fiscal restraint and help restore discipline to the annual budgeting process. Such a step would be even more meaningful if it were coupled with the adoption of a set of provisions for dealing with unanticipated budgetary outcomes over time. As you are well aware, budget outcomes in the past have deviated from projections--in some cases, significantly--and they will continue to do so. Accordingly, a well-designed set of mechanisms that facilitate midcourse corrections would ease the task of bringing the budget back into line when it goes off track. In particular, you might want to require that existing programs be assessed regularly to verify that they continue to meet their stated purposes and cost projections. Measures that automatically take effect when costs for a particular spending program or tax provision exceed a specified threshold may prove useful as well. The original design of the Budget Enforcement Act could also be enhanced by addressing how the strictures might evolve if and when reasonable fiscal balance came into view. I do not mean to suggest that the nation's budget problems will be solved simply by adopting a new set of rules. The fundamental fiscal issue is the need to make difficult choices among budget priorities, and this need is becoming ever more pressing in light of the unprecedented number of individuals approaching retirement age. For example, future Congresses and Presidents will, over time, have to weigh the benefits of continued access, on current terms, to advances in medical technology against other spending priorities as well as against tax initiatives that foster increases in economic growth and the revenue base. Because the baby boomers have not yet started to retire in force, we have been in a demographic lull. But this state of relative stability will soon end. In 2008--just three years from now--the leading edge of the baby-boom generation will reach 62, the earliest age at which Social Security retirement benefits can be drawn and the age at which about half of those eligible to claim benefits have been doing so in recent years. Just three years after that, in 2011, the oldest baby boomers will reach 65 and will thus be eligible for Medicare. Currently, 3-1/4 workers contribute to the Social Security system for each beneficiary. Under the intermediate assumptions of the program's trustees, the number of beneficiaries will have roughly doubled by 2030, and the ratio of covered workers to beneficiaries will be down to about 2. The pressures on the budget from this dramatic demographic change will be exacerbated by those stemming from the anticipated steep upward trend in spending per Medicare beneficiary. The combination of an aging population and the soaring costs of its medical care is certain to place enormous demands on our nation's resources and to exert pressure on the budget that economic growth alone is unlikely to eliminate. To be sure, favorable productivity developments would help to alleviate the impending budgetary strains. But unless productivity growth far outstrips that embodied in current budget forecasts, it is unlikely to represent more than part of the answer. Higher productivity does, of course, buoy revenues. But because initial Social Security benefits are influenced heavily by economywide wages, faster productivity growth, with a lag, also raises benefits under current law. Moreover, because the long-range budget assumptions already make reasonable allowance for future productivity growth, one cannot rule out the possibility that productivity growth will fall short of projected future averages. In fiscal year 2004, federal outlays for Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid totaled about 8 percent of GDP. The long-run projections from the Office of Management and Budget suggest that the share will rise to approximately 13 percent by 2030. So long as health-care costs continue to grow faster than the economy as a whole, the additional resources needed for these programs will exert intense pressure on the federal budget. Indeed, under existing tax rates and reasonable assumptions about other spending, these projections make clear that the federal budget is on an unsustainable path, in which large deficits result in rising interest rates and ever-growing interest payments that augment deficits in future years. But most important, deficits as a percentage of GDP in these simulations rise without limit. Unless that trend is reversed, at some point these deficits would cause the economy to stagnate or worse. The broad contours of the challenges ahead are clear. But considerable uncertainty remains about the precise dimensions of the problem and about the extent to which future resources will fall short of our current statutory obligations to the coming generations of retirees. We already know a good deal about the size of the adult population in, say, 2030. Almost all have already been born. Thus, forecasting the number of Social Security and Medicare beneficiaries is fairly straightforward. So too is projecting future Social Security benefits, which are tied to the wage histories of retirees. However, the uncertainty about future medical spending is daunting. We know very little about how rapidly medical technology will continue to advance and how those innovations will translate into future spending. Consequently, the range of possible outcomes for spending per Medicare beneficiary expands dramatically as we move into the next decade and beyond. Technological innovations can greatly improve the quality of medical care and can, in some instances, reduce the costs of existing treatments. But because technology expands the set of treatment possibilities, it also has the potential to add to overall spending--in some cases, by a great deal. Other sources of uncertainty--for example, the extent to which longer life expectancies among the elderly will affect medical spending--may also turn out to be important. As a result, the range of future possible outlays per recipient is extremely wide. The actuaries' projections of Medicare costs are, perforce, highly provisional. These uncertainties--especially our inability to identify the upper bound of future demands for medical care--counsel significant prudence in policymaking. The critical reason to proceed cautiously is that new programs quickly develop constituencies willing to fiercely resist any curtailment of spending or tax benefits. As a consequence, our ability to rein in deficit-expanding initiatives, should they later prove to have been excessive or misguided, is quite limited. Thus, policymakers need to err on the side of prudence when considering new budget initiatives. Programs can always be expanded in the future should the resources for them become available, but they cannot be easily curtailed if resources later fall short of commitments. I fear that we may have already committed more physical resources to the baby-boom generation in its retirement years than our economy has the capacity to deliver. If existing promises need to be changed, those changes should be made sooner rather than later. We owe future retirees as much time as possible to adjust their plans for work, saving, and retirement spending. They need to ensure that their personal resources, along with what they expect to receive from the government, will be sufficient to meet their retirement goals. Crafting a budget strategy that meets the nation's longer-run needs will become ever more difficult the more we delay. The one certainty is that the resolution of the nation's unprecedented demographic challenge will require hard choices and that the future performance of the economy will depend on those choices. No changes will be easy. All programs in our budget exist because a majority of the Congress and the President considered them of value to our society. Adjustments will thus involve making tradeoffs among valued alternatives. The Congress must choose which alternatives are the most valued in the context of limited resources. In doing so, you will need to consider not only the distributional effects of policy changes but also the broader economic effects on labor supply, retirement behavior, and national saving. The benefits to taking sound, timely action could extend many decades into the future.
Remarks by Governor Edward M. Gramlich At the Spring 2005 Banking and Finance Lecture, Widener University, Chester, Pennsylvania April 21, 2005 A First Step in Dealing with Growing Retirement Costs Population aging is a worldwide phenomenon. In this country the looming retirement of the baby boom generation will take the United States ratio of workers to retirees from 3.3 today to 2 in about thirty years. Around the world, under present policies and demographic trends, the ratio of workers to retirees is likely to fall to less than 2 for countries as diverse as Australia, Brazil, Canada, China, France, Germany, Korea, Mexico, Russia, Turkey, and the United Kingdom. The ratio is likely to fall to less than 1 for Italy and Japan--that's right, in a few decades these two countries will be looking at a population situation in which they will have fewer workers than retirees. Demographic movements of this magnitude will require significant policy changes. The public costs of retirement systems will rise markedly unless countries raise their age of eligibility for retirement program benefits or cut these benefits. Moreover, small tax increases or benefit cuts will not do the job--the implicit actuarial deficits of these programs are so large that halfway measures will not be adequate. The United States is in relatively good shape by international standards. In contrast to other countries, the United States birth rate is not far below the rate that stabilizes population levels, and the tax rates necessary to finance our main retirement programs, Social Security and Medicare, are relatively low. But while the present situation of the United States may not be alarming, the outlook comes closer to being so. Outlays are projected to rise slightly more than program revenues for Social Security and much more than program revenues for Medicare. The recent annual report of the trustees of Social Security and Medicare projected rapid deterioration in the trust funds financing both programs, with the Medicare fund being exhausted in fifteen years. Their implication was that substantial tax increases or benefit cuts would be necessary to put both programs in long-term actuarial balance. What should we do to ensure the viability of Social Security and Medicare? Disaster is not imminent, but it seems pretty clear that in the not too distant future the United States, too, will have to confront some distinctly unpleasant policy choices. In this talk, I want to anticipate some of these choices. Up to now, discussions of Social Security and Medicare have been fragmented--there are a sizable number of proposals to reform Social Security, a few to reform Medicare, and none to unify the reforms for both programs. I will propose a joint approach that treats both programs alike and applies to them the same retirement ages and tax arrangements. This joint proposal fully corrects the long-term actuarial deficit for Social Security and would also make a start on a solution for Medicare. The Trustees' Report Programs such as Social Security and Medicare could in principle be funded in many ways. But the tradition here, and in many other countries, has been to tie these public, defined benefit programs to a trust fund, with the revenues coming mainly from dedicated payroll taxes levied on employers and employees. To economists, the exact split between employers and employees is immaterial, because even the employer share is likely to be shifted back to employees in the form of reduced wages. The trust funds have been financed basically on a pay-as-you-go basis, though it would certainly be possible to pre-fund benefits through accumulations in advance of later spending. To some extent this has been done for Social Security by reforms made in the 1980s. At that time, the retirement of the large baby boom population was anticipated, and payroll tax revenues were accumulated in advance of benefit payments, steps that created the present-day cash surpluses for the Social Security component of the overall federal budget. The Social Security retirement program began seventy years ago, and disability insurance was added fifty years ago. The combined expenses are financed by the Old Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance (OASDI) Trust Funds. Medicare programs were added forty years ago. Part A of Medicare, covering hospital insurance is financed, just like Social Security, out of a payroll tax and trust fund. Part B, covering physician and outpatient costs, is optional, with about one-fourth of the costs financed by premiums paid by those who participate in the program and the remainder by general revenues. Part D, covering drug costs, was added last year and is also optional, financed by participants, general revenues, and some state contributions. To measure the adequacy of long-term financing, the four government trustees of the Social Security and Medicare trust funds convene every March with two outside members to review the projections. The actuaries make a number of long-term projections for life expectancy, birth rates, economic growth variables, prices, in general as well as specifically for health care; they then compute the expected actuarial situation for the trust funds for both programs. In recent years these projections have been made for seventy-five years, a horizon that seems long but in some sense is really not long enough. Because trust fund outlays are running well ahead of tax inflows by the end of the forecast period, the mere passage of time throws these seventy-five-year forecasts out of actuarial balance. To correct this tendency, the actuaries now provide forecasts that show costs if the ratio of trust fund assets to outlays is stable in the eighth decade out. This adjustment provides a reasonable approximation to the tax rates necessary to balance the system in perpetuity. The flow results for these projections, using the trustees' intermediate assumptions, are given in . The present combined employer-employee tax rate for the OASDI trust funds, the "income rates" line in the figure, is 12.4 percent and is assessed on the first $90,000 of taxable wages and salaries. Outlay rates are less than 12.4 percent of taxable wages and salaries now, but they rapidly rise above 12.4 percent as the huge baby boom population moves into retirement over the next thirty years. Even after that, time outlay rates continue to rise gradually because of steadily growing projected life expectancies. The pattern is qualitatively similar for the portion of Medicare financed by the payroll tax--Part A, or the hospital insurance (HI) portion. However, the outlay rates for Part A rise more steeply because of the rising relative costs of health care. Flow numbers are flow numbers, and given the steep inclines of at least some of the outlay rates, it makes sense to switch over to present values of liabilities, as shown in . Over the next seventy-five years the unfunded liability for OASDI, essentially the discounted cumulated area between the cost and income lines in figure 1, is $4.0 trillion, 0.6 percent of the discounted present value of gross domestic product (GDP) over this period. An immediate payroll tax increase of 1.9 percentage points would be sufficient to pre-fund this liability. But because outlays greatly exceed revenues at the end of the projection period, the infinite-horizon unfunded liability is much larger, $11.1 trillion, or 1.2 percent of the discounted present value of GDP, which is tantamount to an immediate 3.5 percentage point increase in payroll tax rates. For Medicare, the initial size of the program is much smaller, but the outlay increases are larger, and the unfunded liabilities are much larger. Part A, the hospital insurance component, has a seventy-five-year unfunded liability of $8.6 trillion, or 1.4 percent of discounted GDP, and an infinite-horizon liability of $24.1 trillion, 2.5 percent of discounted GDP. It is more difficult to compute the liabilities for parts B and D because they have no dedicated trust funds. The gross expenditures for these programs, covering participant costs, general revenues, and state contributions, are $27.8 trillion (4.4 percent of GDP) over a seventy-five-year horizon or $58.0 trillion (6.1 percent of GDP) over an infinite horizon. Currently, participants and general revenues finance 1.3 percent of these costs (state payments under part D have not started yet). Hence, a reasonable estimate of the future unfunded liability is the difference--$19.8 trillion (3.1 percent of GDP) for seventy-five years or $45.8 trillion (4.8 percent of GDP) for the infinite horizon. And these humongous numbers do not even include Medicaid, which is financed entirely by general revenues and states, and also growing rapidly because of costs related to the aged. Policy Approaches Despite the fact that the long-term financial problem is far worse for Medicare than Social Security, most policy proposals have focused on Social Security. There are three reasons for this. One is that with numerous legislated and designated advisory councils, groups are forced to make Social Security proposals more often than Medicare proposals. Another reason is that the numbers are less daunting--it is hard enough to deal with unfunded liabilities of $11 trillion, but it is virtually impossible to deal with unfunded liabilities of $70 trillion. The third reason is that changes to Social Security just involve money--cutting benefits means cutting someone's defined-benefit pension payments. Cuts in Medicare, on the other hand, while partly mitigating financial burdens on the aged, could also involve the much more difficult question of limiting, or even rationing, health care treatments. Medicare cuts could be quite literally a life-and-death affair. I have participated in the Social Security debate in the past, as chair of the 1994-96 Social Security Advisory Council, but today I want to look at both programs together. I freely admit that my proposal is only partial, a first step. I will focus only on ages of eligibility and tax rates for both programs, and will leave aside questions about privatizing Social Security or "carve out" or "add on" individual accounts. I also leave aside difficult questions about the structure of Medicare--whether and how to make more use of economic incentives or rationing. My idea on the tax side is relatively straightforward. Today, Medicare Part A is financed by a 2.9 percent combined payroll tax on all wages, and Social Security is financed by a combined 12.4 percent combined payroll tax on wages up to $90,000, a threshold that is increased each year with the growth in wages. One of my goals is to standardize treatment across the programs, and I would do that by removing the $90,000 cap on wages and salaries that are taxable for Social Security purposes. Let's treat both programs alike by taxing all wages for both programs. Will this represent a tax increase for Social Security? Of course it will, though in part the removal of the cap merely adjusts for the fact that because of the widening of the income distribution, substantially more wages are above the cap than in earlier times. But the main reason for removing the taxable payroll cap is that both programs together are woefully underfunded, and this would be a small step in the direction of fiscal responsibility. The basic idea on the benefit side is nearly as straightforward. We already have two relevant retirement ages for Social Security--the so-called normal retirement age (NRA), at which an individual qualifies for full benefits on the basis of his or her earnings history; and the age of early eligibility (EEA), at which an individual can receive actuarially reduced benefits. Historically the NRA has been 65 and the EEA has been 62. Recently the NRA has begun slowly climbing from 65 to 67 and is now near 66, but the EEA has remained fixed at 62. As I will argue below, there is a good rationale for raising the NRA beyond age 67, but I also think we should raise the EEA at the same pace. There are two reasons: As the NRA rises with no change in the EEA, the actuarial reductions get larger and larger. Pretty soon, benefit payments at the EEA get pretty low, and what we are thinking of as a retirement insurance program becomes progressively less so. Because of shifting demographics, the country will just plain need more workers to pay for growing retirement costs. If all workers were perfectly rational in comparing benefits and costs, they could possibly decide for themselves when to retire. But study after study has shown that many workers seem to be highly myopic and retire at the first instant at which they are eligible for any money at all from Social Security. In such cases a reasonable policy response is to nudge workers in the direction of working longer careers by the simple expedient of moving the EEA up along with the NRA. The next part of the age program is to keep the two ages common across both Social Security and Medicare. Confusion already exists because people qualify for full benefits under Medicare at age 65 and full benefits under Social Security at an age nearing 66. As the NRA increases for Social Security, the disparity will widen and the confusion will grow. So at the slowly rising NRA, I would give full benefits for both Social Security and Medicare. At the EEA, which would rise at the same slow rate as the NRA, I would give actuarially reduced benefits for Social Security and early buy-in opportunities for Medicare. One illustrative schedule is that individuals might be allowed to buy in to Medicare by paying, say, 90 percent of the average Medicare costs for parts A, B, and D once they hit the EEA, 60 percent a year later, 30 percent a year later, and only the standard part B and D premiums when they fully qualify for Medicare. Tying the program conventions together has programmatic value, but these programs are different and one must proceed cautiously. Medicare is a health insurance program, and health insurance performs two functions--it mitigates financial loss for households getting treatment, and it permits households to get health treatment in the first place. To the extent that the latter motive is dominant, as it could be for low-income or disabled households, measures to raise the eligibility age could be problematic. For this reason, it would be important to provide a generous schedule of buy-in substitutes for households with low-income or disabled beneficiaries, to encourage greater use of health care in the years before the NRA. The subsidies could be offset by surcharges on the premiums for well-off households, who could more easily afford the buy-in. Retirement Ages The hardest question here is how rapidly to increase the basic retirement age, at which individuals qualify for full benefits under both programs. There are several ways of dealing with the question. I begin with the underlying logic for a rising retirement age. Historically most workers contributing to Social Security have been males. Males in my grandparents' generation who were lucky enough to attain age 65 could be expected to live, and collect benefits, for another thirteen years. Males in my grandchildren's generation lucky enough to attain age 65 are projected to live another twenty years. Had the NRA not been raised, this factor alone would have made Social Security a better deal by almost 60 percent for the younger generation. Obviously there have been many other changes in society, the economy, and Social Security over this time. But, still, it is my guess is that if the designers of Social Security had known back in the 1930s that postwar life expectancies would increase so significantly, they would have built rising retirement ages into the system. Of course, when asked, people do not favor rising retirement ages. But given the various undesirable choices for moving these programs back toward actuarial soundness, a slowly rising retirement age seems far and away the fairest across generations. One standard for how fast to raise the retirement age is to invoke life expectancies. Life expectancies at age 65 speak to the question of how many years into retirement individuals are likely to collect benefits. Life expectancies at age 20 address the question from a different perspective--as individuals enter adulthood, we might have them spend a constant percent of their time in work and retirement. The age-65 standard shows that, for males born between 1875 and 1995, life expectancy at age 65 has increased 7.4 years, an average of 0.6 years every decade . It also turns out that life expectancy has increased more rapidly for those born in the twentieth century--over this shorter period improvement has been about 0.7 years every decade. The age-20 proportionate standard works out as follows. In 1940, at the dawn of Social Security, 20-year-old males could expect to work another 45 years and to live just 1.9 more after retirement. That is, they could expect to spend 96 percent of their remaining life in the work force and 4 percent in retirement. Today, 20-year-old males can expect to live another 55.6 years. If they were to spend 96 percent of that time in the work force, the NRA would be slightly more than 73. By this standard, the NRA would have advanced 1.4 years every decade. Health status is also relevant. One measure is the share of men near death, defined as being in the last two years of life. In 1960 this share, for men around today's Social Security early retirement age of 62, was about 6 percent . In 2000, the share of 68-year-old men near death was at this baseline level of 6 percent. By this health standard, in 40 years healthy life expectancies have increased 6 years, or 1.5 years per decade. One can also consider a broader measure of health status. Since 1970 the National Health Interview Survey has asked a direct question about health status. Typically, the proportion of people describing their own health as fair or poor is taken as a measure of poor health status. Since the numbers bounce around, I have made comparisons with trend lines estimated by Cutler, Liebman, and Smyth . The trend lines show that, in the mid-1970s, 28 percent of men aged 62 reported that their health status was fair or poor. By the mid-1990s the 28 percent standard was not reached until men were about 73, an improvement of 11 years in just two decades. By this standard, the retirement age should increase by a whopping 5.5 years per decade. These health standards give varying estimates, so the conclusions are not as tight as for life expectancy. But they suggest that health standards are improving even more rapidly than life expectancies. If the retirement age were increased about a year per decade from the standpoint of life expectancy alone, the increase would be more rapid from the standpoint of health status. A sensible compromise would seem to be to raise the NRA and the EEA slightly more than a year every decade--maybe three months every two years--a pace slightly slower than the present rate of increase for the NRA. This rate of increase should be reviewed periodically to adjust to future changes in health status or life expectancy. There is one final point. A standard argument against raising the retirement age is that people are working physically demanding jobs and are simply not able to continue. Of course, workers can and do switch careers as they age, or claim early retirement. But it still makes sense to look at the share in demanding jobs, as is done in . In 1950, one-fifth of the work force worked in jobs judged by the Labor Department to be physically demanding. But this share has dropped an average of 24 percent per decade since then. By 1996 it was down to only 7.5 percent of workers in physically demanding jobs, and by the time any of my suggested measures take effect, the share should be on the order of 3 or 4 percent--not zero, but probably not high enough to argue against measures to raise the retirement age at a gradual rate. It is not popular to raise the retirement age. Workers have a valid desire to consume some of their increasing productivity in the form of leisure time, or earlier retirement. At the same time, Social Security and Medicare together pose huge financial problems. It is also not popular to raise payroll taxes, or to ration health care. Among very unpleasant alternatives, raising the retirement age seems to be one of the fairest approaches across generations. Budget Savings Let's then take a policy change that raises the retirement age three months every two years, or 1.25 years every decade, and taxes all wages for both Social Security and Medicare. How does it stack up? The tax change is easy to compute. Right now about 85 percent of wages are taxable and this coverage rate is slated to decline slightly over time. Applying the 12.4 percent tax rate to the15 percent of wages that are untaxed leads to an effective change based on now-taxable wages and salaries of 2.1 percentage points. This change more than solves the seventy-five-year Social Security problem (for the intermediate assumptions), and solves more than half of the infinite-horizon Social Security problem. It is only a first step, but a strong one. Increasing the NRA by three months every two years would improve the actuarial balance of Social Security by slightly less than 1 percentage point of taxable wages and salaries. I ignore any cost-saving effect on Medicare, permitting the early buy-in costs for low-income households to use up any budget savings from higher premiums for high-income households whose primary breadwinner is just over 65. If we were to combine this increase in the retirement age with a few standard measures to improve the horizontal equity of Social Security--including all newly-hired state and local workers and using a chained price index--the total improvement reaches about 1.4 percentage points. On net, the changes recommended here might improve the overall balance of Social Security plus Part A of Medicare by about 3.5 percentage points of taxable wages and salaries. These steps alone are enough to finance Social Security in perpetuity. Or, they could finance Social Security for seventy-five years and extend the life of Part A trust fund by about three decades. Huge general revenue liabilities for parts B and D of Medicare remain, but this package is still a start in dealing with growing retirement costs. As said above, the package of taxing all payrolls for Social Security and advancing the normal retirement age is indeed strong medicine. My approach here has been to unify proposals for the financial reform of Social Security and Medicare on the tax side and for retirement ages. Will the changes be pleasant or popular? No. Will something like them, or worse, be necessary some day? Yes. We might as well begin now thinking about those changes that seem to be the fairest across generations. Footnotes David Cutler, Jeffrey B. Liebman, and Seamus Smyth (forthcoming), "How Fast Should the Social Security Retirement Age Rise?" Table 1. Measures of Trust Fund Actuarial Deficiency, 2005 Seventy-Five-Year Horizon Infinite Horizon Trust Fund Exhaustion Date Payroll Tax Shortfall (percent) Open Group Liability (trillions of dollars) Share of GDP (percent) Payroll Tax Shortfall (percent) Open Group Liability (trillions of dollars) Share of GDP (percent) OASDI 2041 1.9 4.0 0.6 3.5 11.1 1.2 Medicare, Part A 2020 3.1 8.6 1.4 5.8 24.1 2.5 Medicare, Parts B & D -- -- 19.8 3.1 -- 45.8 4.8 Source: and 2041 1.9 4.0 0.6 3.5 11.1 1.2 2020 3.1 8.6 1.4 5.8 24.1 2.5 -- -- 19.8 3.1 -- 45.8 4.8 Table 2. Male Life Expectancies Year of Birth Year Turning 65 Mean Life Expectancy at 65 Year of Birth Year Turning 20 Mean Life Expectancy at 20 1875 1940 12.7 1920 1940 46.9 1905 1970 13.8 1950 1970 49.5 1935 2000 16.5 1980 2000 55.6 1965 2030 18.4 2010 2030 n.a. 1995 2060 20.1 2040 2060 n.a. Source: Social Security Administration and . 1875 1940 12.7 1920 1940 46.9 1905 1970 13.8 1950 1970 49.5 1935 2000 16.5 1980 2000 55.6 1965 2030 18.4 2010 2030 n.a. 1995 2060 20.1 2040 2060 n.a. Table 3. U.S. Workers in Physically Demanding Jobs Year Percent in Demanding Jobs 1950 20.3 1960 13.8 1970 11.1 1980 9.1 1990 7.8 1996 7.5 Source: Eugene Steuerle, Christopher Spiro, and Richard W. Johnson (1999), on Social Security and Retirement Policy , The Urban Institute, August 15. 1950 20.3 1960 13.8 1970 11.1 1980 9.1 1990 7.8 1996 7.5
Remarks by Governor Donald L. Kohn At the 15th Annual Hyman P. Minsky Conference, The Levy Economics Institute of Bard College, Annandale-on-Hudson, New York April 22, 2005 Imbalances in the U.S. Economy I am pleased to be here today at this conference considering U.S. financial and macroeconomic conditions and the economy's prospects, puzzles, and imbalances. You have considered a broad range of issues of interest to us at the Federal Reserve, and I am sorry I could not be here for your discussions. I thought it might be useful for me to close the conference by giving you my perspective on some of the imbalances currently evident in the U.S. and global economies, how they might be resolved, and their implications for policy--including monetary policy. I must emphasize that these views are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. The Current State of the Economy The United States has been doing well over the past few years by most measures of overall economic performance. Real gross domestic product growth has rebounded smartly from the 2001 recession, and slack both in labor and product markets has eroded appreciably. After a substantial period of little or no increase in employment, payroll gains have picked up to an average of 160,000 per month over the past half year, and the unemployment rate has fallen to 5-1/4 percent, almost 1 percentage point below where it was two years ago. Household spending on goods and services and housing has been strong throughout the expansion, and, more recently, business investment in capital equipment has surged. The increase in output has been accompanied by large increases in labor productivity that, since 2002, have been in excess of even the elevated pace of the second half of the 1990s. To be sure, the rise in energy prices seems to have taken a toll on consumer confidence and spending most recently. But with financial conditions still accommodative, profits and cash flow still healthy, and incomes continuing to increase, most forecasters expect growth to remain solid. Excluding food and energy, the rate of inflation has fluctuated around 1-1/2 percent over the past few years, measured by the chain-weighted price index for personal consumption expenditures. Core inflation has been running somewhat faster more recently, in part because of the increases in the prices of energy, commodities, and imports that began last year. Nevertheless, barring further sizable increases in the prices of oil and natural gas, both core and headline inflation rates should moderate later this year. Buttressing this view, long-run inflation expectations have been, on balance, fairly stable in the face of these price gyrations. Imbalances in the Economy Although the overall state of the economy is favorable, some aspects of the current situation might be viewed as worrisome. In particular, beneath this placid surface are what appear to be a number of spending imbalances and unusual asset-price configurations. At the most aggregated level, the important imbalance is the large and growing discrepancy between what the United States spends and what it produces. This imbalance, measured by the current account deficit, has risen to a record level, both in absolute terms and as a ratio to GDP. Moreover, the cumulative value of past current account deficits--the net foreign indebtedness of the United States--is also at a record high, again both in absolute terms and as a ratio to GDP. The growing current account deficit has been associated with a pronounced decline in the saving proclivities of both the private and public sectors. Over the past year, households have saved only about 1 percent of their after-tax income, compared with about 8 percent on average from 1950 to 2000. In the public sector, the federal-budget deficit has been larger in the past, at least relative to the size of GDP, but the deterioration in the balance over recent years has been sizable, moving from a surplus of $236 billion in fiscal year 2000 to a deficit of more than $400 billion last year. The resultant overall decline in national saving contrasts with the pace of capital spending: Residential investment as a share of GDP now stands at its highest level since the 1950s, while the share of GDP devoted to investment in plant and equipment has recovered sufficiently from its recent slump to return to the neighborhood of its long-run average. One might have thought that, with probably limited economic slack remaining, such a pronounced imbalance between national saving and domestic investment would have placed substantial upward pressure on interest rates. One also might have expected real interest rates to be high at a time when we are experiencing rapid productivity growth. But, as you know, nominal and real yields on both short-term and long-term Treasury securities are low by historical standards. Moreover, although premiums on private bonds relative to Treasury yields have risen somewhat of late, they are still at the low end of their historical range, suggesting that investors are sanguine about default risk and other types of uncertainty. Low interest rates have, in turn, been a major force driving the phenomenal run-up in residential real estate prices over the past few years, and the resultant boost to net worth must be one of the reasons households have felt comfortable directing so little of their current income to saving. However, whether low interest rates and other fundamental factors can fully explain the current lofty level of housing prices is the subject of substantial debate. This situation raises some difficult questions. Can the aforementioned spending imbalances and possible asset-price anomalies continue without threatening macroeconomic stability? And if they cannot be sustained, how will they unwind? Will the transition be relatively benign, or will it be a rocky adjustment with deleterious effects on economic growth, inflation, and other factors? And finally, what role will government policies play in influencing the path of adjustment? Sustainability of Current Imbalances On the question of sustainability, it is worth noting that these sorts of imbalances are not new. The trade account has been persistently in deficit since the late 1970s, and the current account has been in a similar state almost continuously since the early 1980s. The personal saving rate has been declining since the mid 1980s. And the federal government has spent more than it has taken in every year since 1970 except for a brief respite between 1998 and 2001. So these imbalances have been around for a long time, and our economy is still churning out high rates of productivity and income growth. But, the magnitude of these imbalances is increasingly moving into unfamiliar territory. I have already noted the unprecedented level of the current account deficit and the depressed household saving rate. As for the federal budget, the projected funding shortfall in Social Security and exploding Medicare and Medicaid costs mean that without a reassertion of fiscal discipline, the long-run outlook for the federal budget balance is for worse to come. The sustainability of these large and growing imbalances has become especially suspect because it would require behavior that appears to be inconsistent with reasonable assumptions about how people spend and invest. For example, it seems unlikely that foreigners would be willing to continue to indefinitely increase the proportion of their wealth held in dollars without upward movements in the expected return on these assets. And if the government tried to honor its current long-run commitments to future retirees without raising tax rates, it seems unlikely that it could borrow the massive amounts needed without paying creditors higher returns--returns potentially so high over coming decades as to be economically debilitating. Similar considerations apply to the current low rate of household saving. Most theories of consumer behavior emphasize the desire of households to save for retirement. However, given average life expectancies and the typical number of working years, a sustained saving rate of less than 2 percent is too low for households to accumulate enough wealth to maintain their standard of living after retirement--unless, of course, those households are lucky enough to receive outsized capital gains on their homes and other assets. Although many households have received such windfalls over the past few years, such gains are not likely to be continually repeated in the future. The current imbalances will ultimately give way to more sustainable configurations of income and spending. But that leaves open the question of the nature of that adjustment. Ideally, the transition would be made without disturbing the relatively tranquil macroeconomic environment that we now enjoy. But the size and persistence of the current imbalances pose a risk that the transition may prove more disruptive. The Underlying Causes of the Imbalances Speculating on the adjustment path would be more fruitful if we understood how we got to where we are today. Unfortunately, the situation is complicated and, even after the fact, not fully understood, which is why we hold conferences like this one. Nevertheless, I think we can identify several factors that have played an important role in the emergence of these imbalances, and in so doing gain some insight into their likely resolution. A rise in the net supply of saving in other countries, the perception that dollar assets are a relatively favorable vehicle in which to place that saving, and an increase in global financial integration that has facilitated the transfer of savings have been important factors in our growing trade and current-account imbalances. The increased desire to hold dollar assets resulted in part from the jump in the rate of increase in productivity that materialized in the United States in the mid- to late-1990s and that, in turn, raised the perceived rate of return on U.S. assets. At the same time, sluggish growth and recessions in other developed countries and the Asian financial crisis of 1997 damped returns elsewhere. Moreover, foreign governments--especially in Asia--took the lesson from the financial crisis that a large war chest of reserves was needed to protect against the volatility of capital flows. Such a buildup of dollar reserves was also consistent with an emphasis on stable exchange rates that fostered exports as means to sustaining high growth rates in their countries. The resultant shift toward dollar-denominated assets was associated with capital inflows into the United States and a deterioration of the current-account balance. In addition, the increased willingness of the rest of the world to hold U.S. assets, along with the jump in our productivity growth, contributed to a sharp increase in U.S. equity valuations. And the associated capital gains, in turn, caused the net worth of U.S. households to soar relative to their income and induced a reduction in personal savings rates. Then, in 2000 and 2001, global stock markets slumped and business investment was slashed. In the United States and elsewhere, monetary and fiscal policies turned stimulative to bolster demand and to stave off unwelcome disinflation. The size of the stimulus required to accomplish our macroeconomic objectives in the United States was further increased by the sluggish economic growth of our trading partners and by continued demand for dollar assets, which further exacerbated our trade imbalance. In the aftermath of the recession in the United States, private aggregate demand, both here as well as in Europe and Japan, has strengthened only gradually. This slow rebound has meant that many central banks around the world have held real interest rates low to support real activity and keep inflation stable. The climate of low interest rates has in turn bolstered asset markets in some countries, especially residential real estate markets. The associated capital gains, coupled with financial market innovations that make extracting housing equity easier in the United States, help to explain the depressed level of the personal saving rate here; low interest rates themselves also have probably boosted consumption relative to income by reducing the return to saving. At the same time, demands for dollar-denominated assets have been sustained at a high level. Returns on these assets have apparently continued to look reasonably attractive to private investors. And some foreign governments have continued to accumulate dollar assets, adding to already high levels of reserves. Their actions likely reflect in part a concern about the adequacy of their domestic demand to support the advances in economic activity required for job creation. This explanation has emphasized a favorable relative return on U.S. investment, coupled with increased foreign willingness to hold dollar assets, as causal factors driving the United States' growing current account deficit and low national saving rate. But causation may in part also have run from structural influences that contributed to reduced U.S. saving. That is, a fiscal policy shift toward greater deficits and innovations in financial markets and other structural changes that facilitated household spending worked to lower national saving relative to domestic investment. The resultant upward pressure on rates of return here relative to those abroad have helped to draw in capital and increase the current account deficit. Unwinding the Imbalances What can we say about the likely path by which these spending imbalances will resolve themselves and about the effects those resolutions will have on the broader economy? Almost a year ago, the Federal Reserve started a process of removing the unusual degree of policy accommodation, which was outliving its usefulness as the economic expansion gathered strength and the possibility of declines in inflation receded. We have not yet finished this task: The federal funds rate appears to be below the level that we would expect to be consistent with the maintenance of stable inflation and full employment over the medium run, and, if growth is sustained and inflation remains contained, we are likely to raise rates further at a measured pace. By increasing the return to saving and by damping the upward momentum in housing prices, rising interest rates should induce an increase in the personal savings rate, and thereby lessen one of the significant spending imbalances we have noted. Forecasting the path of the overall spending-production imbalance is more difficult. To a great extent, continuation of the current account deficit depends on the willingness of investors to provide financing. One factor that will influence their willingness is the rate at which U.S. dollar assets are increasing in global portfolios relative to other assets. We can speculate that unless a persistently large current account deficit in the United States is accompanied by further and continuous shifts in the world's willingness to increase holdings of dollar-denominated assets in their total portfolios, investors will ultimately require higher ex ante rates of return on their U.S. assets relative to those available on foreign assets. This presumably applies to foreign governments as well as private investors. Governments will eventually see that returns from encouraging domestic investment will outstrip those expected on their growing holdings of dollar reserves, or that more-flexible exchange rates are required to exercise a stabilizing monetary policy. Over the past few years, we have seen a moderate decline in the dollar, indicating that the demand for dollar-denominated assets is not infinitely elastic. And, at some point, the current account deficit should start to narrow. In addition, the process of narrowing deficits may be helped by an autonomous rise in domestic saving. We do not understand all the reasons for recent low personal saving rates, and the rise in the saving rate could exceed the increase that results from likely movements in interest rates and house prices--especially as households contemplate the adequacy of their retirement income. And fiscal policymakers do seem to be more aware of the need to change the medium-term trajectory of the federal budget. To the extent that current spending behavior is built on realistic expectations--in particular, for future short-term interest rates, the exchange rate, rates of return on capital investments in the United States relative to those abroad, and housing price appreciation--the transition should be relatively orderly: Asset prices should adjust gradually to changing developments, as should the spending patterns of households and firms. But if current expectations are badly distorted, then the way forward may not be so smooth. Eventually, reality always asserts itself over wishful thinking, and such realignments are sometimes abrupt, as illustrated by the collapse of the high-tech bubble a few years ago. In such circumstances, asset prices can adjust sharply, and private spending may also respond quickly, making it difficult for monetary and fiscal policy actions to provide a timely enough counterweight to keep the economy continuously on track. Are expectations substantially distorted? Because we seldom have direct and reliable readings, it is hard to say. Still, some observations can be made. First, even after their recent increases, both Treasury yields and risk premiums on private securities are low by historical standards. To a considerable extent, Treasury yields reflect two factors: low actual and expected inflation; and the market's belief that, with growth moderate and inflation contained, the federal funds rate will move up only gradually as the expansion proceeds. In addition, with the macroeconomic climate expected to remain calm, investors seem to require less compensation for the risks inherent in lending over a longer term or of supplying credit to borrowers who usually have a greater chance of defaulting. In this environment, the likelihood that major credit problems will develop would seem limited, and that limited risk makes it not unreasonable for private bond premiums to be at the low end of their historical range. Still, investors seem to expect short-term interest rates to remain on the low side of historical averages for some time. These subdued expectations may reflect a belief that underlying global demand will remain damped and that the world will continue to be willing to invest heavily in the United States. A second observation concerns the housing market, which you have already discussed. A couple of years ago I was fairly confident that the rise in real estate prices primarily reflected low interest rates, good growth in disposable income, and favorable demographics. Prices have gone up far enough since then relative to interest rates, rents, and incomes to raise questions; recent reports from professionals in the housing market suggest an increasing volume of transactions by investors, who (along with homeowners more generally) may be expecting the recent trend of price increases to continue. Even so, such a distortion would most likely unwind through a slow erosion of real house prices, rather than a sudden crash. Moreover, experience suggests that consumer spending would respond only gradually to any loss in wealth--an important consideration because a gradual adjustment in spending would give offsetting policy actions time to work. In any event, I take some comfort from the continuing disagreement among close students of the market about whether houses are overvalued, and, given the widespread press coverage of this issue, from my expectation that people should now be aware of the risks in the real estate market. Finally, there is the exchange rate. The inability of anyone to predict movement in the dollar accurately and consistently has been evident. Presumably, the dollar's value is based partly on market expectations about future interest rates, trade flows, and portfolio preferences, among other things. There is no particular reason to think that these expectations are substantially distorted. Certainly no investor out there buying dollar assets could be surprised to learn that the United States has a growing current account deficit! And, I do not anticipate a marked and persistent downshift in U.S. productivity growth that would greatly reduce the expected returns from holding dollar-denominated assets. Governments who have been accumulating dollar assets also would seem to have no reason for shifting their preferences suddenly and disruptively, even in the context of allowing greater exchange rate flexibility. Financial markets are flexible and increasingly integrated around the world, facilitating continuous and gradual adaption of capital flows to changing circumstances. Markets for goods and services are also becoming more integrated and flexible, though this trend has been, perhaps, more subject to government actions to slow the process. In fact, the dollar has risen in 2005, reflecting the interplay of portfolio preferences and shifting patterns of saving and investment in markets. In all likelihood, adjustments toward reduced imbalances in the United States and globally will be handled well by markets without, by themselves, disrupting the good, overall performance of the U.S. economy--provided, of course, that the Federal Reserve reacts appropriately to foster price and economic stability. Still, complacency would be ill-advised. Although the odds seem favorable for an orderly adjustment, the current imbalances are large and--importantly for gauging risks--unusual from a historical perspective. Thus, we have little experience to call on in judging when and how they will be corrected. In such circumstances, we cannot rule out sudden shifts in expectations, whether or not they are unreasonable to begin with, and asset prices may change suddenly. Investors may recognize the unsustainability of some flows and prices, but believe they can adjust in advance of the market--as apparently many thought they could in the tech-stock bubble--and their reactions when prices move could add to volatility. Moreover, we cannot rule out governments engaging in unwise policies--policies that might undermine confidence or might hinder market adjustments and associated changes in asset prices. The Role of Policy Sound public policies are essential to enhance the chances that any transition will be smooth. A permanent correction to the spending imbalances must involve the restoration of fiscal discipline and long-run solutions to the financing problems of Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid. Achieving these objectives are important in any event, but they take on added weight to the extent that we cannot count on an ever-increasing flow of global savings coming to the United States. Without a resolution of these fiscal problems, the balancing of aggregate production and spending would be much more difficult and would result in intensified pressures on interest rates. Those pressures would tend to hold down the growth of investment and productivity and they would exacerbate asset-price movements and adjustment difficulties in other markets. Adjustment of global current-account imbalances could also be aided by changes over time in the policies of our trading partners. To some extent, it would seem appropriate for them to use their macroeconomic policies to stimulate domestic spending. In many cases, however, the root cause of deficient demand seems to be more structural than cyclical in nature, and would thus call for more micro-oriented measures. Combined, these policy initiatives on the part of our trading partners should yield higher productivity growth, generate more vigorous spending abroad, raise rates of return on their capital investment, and ease their adjustment to smaller U.S. deficits. These changes, in turn, would boost the demand for U.S. exports and could shift portfolio preferences away from dollar-denominated assets. Other public policies here and abroad can have an important influence on the transition process by working with markets and facilitating adjustment. For example, governments should strive to maintain and enhance the flexibility of markets. In particular, the United States and its trading partners should vigorously protect the current degree of market openness and should aim to reduce trade barriers further. Over time, increased exchange rate flexibility abroad would also be beneficial. These and other types of market flexibility help facilitate needed shifts in spending and prices; without them, rigidities might impede such stabilizing changes, causing adjustments to break out forcefully in other, more disruptive ways. Strong financial institutions are especially important at this time when asset prices could move by large amounts unexpectedly. By ensuring that financial institutions are adequately capitalized and well prepared in general to deal with major changes in asset prices, prudential regulation decreases the risk that the actions of impaired financial institutions could disrupt the flow of credit and thereby intensify what might already be difficult adjustments. In addition, strong institutions should be positioned to weather any necessary changes in short-term interest rates as policy is adjusted. Finally, there is the role that monetary policy plays in reacting to these imbalances and their inevitable unwinding. The Federal Reserve's mandate is to keep inflation low and stable and to promote full resource utilization, with the economy expanding at its maximum sustainable rate. Thus, anything that has the potential to threaten the stability of output and prices is of concern to us. These imbalances certainly affect the forces of supply and demand and have consequences for price stability. Nevertheless, their direct influence on monetary policy is limited: They are important to us in so far as they affect the macro economy, and in this regard they are just a few of the factors that the Federal Open Market Committee considers in assessing the prospects for the stability of prices and output. Hence, we should take into account the claim on resources implied by the federal budget, as we should the effect that housing wealth has on consumer spending and the economy more broadly. We should note the implications of changes in the exchange rate or borrowing rates by U.S. corporations that result from shifts in global investor sentiment. But, in the same vein, we should not hesitate to raise interest rates to contain inflation pressures just because it might set off a retrenchment in housing prices, just as we were willing to keep rates unusually low as house prices rose rapidly. Nor should we hesitate to raise rates because higher rates mean higher debt-servicing burdens for the current account, the fiscal authority, or households. In my view, our role is to anticipate as best we can the macroeconomic effects of imbalances and their correction and to respond to unexpected changes in asset prices and spending propensities as they occur. It is through such actions that we aim to achieve our objective of economic stability. Footnotes Eileen Mauskopf and , of the Board's, staff contributed greatly to the preparation of these remarks. For a model-based examination of this question, see " ," remarks by Vice Chairman Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. to the Economics Club of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina (April 20, 2005).
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and between the Civitas BankGroup, Inc., Franklin, Tennessee, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. A copy of the Written Agreement is attached.
Joint Press Release Financial Crimes Enforcement Network Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation National Credit Union Administration Office of the Comptroller of the Currency Office of Thrift Supervision For Immediate Release April 26, 2005 Guidance and Advisory Issued on Banking Services for Money Services Businesses Operating in the United States The Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN), along with the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the National Credit Union Administration, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Office of Thrift Supervision (collectively, the ï¿½Federal Banking Agenciesï¿½), today issued interpretive guidance designed to clarify the requirements for, and assist banking organizations in, appropriately assessing and minimizing risks posed by providing banking services to money services businesses. FinCEN also has issued a concurrent advisory to money services businesses to emphasize their Bank Secrecy Act regulatory obligations and to notify them of the types of information that they will be expected to provide to a banking organization in the course of opening or maintaining account relationships. While recognizing the importance and diversity of services provided by money services businesses, the guidance to banking organizations specifies that FinCEN and the Federal Banking Agencies expect banking organizations that open and maintain accounts for money services businesses to apply the requirements of the Bank Secrecy Act, as they do with all account holders, on a risk-assessed basis. Registration with FinCEN, if required, and compliance with any state licensing requirements represent the most basic of compliance obligations for money services businesses. Based on existing Bank Secrecy Act requirements applicable to banking organizations, the minimum compliance expectations associated with opening and maintaining accounts for money services businesses are: Apply the banking organizationï¿½s Customer Identification Program; Confirm FinCEN registration, if required; Confirm compliance with state or local licensing requirements, if applicable; Confirm agent status, if applicable; and Conduct basic risk assessment to determine the level of risk associated with the account. Through the interpretive guidance, FinCEN and the Federal Banking Agencies confirm that banking organizations have the flexibility to provide banking services to a wide range of money services businesses while remaining in compliance with the Bank Secrecy Act. While banking organizations are expected to manage risk associated with all accounts, including money services business accounts, banking organizations are not required to ensure their customersï¿½ compliance with all applicable federal and state laws and regulations. The guidance contains examples that may be indicative of lower and higher risk within money services business accounts to assist banking organizations in identifying the risks posed by a money services business customer and in reporting known or suspected violations of law or suspicious transactions relevant to possible violations of law or regulation. In addition, the guidance addresses the recurring question of the obligation of a banking organization to file a suspicious activity report on a money services business that has failed to register with FinCEN, if required to do so, or failed to obtain a license under applicable state law, if required. The guidance states that a banking organization should file a suspicious activity report if it becomes aware that a customer is operating in violation of the registration or state licensing requirements. This approach is consistent with long-standing practices of FinCEN and the Federal Banking Agencies under which banking organizations file suspicious activity reports on known or suspected violations of law or regulation. The concurrently issued FinCEN advisory to money services businesses emphasizes the importance of compliance with Bank Secrecy Act regulatory requirements by money services businesses. The advisory is designed to assist money services businesses by outlining the types of information that they should have and be prepared to provide to a banking organization in the course of opening or maintaining account relationships. The advisory also makes clear that money services businesses that fail to comply with the most basic requirements of the Bank Secrecy Act, such as registration with FinCEN if required, will be subject to regulatory and law enforcement scrutiny, and that continued non-compliance will likely result in the loss of banking services. # # #
Remarks by Vice Chairman Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. At a European Central Bank Colloquium in Honor of Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa, The European Central Bank, Frankfurt, Germany April 27, 2005 The Evolution of Central Banking in the United States This conference honors the many contributions of Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa. As a staff member at the Banca d'Italia starting nearly four decades ago and as a member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank (ECB) since 1998, Tommaso has been deeply involved in what central banks do and how they are organized. Tommaso has stated: "In shaping monetary policy operations, the role of the financial environment is not less important than the charter." That observation was made in the context of the way open market operations ought to be conducted, but I would like to interpret it more broadly in my remarks today. In particular, I will address the question of whether a central bank's operations depend in an important way on the architecture of the financial system and the economy it serves. The charter imposes a certain framework, but events may require changes to procedures and, on rare occasions, changes to the charter. To explore this topic, I would like to discuss the evolution of central banking in the United States, with particular reference to currency, relations between the regions and the center, mandates, and communication. Along the way, I will compare our experience with that of the ECB. I will, of course, be speaking for myself and not my colleagues at the Federal Reserve. To start, let me address the title of this session: "A Single Currency and a Team of Thirteen Central Banks." How did the United States develop a single currency, and what are the parallels that we can draw with the euro? A Single Currency Although the notes of the First and Second Banks of the United States achieved relatively wide circulation, not until the 1860s, during our Civil War, did a national paper currency become established. The first step was an issuance of Treasury currency, commonly known as "greenbacks" because of the color of the ink used to print the notes. Shortly thereafter, the Congress authorized the establishment of national banks, which issued notes that were backed by holdings of government bonds. National bank notes of different banks were similar in design and widely accepted in transactions, but the system had some flaws--the main one being that there was no means of quickly adjusting the supply of national bank notes to changing circumstances. In other words, we had established a national currency system but not a central bank to manage it. This beginning contrasts with the way the euro was established as a single currency out of many European currencies. Rather than having no central bank, what was to become the euro area had, in fact, twelve national central banks, each managing its own currency. Those currencies were brought into line with one another, first through the exchange rate mechanism and later by the permanent fixing of exchange rates. The ECB then was created as a central bank to manage the euro even before a euro paper currency came into existence. Federal Reserve notes began to circulate in 1914. The System's treatment of these notes serves as an example of Tommaso's observation that central bank operations respond to financial events. Initially, notes issued by one Reserve Bank could not be reissued into circulation by another Reserve Bank. A person could travel from Boston to New York with notes from the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston in his pocket, spend the notes in New York, and have them accepted. But when the notes made their way to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, that Bank returned the notes to Boston for re-issue. With regard to currency, then, the Federal Reserve System's charter established twelve banks issuing similar, but not identical, currency. Over time, however, financial practice made this distinction unimportant, and the treatment was later discontinued. Today, currency is treated fungibly by the Reserve Banks, regardless of which Bank issued the note. The notes still carry identifiers that let us track the Reserve Bank to which the notes were originally assigned, and they are still allocated as liabilities to individual Reserve Banks. But there is no practical distinction between the notes of the Reserve Banks. My understanding is that euro banknotes circulate in a similar fashion within the euro area and that any national central bank can re-issue fit euro banknotes regardless of the original issuer. Although the country that originated the production order is indicated by the letter prefix to the euro banknotes' serial number, even that designation is becoming less important as the Eurosystem moves to a pooled system of printing banknotes. Even though the Eurosystem contains the central banks of sovereign nations, the unified treatment of euro banknotes recognizes the unifying force of a single currency. Clearly, then, as one considers currency, the history of the Federal Reserve supports and reflects the truth of Tommaso's statement. As our economy evolved from regional to national, our currency moved more completely in that direction. I would argue that the euro reflects a different perspective, with the currency playing a catalytic role in the development of a continental economy as well as reflecting developments in that regard. Regions and the Center In 1913, the very idea of a central bank was contentious in the United States. The result of the Federal Reserve Act was a compromise, with regional Reserve Banks owned by their member commercial banks and a Board in Washington to provide oversight. Although the integration of U.S. financial markets was considerable by the time the Federal Reserve Act was passed, remaining segmentation made it possible to have different prices for Reserve Bank credit in different regions during the System's early years. To be sure, these differences were not huge--basic discount rates differed by as much as 1-1/2 percentage points, with differences of 50 to 100 basis points persisting for long periods. In Tommaso's terms, monetary policy operations--that is, discount policy--reflected both the regional nature of the System's charter and the partial segmentation of the financial environment. Further integration of the money market over time shifted the focus of policy from twelve regional discount policies to a single national policy. In addition, concern about operational efficiencies and about the level of borrowing led to a move from discount rates to open market operations as the policy instrument of choice. This shift may also have been aided by the expansion of the government bond market during and after World War I. The use of open market operations accelerated the desire for coordination of policy at the national level, so that one Reserve Bank was not draining liquidity at the same time that another was adding liquidity. Again, the financial environment contributed to developments in policy implementation. The balance of policy power shifted from the regions to the center, when the Banking Act of 1935 established the Federal Open Market Committee in its modern form, with the Board having the majority of votes. From the perspective of monetary policy, it was at that point that the Federal Reserve System became a single central bank rather than a confederation of regional central banks. Thus, as Tommaso might suggest, charter changes also played an important role in the structure of policy. In the Eurosystem, the balance between the center and the regions is still evolving. The composition of the Governing Council, the Eurosystem's equivalent to the FOMC, and the administrative roles of the Governing Council and the Executive Board reflect the relative strength of the national central banks. This difference in the relative power of the center, however, should not have great significance for the conduct of monetary policy. As in the Federal Reserve System, each Eurosystem policymaker is expected to act in the interest of the entire currency area. In the United States, once policy implementation boiled down to managing the consolidated balance sheet of the Federal Reserve Banks, it made sense to concentrate open market operations in New York, where most major banks and dealers had offices. New York bought and sold on the FOMC's orders, but the resulting portfolio was allocated to each Reserve Bank based on its capital. In the Eurosystem, open market operations are conducted in a unified but decentralized manner. Each national central bank collects bids from financial entities in its country and relays those to the ECB where they are ranked and allocated accordingly. I would argue that these slight variations in the implementation of monetary policy reflect the financial circumstances under which each institution operates, with a unified money market in the United States and more-fragmented (but consolidating) money markets in the eurozone. Internal Dynamics Although the 1935 legislation that created the Federal Open Market Committee of today shifted monetary policy power from the regions to the center, important questions remained about the internal workings of the FOMC itself. With only five of the twelve Reserve Bank Presidents on the Committee at any one time, how were these seats to be allocated? The FOMC finally settled on a rotation system that was a compromise between strict equality and relative importance of each District in the financial system. New York was given a permanent seat. Cleveland and Chicago were grouped together, and the remaining Reserve Banks were put into groups of three. Thus, Presidents of Reserve Banks other than New York would be FOMC members every other year or every third year. That rotation structure has remained unchanged since 1942. The FOMC operates through formal votes on policy questions, yet in recent years dissents in the recorded votes have been remarkably rare. Through discussion and with the leadership of the Chairman, the Committee often crafts a policy action that all members can agree on. Yet, if one looked only at the final vote, one would miss the lively and wide-ranging debate that goes on within the meetings themselves. We try to give the flavor of this debate in the minutes released three weeks after each meeting, and we do release detailed transcripts with a lag of five years. My understanding is that the ECB's Governing Council operates by consensus, although a procedure is in place for a majority vote to determine the course of monetary policy. So far, the ECB has maintained the principle of one member, one vote, with the six Executive Board members and the twelve national central bank presidents voting equally regardless of the economic size of the country that they represent. The ECB has had to wrestle with how to adjust voting as the euro area expands over the next decade or so. The European Council has accepted a proposal from the ECB to cap the number of voting national central bank presidents at fifteen and to begin rotational voting once the number of countries in the euro area exceeds fifteen. The voting rotation would look a bit like that initially established by the Federal Reserve, with the frequency of voting by individual members depending in part on the economic and financial size of their regions. The big difference, however, is that the national central bank presidents would have fifteen votes versus the six votes of the Executive Board members, whereas Federal Reserve Board members have a seven-to-five voting advantage over regional Fed Presidents. Clearly the system that we follow, with strong regional representation but a majority in the center, reflects the judgment made in 1935 regarding the primacy of political appointees with a national mandate. I would argue, although those closer to the scene might correct me, that the ECB's approach to its regional representation reflects an evolving compromise that attempts to balance the ongoing legitimacy of national monetary authorities with the need for a practical solution to the challenges posed by the increasing number of nations within the eurozone. Mandates and Approaches to Monetary Policy The original Federal Reserve Act contained almost no explicit macroeconomic goals for the System to follow. The gold standard was thought to be sufficient to produce price stability, and the central bank's lending to meet the needs of trade ("real bills") was seen as fostering financial stability and the smooth functioning of the economy. Nonetheless, fairly early in its history, the Federal Reserve interpreted its mandate to be the promotion of monetary and credit conditions that would foster sustainable growth and a stable value of the dollar. After the Great Depression and World War II, the federal government took a more-active role in managing the macroeconomy. The Employment Act of 1946 committed the federal government to use its resources to foster maximum employment. This act provided some broad guidance for the Federal Reserve but not explicit goals for monetary policy. Against the backdrop of poorer economic performance in the 1970s, the Congress gave the Federal Reserve explicit goals in a 1977 amendment to the Federal Reserve Act. These goals were stated in terms of maintaining long-run growth of monetary and credit aggregates that would promote "maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates." Thus, the mandate really contained three goals, but the last one has been widely interpreted as those long-term interest rates consistent with the first two goals, giving the Federal Reserve a "dual mandate" of maximum employment and stable prices. Many times in recent decades, the Federal Reserve has stressed its long-run goal of stable prices, linking it with the other half of our mandate by noting that in the long run the two do not conflict. However, at times the Federal Reserve has used the flexibility that our dual mandate provides to consider the variability of real output in policymaking. For the ECB, the Maastricht treaty mandated that price stability would be the primary objective. The treaty also established that the ECB should support the general economic policies of the European Community, aiming at growth and employment but only insofar as price stability is not endangered. This focus on price stability helped establish credibility for the new central bank and has helped anchor inflation expectations among the public. A case can be made that the primacy of the inflation goal also reflected the Bundesbank's distaste for inflation in light of the German hyperinflation of the 1920s and that this legacy was bequeathed to the new European Central Bank. Still, policymakers need to be free to act when severe supply shocks occur. The ECB has wisely interpreted its mandate as maintaining price stability "over the medium term," giving it flexibility to deal with temporary shocks. Obviously, in both the United States and Europe, external conditions and experiences have guided the development of the mandate, as Tommaso would have suggested and common sense dictated. Communication and Transparency As the conduct of monetary policy has changed over time, it has become increasingly important that the central bank communicate in an effective and transparent manner. The Federal Reserve's communications efforts are a work in progress, with several significant advances being implemented over the past few years. In March 2002, the FOMC began to release the vote of its members immediately after its meetings. In December 2004, the FOMC accelerated the release of its minutes from an average of six weeks after the meetings to just three weeks after the meetings. As part of its communication efforts, the Federal Reserve, since the late 1970s, has been providing forecasts of inflation and real economic activity twice a year, as several other central banks have elected to do more recently. Until recently, these forecasts had a horizon that could be as short as one year. This past January, the semiannual FOMC forecasts reported in the Monetary Policy Report were extended to include the following calendar year. ECB communication practices differ in some notable aspects from those of the Federal Reserve, with the differences partly reflecting the ECB's unusual situation as a multinational central bank. The ECB does not release minutes or transcripts and does not provide information on Governing Council votes. Rather than detailing the differing views of individual members, who might feel pressure to represent their national interests if their votes were made public, the ECB focuses on explaining the analysis behind the Governing Council's consensus. In particular, the ECB follows its monetary policy meetings with a news conference in which the president reads a statement reflecting the Council's deliberations and then answers questions. Changes to ECB communication policy in recent years also have reflected the ECB's multinational status. In December 2000, when the ECB started releasing twice-yearly forecasts of gross domestic product and inflation, it chose to release its staff forecasts, in contrast to the practice of the Federal Reserve, which releases the range and central tendencies of projections of the individual FOMC members. I would argue that the Federal Reserve's ongoing process of transparency may also reflect the highly developed state of our financial markets and a growing recognition that, against that financial backdrop, shaping the expectations of market participants can on occasion be an important adjunct to monetary policy. I would be curious to learn the degree to which the ECB's approaches to communications reflect the financial circumstances as well as the multinational nature of the institution. Conclusion In conclusion, I would like to stress the importance of Tommaso's observation about policy that I quoted at the outset. Monetary policy arrangements do, and should, adjust over time to changes in the economic and financial environment. This brief review of the history of the Federal Reserve shows this adjustment process at work over our ninety-year history. The charter lays out a structure for policy implementation that is appropriate for the financial system of the day. The financial system then changes and policy implementation must adapt. Eventually, changes in the financial system can trigger changes in the charter that give policy implementation a new context. While there is no single best way to arrange monetary policy and central bank functions within a multiregional system, I am struck by the broad similarities between the Federal Reserve and the Eurosystem as each grapples with a large, complex, and ever-changing macroeconomy. In some ways, your experience has collapsed into several years changes that evolved over decades for the Federal Reserve. But both experiences, and the ongoing changes in the economic environment in which we operate, suggest that the art of central banking is certainly likely to undergo further changes. Bibliography Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1994). . Washington: Federal Reserve Board. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1943). Banking and Monetary Statistics 1941-1970 . Washington: Federal Reserve Board. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1976). Banking and Monetary Statistics 1914-1941 . Washington: Federal Reserve Board. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1941). Banking Studies . Washington: Federal Reserve Board, pp. 65-83. European Central Bank (2004). . Frankfurt, Germany. European Central Bank (2004). . Frankfurt, Germany. European Central Bank (2004). . Frankfurt, Germany. European Central Bank (2002). ECB Monthly Bulletin (May), pp. 41-53. Kennedy, Ellen (1991). The Bundesbank--Germany's Central Bank in the International Monetary System . New York: Council on Foreign Relations. Meltzer, Allan H (2003). A History of the Federal Reserve, Volume I, 1913-1951 . Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Padoa-Schioppa, Tommaso (2004). The Euro and Its Central Bank . Cambridge: Mass.: MIT Press. "Textual Changes in the Federal Reserve Act and Related Laws" (2002). Compiled in the Law Library of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October 31. Footnotes Padoa-Schioppa (2004), pg. 86. At any given time, the FOMC consists of only twelve members--the seven members of the Board of Governors and five of the twelve Reserve Bank Presidents on a somewhat complicated rotating basis. By custom, however, all twelve Reserve Bank Presidents attend the meetings of the Committee. The extra seven presidents are not considered nonvoting members of the FOMC; they are just not on the Committee at that time. Since there are no nonvoting members of the FOMC, the term "voting member of the FOMC" is redundant. A more accurate term is "non-voting participant." To complicate matters further, some of the extra seven Reserve Bank Presidents are designated as alternate members of the FOMC, depending on the rotation group arrangement.
For immediate release The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced its approval of the applications under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act, the Bank Merger Act, and section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act for Capital City Bank Group, Inc., Tallahassee, Florida, to acquire First Alachua Banking Corporation, and thereby indirectly acquire First National Bank of Alachua, both of Alachua, Florida. Attached is the Boardï¿½s Order relating to this action.
Joint Press Release Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Office of the Comptroller of the Currency Office of Thrift Supervision For immediate release April 29, 2005 Banking Agencies To Perform Additional Analysis Before Issuing Notice of Proposed Rulemaking Related To Basel II The four federal banking agencies (the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of Thrift Supervision) today agreed that additional analysis is needed before publishing a notice of proposed rulemaking (NPR) with respect to the U.S. implementation of the "International Convergence of Capital Measurement and Capital Standards: A Revised Framework," generally known as the Basel II Framework. The agencies had intended to publish the NPR at midyear 2005, but agreed to a delay to better assess the results of a recently completed quantitative impact study (QIS4). The agencies agreed to issue the NPR at the earliest possible date after considering issues raised by the QIS4 results. In a Joint Release published on June 26, 2004, the agencies described U.S. efforts to implement the Basel II Framework through revisions to our existing Capital Adequacy regulations. Among the key features in that implementation plan was an assessment of the implications of the Framework on U.S. regulatory capital requirements through QIS4 and the solicitation of public comments on necessary revisions to existing capital adequacy regulations through an NPR. The QIS4 process was designed to provide the agencies with a better understanding of how the implementation of the Basel II Framework might affect minimum required risk-based capital within the U.S. banking industry overall, at consolidated U.S. institutions, and for specific portfolios. The agencies believe that the QIS4 results are critical inputs in the assessment of (1) the implications of Basel II for the safety and soundness of the banking system and (2) the competitive effects of adopting the Basel II Framework. Both are fundamental to the formulation of the NPR. The agencies have received QIS4 submissions from participating institutions and have completed a preliminary analysis of those materials. The agencies have determined that additional analysis beyond that previously contemplated is necessary before publication of an NPR. The QIS4 submissions evidence material reductions in the aggregate minimum required capital for the QIS4 participant population and significant dispersion of results across institutions and portfolio types. Additional work is necessary to determine whether these results reflect differences in risk, reveal limitations of QIS4, identify variations in the stages of bank implementation efforts (particularly related to data availability), and/or suggest the need for adjustments to the Basel II Framework. The agencies remain committed to moving forward with the implementation of Basel II while retaining Prompt Corrective Action and leverage requirements. The delay in issuing the NPR is intended to ensure that any proposed changes to the risk-based capital framework are consistent with safety and soundness, good risk management practices, and the continued competitive strength of the U.S. banking system. The agencies encourage institutions that seek to adopt Basel II-based rules at their inception to continue with their implementation efforts. The agencies continue to target the existing implementation timeline for Basel II. However, the additional work noted above may cause the agencies to revisit this timeline. The agencies will provide additional information on the timing and other aspects of Basel II implementation as it becomes known. Media Contacts: Federal Reserve Dave Skidmore 202-452-2955 FDIC Frank Gresock 202-898-6634 OCC Kevin Mukri 202-874-5770 OTS Kevin Petrasic 202-906-6677