Governor Susan Schmidt Bies At the Risk Capital 2006 Forum, Paris, France Good morning. And if you will indulge me on this U.S. national holiday, I would like to wish you a happy Fourth of July. I am honored to be addressing such an esteemed collection of professionals in the field of risk management. As you know, the Federal Reserve is strongly committed to the continuing evolution of risk measurement and management at U.S. banking organizations. Thus, we want you to be successful at your craft, and meetings such as this will facilitate the communication of emerging best practice ideas across financial institutions. Today I will provide an update on progress with respect to Basel II implementation in the United States, and describe areas where further advances in risk management practices are most needed to ensure the success of this new risk-based capital standard. Naturally, given the international composition of this audience, I will also offer some thoughts on cross-border implementation issues associated with Basel II, including so-called home-host issues. Moving to Basel IIBy now most of you are aware that on March 30 of this year the Federal Reserve Board approved a draft of the U.S. notice of proposed rulemaking (NPR) on the Basel II capital framework. I imagine that many of you have already read the draft’s 400-plus pages. Once all of the U.S. banking agencies have completed their individual review and approval processes, the NPR will be issued in the Federal Register, meaning that it will be officially out for comment. It appears that those approval processes are going well and there have not been any unanticipated issues so far. Indeed, the recent completion of the Office of Management and Budget’s (OMB) review of the draft NPR brings us one step closer to issuing the NPR for comment. Since the release of the draft NPR by the Federal Reserve, the U.S. banking agencies have met with a number of industry groups, comprising both U.S. and foreign banks, to discuss the document. From our perspective, these discussions have been informative and helpful, and we believe that some of the clarifications we have provided have been useful to bankers. I would like to make one further clarification, on a procedural matter that may be a bit confusing: Although we welcome comments on the draft NPR at this time, bankers should not expect that those comments will be incorporated in the NPR that is released in the Federal Register. That stage will come later in our rulemaking process. A proposed 120-day comment period will be provided once the final NPR has been released, and all comments given now and during that period will be considered as the final rule is written. Before discussing some of the specifics in the draft NPR, I would like to review the Federal Reserve’s reasons for pursuing Basel II. Rationale for Moving to Basel IIThe current Basel I capital framework, adopted nearly twenty years ago, has served us well. But it has become increasingly inadequate for large, internationally active banks that are offering ever more complex and sophisticated products and services. We need a better capital framework for these particular banks, and we believe that Basel II is such a framework. One of the major improvements in Basel II is the closer linkage between capital requirements and the way banks manage their actual risk. The current Basel I measures have very limited risk-sensitivity and do not provide bankers, supervisors, or the marketplace with meaningful measures of risk at large complex organizations. Under Basel I, a bank’s capital requirement does not adequately reflect gradations in asset quality and does not change over time to reflect deterioration in asset quality. Further, there is no explicit capital requirement to account for the operational risk embedded in many of the services from which the largest institutions generate a good portion of their revenues. In addition to strengthening the linkage between “minimum regulatory capital,” as calculated in Pillar 1, and the way banks manage their “actual” capital, Basel II should make the financial system safer by encouraging continuing improvement in risk-measurement and risk-management practices at the largest banks. Pillar 1 of Basel II is based on many of the economic capital practices of the most sophisticated banks and therefore brings minimum regulatory capital requirements closer to the capital generated by banks’ internal models. By providing a consistent framework within which the largest banks calculate minimum regulatory capital requirements, supervisors will more readily be able to identify those portfolios and banks whose capital is not commensurate with their inherent risk levels. Working within this consistent framework and engaging in ongoing and regular dialogue with supervisors will in turn help inform management about how its proprietary risk measurement and management models compare with the range of current practices and where enhancements are needed. We have already seen some progress in risk measurement and management at many institutions in the United States and around the globe as a result of preparations for Basel II. Admittedly, banks have told us that some of the costs for Basel II would have been incurred anyway. But if anything, Basel II has accelerated the pace of this change. Basel II can also provide supervisors with a more conceptually consistent and more transparent framework for evaluating systemic risk in the banking system, particularly through credit cycles. Thus it improves on Basel I, which requires banks to hold the same level of capital for a given portfolio, no matter how the portfolio’s inherent risk may change over time. Further, as bankers gain experience with the advanced approaches under Basel II, they will have better information on how their risk taking may vary through various cycles. Therefore, Basel II establishes a more coherent relationship between how supervisors assess regulatory capital and how they supervise banks, enabling examiners to better evaluate whether banks are holding prudent levels of capital, given their risk profiles. The reasons I’ve just given for pursuing Basel II also provide justification for the recent Basel revisions to the 1996 Market Risk Amendment (MRA). Since adoption of the MRA, banks’ trading activities have become more sophisticated and have given rise to a wider range of risks that are not easily captured in their existing value-at-risk (VaR) models. For example, more products related to credit risk, such as credit default swaps and tranches of collateralized debt obligations, are now included in the trading book. These products can give rise to default risks that are not captured well in methodologies required by the current rule specifying a ten-day holding period and a 99 percent confidence interval, which can create potential arbitrage opportunities between the banking book and the trading book. The U.S. agencies are in the final stages of drafting the NPR to revise Market Risk capital requirements, which will be issued for comments. In the United States we would continue to have banks with significant trading book activity hold additional capital for the risks inherent in that line of business, whether they remain Basel I banks or move to Basel II. Bridging the Gap Between Regulatory Capital Requirements and Internal Bank PracticeWith Basel II, U.S. supervisors are attempting to use the internal risk-measurement and risk-management information produced by large complex institutions to manage their own risks in such a way as to augment the risk sensitivity and overall meaningfulness of minimum regulatory capital measures. Basel II, by tying Pillar 1 minimum regulatory capital calculations to bank-generated inputs, offers greater transparency about the practices that stand behind the inputs provided by banks and the way those inputs are calculated. In fact, through the Basel II framework, supervisors will be able to compare results across banks and provide better information to bankers about how their models and methodologies agree with sound practice and where they may be an outlier. Of course, we understand that the extent to which banks’ internal inputs can be used in minimum regulatory capital requirements is limited, for a variety of reasons. Today’s banks have highly customized models for running their businesses, which of course is entirely appropriate. But as supervisors, we need to ensure adequacy and enforceability of our minimum regulatory capital requirements while maintaining some consistency across banks. In a broader sense, we are working to protect the safety and soundness of our financial system. Naturally, as we seek to develop a common framework that will work for large complex banks globally, we recognize an inherent tension between our regulatory requirements and internal bank practice. We are working to strike the right balance to achieve our goals without making Basel II purely a compliance exercise and creating undue burden. Need for Strong CapitalBasel II is intended to improve regulatory capital requirements, especially for large complex organizations, through greater risk sensitivity of regulatory capital and improved linkage to banks’ actual capital risk management. That is why the U.S. agencies have chosen to adopt only the most advanced options for credit risk and operational risk minimum regulatory capital calculations in the United States, and to limit the requirement of Basel II to only a small number of banking institutions that fit the definition of large, complex, and internationally active. It is important to recognize that Basel II is a complete capital framework consisting of three pillars. While much of the focus to date has been on Pillar 1 and the calculation of minimum regulatory capital, the importance of Pillar 2, which provides for supervisory review and oversight of an institution’s overall capital adequacy, should not be overlooked. Pillar 2 is intended to ensure that banks have adequate capital to supportallthe risks to their business, and to further encourage them to develop and use better techniques to monitor and manage the risks. It addresses some kinds of risk that are not captured in Pillar 1, such as credit concentration, interest rate, and liquidity risks. And it provides supervisors with the opportunity to assess compliance with the minimum standards and disclosure requirements of the advanced approaches in Pillar 1. Some key principles of the supervisory review process are discussed in the framework document. Time does not permit a full discussion of each, but I do want to at least mention them today. First, banks should have a process for assessing their overall capital adequacy in relation to their risk profile and a strategy for maintaining their capital levels. Second, supervisors should review and evaluate banks’ internal capital adequacy assessments and strategies, as well as their ability to monitor and ensure their compliance with regulatory capital ratios--and should take appropriate supervisory action if they are not satisfied with the results of this process. Third, supervisors should expect banks to operate above the minimum regulatory capital ratios and should have the ability to require banks to hold capital in excess of the minimum. Finally, supervisors should seek to intervene at an early stage to prevent capital from falling below the minimum levels indicated by the risk characteristics of a particular bank--and should require rapid remedial action if capital is not maintained or restored. Many of the actions implied by the Pillar 2 principles are already part of the supervisory process in the United States. The agencies plan to provide some information about our expectations for Pillar 2, beyond what is included in the existing U.S. supervisory process, in forthcoming supervisory guidance. Let me assure you that we at the Federal Reserve would not be pursuing Basel II if we thought that it would in any way undermine the strong capital base that U.S. institutions now enjoy. As a central bank and a supervisor of banks, bank holding companies, and financial holding companies, the Federal Reserve is committed to ensuring that the Basel II framework delivers a strong and risk-sensitive base of capital for our largest and most complex banking institutions. That is why we supported moving ahead with the draft NPR, which was modified to address concerns identified in the fourth quantitative impact study, known as QIS4, and includes additional safeguards to ensure strong capital levels during the transition to Basel II. We will remain vigilant in monitoring and assessing Basel II’s impact on individual and aggregate minimum regulatory capital levels on an ongoing basis. As an extra degree of precaution, the U.S. banking agencies also decided to delay for a year the start of the parallel-run period. Starting with the parallel run, and both duringandafter the transition period, the U.S. agencies will rely on ongoing, detailed analyses to evaluate the results of Basel II, so as to ensure prudent levels of capital. Importantly, Basel II represents a new way of thinking about regulatory capital; it is complex, reflecting the complexity of risk measurement and management for the largest, most complex banking institutions. Banking institutions and their supervisors will need to have ongoing dialogue and work diligently to make sure Basel II is working as we expect it to. But we believe it is a powerful approach to making regulatory capital more risk sensitive. To be quite clear, the Federal Reserve believes that strong capital is critical to the health of our banking system, and we believe that Basel II will help us continue to ensure that U.S. banks maintain capital levels that serve as an appropriate cushion against their risk taking. Some Aspects of the U.S. ProposalsAs you know, the draft U.S. Basel II NPR is based on the 2004 framework issued by the Basel Committee and adheres to the main elements of that framework. But the U.S. agencies have exercised national discretion and have tailored the Basel II framework to fit the U.S. banking system and U.S. financial environment--just as their counterparts in other countries have tailored the framework to their situations. For example, as I have just mentioned, the U.S. agencies continue to propose that we implement only the advanced approaches of Basel II, namely the advanced internal-ratings-based approach (AIRB) for credit risk and the advanced measurement approaches (AMA) for operational risk. Also, the draft NPR proposes a more gradual implementation timetable and a more rigorous set of transition safeguards than those set forth in the 2004 Basel II framework. For instance, the U.S. agencies are proposing three years of transition floors below which a bank’s minimum required capital under Basel II would not be permitted to fall. The first transition period would have a floor of 95 percent relative to the general risk-based capital rules, the second period 90 percent, and the third period 85 percent. Implementation of a more gradual transition timetable is justified in part by a recognition that banks need more time to prepare--and that we as supervisors need more time to analyze transition information and ensure that there are no unintended consequences. As you are aware, the QIS4 exercise identified some areas requiring further clarification by regulators and additional work by bankers on risk models and databases. One of the key areas in the NPR influenced by these results pertains to banks’ estimates of loss given default (LGD). Many QIS4 participants reported difficulty computing LGDs (which must reflect downturn conditions), in part because their data histories were not long enough to capture weaker parts of the economic cycle. To address this problem, the agencies have proposed a supervisory mapping function that can be used in the interim by those institutions unable to estimate appropriate downturn LGDs. The mapping function allows an institution to “stress” its expected LGDs, generating an input to the capital calculation that conforms to the Basel II requirements and hence produces a more appropriate capital requirement. The Federal Reserve supported the introduction of this supervisory mapping function, as an important component of U.S. Basel II implementation, in order to address a specific challenge articulated by the industry. Banks would be able to shift from using the mapping function to using their own internal estimates of LGDs when their own estimates become reliable. About a month ago, the Basel Committee released the results of QIS5, which was conducted by a number of countries but not the United States, since we had already conducted QIS4. As you know, the QIS4 results from U.S. institutions are not completely comparable with the QIS5 results from institutions in other countries. Nonetheless, some similarities are worth noting. First, the aggregate declines in minimum regulatory capital of banks using the advanced approaches were similar in the two exercises, particularly considering that QIS4 did not include the 1.06 capital multiplier and QIS5 did. For both exercises the aggregate declines reflected relatively good economic times--which, as we know all too well, do not last forever. Second, both studies pointed to dispersion of changes in minimum required capital. The dispersion among banks in QIS5 was attributed largely to a combination of differences in portfolio characteristics and differences and uncertainties in estimation methodologies. The U.S. agencies highlighted similar issues in their public release on QIS4 and have stated their intention to monitor issues related to dispersion very closely in the future, because we want to ensure that the Basel II framework does indeed accurately produce similar capital for similar risk. The Basel Committee’s release on QIS5 also stated that methodologies and systems for LGD calculation are still being developed and that, as a result, some of the effects of downturns may have been underestimated. The U.S. agencies' release on QIS4 stated that U.S. banks also faced some challenges in estimating downturn LGDs. Basel I ModificationsAt this point I would like to say just a few words about ongoing efforts to revise the existing Basel I regulatory capital rules for non-Basel II institutions. We expect only one or two dozen banks to move to the U.S. version of Basel II in the near term, meaning that the vast majority of U.S. banks will continue to operate under Basel I, which will be amended through a separate rulemaking process. The Basel I framework has already been amended more than twenty-five times in response to changes in banking products and the banking environment and as a result of a better understanding of the risks of individual products and services. The U.S. agencies believe that now is another appropriate time to propose modifications to Basel I rules. The agencies have issued an advance notice of proposed rulemaking discussing possible changes to increase the risk sensitivity of U.S. Basel I rules and to mitigate any competitive distortions that might be created by introducing Basel II. We are now in the process of reviewing comments on the advance notice and working on a notice of proposed rulemaking. We are mindful that within the current structure of the Basel I rules, amendments to those rules should not be too complex or too burdensome for the large number of banks to which the revised rules will apply. With regard to both the Basel II proposals and the proposed Basel I amendments, we understand the need for full transparency. For that reason, we expect to have overlapping comment periods for the Basel II NPR and the NPR for the proposed Basel I amendments. In fact, we want all interested parties to compare, contrast, and comment on the two proposals in overlapping timeframes. Accordingly, our proposals could change as a result of comments received or new information gathered. Cross-Border Implementation of Basel IIAs I noted earlier, each country must implement Basel II as appropriate for its particular jurisdiction. To that end, the U.S. banking agencies are acting to ensure that the Basel II framework is implemented in the United States in a prudential manner. We recognize that the adoption of differing approaches to Basel II by various countries may create challenges for banking organizations that operate in multiple jurisdictions. It is good to remember that cross-border banking has always raised specific challenges that supervisors from various countries have worked hard to address. Let me assure all bankers here that supervisors are aware that the process of changing to new national versions of Basel II has heightened concerns about home-host issues. The Federal Reserve and other U.S. agencies have, for many years, worked with international counterparts to limit the difficulty and burden that have arisen as foreign banks have entered U.S. markets and as U.S. banks have established operations in other jurisdictions. The United States is working to complete its national-standard-setting process, as we recognize that the lack of a final rule creates uncertainty, for both banks and foreign supervisors, about exactly what will be required. At the same time, we have been working with our colleagues on the Basel Accord Implementation Group (AIG) for the past few years to identify issues arising from differences in national standards of the Basel II framework. All of the supervisory bodies participating in the AIG effort are committed to making the transition to Basel II successful. We have heard from some bankers that they are concerned about home-host issues. Many of the issues are institution specific, and all the U.S. banking agencies encourage regular meetings between bankers and supervisors to identify specific concerns. These meetings are also an opportunity for bankers to make supervisors aware of their individual bank’s implementation plans and progress, and for supervisors to make bankers aware of current supervisory expectations with respect to those banks. Indeed, the meetings we have had to date to discuss the draft NPR have provided us with useful information about how our proposals are being interpreted and perceived. We continue to ask for details about concerns bankers may have about cross-border implementation; it is a great help, as we work on our proposals, to hear your specific issues. We were pleased that at a few recent meetings, bankers did, in fact, provide some very specific information about how possible differences in implementation could generate extra burden and affect the way in which the bankers conduct their business. Suggestions for changes to our proposals that are specific, detailed, and supported by facts will allow us, in drafting the final rule, to more clearly identify alternative solutions to the issues raised. Of course, all Basel-member countries have their own rollout timelines and their own ways of addressing matters that are left to national discretion under the Accord, which is entirely appropriate. So while the United States appears to be a bit of an outlier with respect to its implementation timetable, other countries are grappling with their own challenges, too. As you know, a number of other countries plan to implement the full set of Basel II approaches for credit risk (standardized, foundation IRB, and advanced IRB) and operational risk (basic indicator, standardized, and the advanced measurement approaches), with all but the advanced approaches expected to be implemented next year in many Basel countries. This underscores the importance of regular dialogues between home and host supervisors and banks. I hope that bankers pay special attention to the Basel Committee’s June 2006 paper “Home-Host Information Sharing for Effective Basel II Implementation,” as it provides guidance on how cooperative efforts can successfully realize the objectives of Basel II. ConclusionThe Federal Reserve, as I have indicated, believes that Basel II is a worthwhile endeavor despite the challenges facing us. The current regulatory capital framework, based on Basel I, is not adequate for the largest, most complex U.S. banking organizations. We applaud the risk-management improvements made by institutions so far, but additional work remains to be done before banks can meet our expectations--not just for Pillar 1, but also for Pillars 2 and 3. Implementing Basel II is a serious undertaking, with many moving parts both domestically and internationally. The U.S. banking agencies are cognizant of the challenges associated with Basel II, including the challenge of ensuring that its effects are those that we intend. We are also aware of the difficulties that could arise in implementing Basel II on a cross-border basis. So far, we have been pleased with our talks with the industry about our implementation plans and how those plans interact with the plans of other countries. We understand that there are questions to be answered and issues to be addressed, and we hope that bankers--and other interested parties--will provide detailed feedback on the U.S. NPR so that we can assess the entire spectrum of comments. While some observers may be critical of the slower pace of the U.S. agencies, we believe that our deliberate pace is necessary to ensure that the effects of Basel II are indeed understood and that all comments are taken into consideration.
The federal financial institution regulatory agencies and the Federal Trade Commission are soliciting comments on a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (NPRM) concerning identity theft "red flags" and address discrepancies. The NPRM, which has been reviewed and approved by each of the listed agencies, implements sections 114 and 315 of the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act of 2003. The regulations that the agencies are jointly proposing would require each financial institution and creditor to develop and implement an identity theft prevention program that includes policies and procedures for detecting, preventing, and mitigating identity theft in connection with account openings and existing accounts. The proposed regulations include guidelines listing patterns, practices, and specific forms of activity that should raise a "red flag" signaling a possible risk of identity theft. Under the proposed regulations, an identity theft prevention program established by a financial institution or creditor would have to include policies and procedures for detecting any "red flag" relevant to its operations and implementing a mitigation strategy appropriate for the level of risk. The proposed regulations also would require credit and debit card issuers to develop policies and procedures to assess the validity of a request for a change of address followed closely by a request for an additional or replacement card. Additional proposed regulations would require users of consumer reports to develop reasonable policies and procedures that they must apply when they receive a notice of address discrepancy from a consumer reporting agency. Comments on the NPRM are due no later than 60 days after publication in the Federal Register, which is expected shortly. The NPRM is attached. Attachment (466 KB PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday approved action by the Board of Directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, increasing the discount rate at the Bank from 6 percent to 6-1/4 percent, effective immediately.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the issuance of a consent Cease and Desist Order against Progress Bancshares, Inc., Sullivan, Missouri, a registered bank holding company, and its subsidiary bank, Progress Bank of Missouri, Sullivan, Missouri. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
Louise L. Roseman, Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems Before the Subcommittee on Domestic and International Monetary Policy, Trade, and Technology, Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives Thank you for inviting me to discuss Federal Reserve activities related to currency and coin. I plan to touch briefly on new currency designs and currency counterfeiting trends, and then discuss in more depth the lessons that we have learned from earlier coin programs and how we may apply them in managing the new Presidential $1 Coin Program. Federal Reserve’s Role in Currency and Coin DistributionFirst, it may be helpful to describe briefly the Federal Reserve’s role in currency and coin distribution. One of our key responsibilities is to ensure that enough currency and coin is available to meet the public’s needs. In that role, the twelve regional Federal Reserve Banks provide wholesale currency and coin services to more than 9,500 of the nearly 18,000 banks, savings and loans, and credit unions in the United States. The depository institutions that choose not to receive cash services directly from the Reserve Banks obtain them through correspondent banks. The depository institutions, in turn, provide cash services to the general public. Each year, the Federal Reserve Board determines the need for new currency, which it purchases from the Department of the Treasury’s Bureau of Engraving and Printing (BEP) at approximately the cost of production. Our budget for the purchase of new currency for calendar-year 2006 is $494.4 million. The Reserve Banks issue Federal Reserve notes at face value, and these notes are recorded as liabilities on the Reserve Banks’ balance sheets. The Reserve Banks, as required by law, pledge collateral (principally U.S. Treasury securities) equal to the value of currency in circulation, which was approximately $762 billion as of May 31, 2006. In 2005, we returned $21.5 billion to the Treasury, primarily from earnings on securities purchased in the process of putting notes into circulation. The Federal Reserve also provides coins to the nation’s depository institutions, but its role is somewhat different than that for currency. The United States Mint issues circulating coins that the Reserve Banks purchase at face value and record as assets on their balance sheets.1Reserve Banks distribute coins to the banking industry through two channels. First, the Reserve Banks directly accept some coin deposits and pay out some coin orders. Second, the Reserve Banks work with armored carriers, which operate coin terminals to hold, process, and distribute coin on behalf of the Federal Reserve. The 155 coin terminals store about 65 percent of the Federal Reserve’s coin inventory and are a key focus of daily distributional activity. The value of U.S. coins in circulation as of May 31, 2006, was approximately $37 billion, or about 5 percent of total currency and coin in circulation. New Currency DesignAlthough the Secretary of the Treasury, and not the Federal Reserve, has authority to approve new currency designs, the Federal Reserve works collaboratively with the Treasury, the BEP, and the Secret Service to analyze and recommend counterfeit deterrence strategies to maintain the integrity of, and confidence in, U.S. currency worldwide. The latest series of U.S. currency began with the Treasury Secretary’s approval of designs for Series-2004 $50, $20, and $10 denominations that include new and enhanced security features that the public can use to protect itself from accepting counterfeit notes. Reserve Banks began issuing the newly designed $20 notes to depository institutions in October 2003, the $50 notes in September 2004, and the $10 notes in March of this year. In June, the Treasury, the Federal Reserve, and the Secret Service announced the redesign of the $5 note, which the Reserve Banks expect to begin issuing in the first quarter of 2008. The Board is currently working with the Treasury, the BEP, and the Secret Service on a new-generation $100 note design that will include at least one additional security feature for the public to use. The value of personal computer-generated counterfeit currency passed into circulation has increased from less than one percent of total counterfeits passed domestically in 1995 to more than 50 percent in 2005. Because personal computer technology is generally the same throughout the world, the Federal Reserve works with the central banks of the G-10 countries and 16 other central banks in the Central Bank Counterfeit Deterrence Group (CBCDG), to develop and deploy a security feature designed to prevent personal computer software and printers from copying currency. The firms that make this software and equipment have been strong supporters of the CBCDG’s efforts to prevent the use of their products in counterfeiting currency. The Federal Reserve will continue to support this collaborative work for current and future series of Federal Reserve notes. As more manufacturers’ devices include the CBCDG counterfeit deterrence system, the Federal Reserve expects to see increasing effectiveness in deterring the digital counterfeiting of U.S. currency. Overall, counterfeiting of U.S. currency remains at relatively low levels--due primarily to the combination of improvements in the notes’ security features, aggressive law enforcement, and effective education that informs the public about how to verify its currency. Statistics continue to indicate that the value of counterfeit U.S. currency that has been passed into circulationworldwide is less than one-hundredth of one percent of genuine U.S. currency in circulation. Presidential $1 Coin ProgramThe Presidential $1 Coin Act of 2005 establishes a program under which the Treasury will issue four new Presidential $1 coin designs per year starting in 2007. In February, Federal Reserve and Mint staff began meeting regularly to establish plans for distributing the Presidential $1 coins effectively. In addition, to help plan for the introduction of these new dollar coins and to gauge demand for, and anticipate obstacles to, their efficient circulation, we are consulting with a wide range of coin users to gather ideas, advice, and information. On June 8, the Mint and the Federal Reserve jointly hosted the first $1 Coin Users Group Forum, where we obtained input from representatives of banking, armored carrier, transit, automated merchandising, and numismatic organizations, as well as from other federal agencies. We are organizing additional meetings to identify and attempt to address potential barriers to circulation. Since the beginning of the commemorative circulating coin programs seven years ago, the Federal Reserve has supported the Congress and the Mint in issuing new coin designs by distributing about 1.3 billion Sacagawea dollars, 28 billion state quarters, and 3 billion commemorative nickels. Our experiences with the Sacagawea Dollar, Fifty State Quarters, and Westward Journey Nickels programs provide the following insights that should be valuable in our management of the new Presidential $1 Coin Program. 1.The last redesign of the dollar coin did not lead to a sustained increase in demand for the coin.Net payments of dollar coins into circulation rose to $558 million in 2000 due to efforts to stimulate demand during the introductory period of the Sacagawea dollars.2Once the public satisfied its initial interest in collecting Sacagawea coins, demand for dollar coins returned to historical levels. In 2005, net payments of dollar coins by the Reserve Banks totaled approximately $61 million, which is about the same level of net payments experienced in the five years prior to the introduction of the Sacagawea dollar. It is unclear at this point whether the Presidential $1 Coin Program will have a substantial effect on the use of dollar coins in everyday transactions. The Sacagawea dollar has not been successful in substantially stimulating demand because it appears that some of the largest obstacles to dollar coin circulation do not relate to the design of the coin. Retailers are the primary mechanism for distributing coins to consumers, who receive them as change, so broad retailer acceptance is critical to widespread transactional use. While organizations that accept payment at vending machines or other automated equipment have indicated that dollar coins are a less-costly alternative than dollar notes for them, other sectors of the retail industry have indicated that their costs for using dollar coins are much higher than those associated with dollar bills. In addition, dollar coins do not have widespread consumer acceptance. Consumers seem to prefer to carry dollar bills, rather than weigh down their pockets with dollar coins. A 2002 GAO study concluded that public resistance to using the dollar coin is the most substantial barrier to its widespread use in everyday transactions.3The GAO stated that "until individuals can see that the coin is widely used by others and that the government intends to replace the dollar bill with the dollar coin, they will be unlikely to use the coin in everyday transactions." So, should the government eliminate the dollar bill so that the public has no choice but to use the dollar coin? We believe, at this stage, that market forces, rather than government action, should determine the relative use of the dollar bill and dollar coin in our economy, particularly given that there is no compelling evidence that societal costs will decrease as a result of a shift to greater use of dollar coins. 2.The Reserve Banks have modified their distribution strategy to meet the needs of individuals who collect commemorative circulating coins.As a general rule, demand for coin for transactional purposes can be met by any of the circulating designs for that coin.4For example, a retailer that orders nickels or quarters from its bank typically does not care what design(s) it receives. Demand for a commemorative circulating coin by collectors, however, is design-specific. To meet collector demand for commemorative circulating coins, during an initial introductory period the Reserve Banks have suspended their normal practice of first paying out previously circulated coins to depository institutions and instead pay out only the new design. This introductory period ranged from about four weeks for the Fifty State Quarters and Westward Journey Nickels Programs to two years for Sacagawea dollars. Following these initial introductory periods, the Reserve Banks fulfill orders for coin from their inventories, irrespective of coin design. For the Presidential $1 Coin Program, we are currently contemplating a thirty-day introductory period during which only the new coin design would be issued. A final decision regarding the length of the introductory period will be made later this year and may be adjusted over time in light of our experience. 3.The Federal Reserve and the Mint currently hold large inventories of dollar coins.On June 30, 2006, Reserve Banks held more than $94 million in dollar coins, or enough inventory to meet current transactional demand for more than eighteen months. In addition, the Mint holds inventory of about 115 million Sacagawea dollars. Together, these inventories of dollar coins would meet current demand for the next three-and-a-half years. If this program does not spark broad use of dollar coins for everyday transactions, we expect Reserve Bank inventories will further increase with the issuance of each Presidential $1 Coin design. The Presidential $1 Coin Act requires the Treasury Secretary annually to mint and issue Sacagawea dollar coins in quantities equal to no less than one-third of the total Presidential $1 coins issued.5As I noted earlier, it is far from certain that the Presidential $1 Coin Program will stimulate increased demand for Sacagawea dollar coins in particular or dollar coins more generally as a broad-based medium of exchange. Given that we have an ample supply of dollar coins to meet current market demand and that the Presidential $1 Coin Program may increase supplies further, the Reserve Banks may not need to order more Sacagawea dollars from the Mint for a number of years. If the Presidential $1 Coin Program does not stimulate substantial transactional demand for dollar coins, the requirement that the Mint nonetheless produce Sacagawea dollars would result in costs to the taxpayer without any offsetting benefits. In those circumstances, we would strongly recommend that Congress reassess the one-third requirement. 4.The need to distribute multiple coin designs poses continuing inventory challenges that must be managed carefully.In recent years, the Mint and the Reserve Banks have improved their forecasting of coin demand, and Reserve Banks have managed coin inventories from a national perspective to improve efficiency. These efforts have allowed the Reserve Banks, for example, to lower their orders from the Mint for each new quarter design from a peak of 1.6 billion for the Virginia quarter in 2000 to roughly 500 million for recently introduced state quarter designs. Nonetheless, Reserve Bank coin inventory management remains a challenge. At their 2003 peak, Reserve Bank quarter inventories reached $749 million, equal to about twelve months ofnet payments. Through reduced orders of new state quarters and careful inventory management, the current stock of quarters has been reduced to about $383 million, still above our target range of $182 million to $325 million.6 In forecasting demand for Presidential $1 coins, we are working with the Mint to align both demand for ordinary commerce and from casual collectors with our goal of effectively managing Reserve Bank inventories. To do so, we are exploring options for providing the dollar coins to depository institutions in increments smaller than our standard of 2,000 and are planning to conduct a pilot program to assess the benefits of packaging the dollar coins in smaller rolls. ConclusionThe Federal Reserve will continue to work to meet demand for currency and coin efficiently and effectively. I appreciate the opportunity to discuss these issues with you and would be happy to answer your questions. Footnotes 1.Coins are non-interest-earning assets on the Reserve Banks’ books.Return to text 2.Net payments to circulation is defined as gross payments to circulation less gross receipts from circulation.Return to text 3.New Dollar Coin: Marketing Campaign Raised Public Awareness but not Widespread Use(GAO-02-896), September 2002.Return to text 4.Some persons have stated that they would prefer not to receive the Susan B. Anthony dollar coin because it could be easily confused with the quarter. The Reserve Banks’ largest cash customers have reported, however, no preference among their customers for one design of dollar coins over another.Return to text 5.31 USC 5112(n)(1)(B)(ii)Return to text 6.Reserve Banks develop upper and lower bound targets reflecting the seasonal fluctuation of demand. The Federal Reserve and the Mint applied lessons learned from the Sacagawea Dollar and State Quarter programs to manage the distribution of the new Westward Journey Nickels designs. A number of factors seem to have influenced a more orderly rollout of the new nickels. Modest initial publicity about the new design tempered public demand, and perhaps most importantly, there were only two design changes each year. The Reserve Banks have been able to keep their inventories of nickels at relatively constant levels throughout the Westward Journey Nickels program. On June 30, 2006, Reserve Banks held approximately $31 million in nickels, slightly less than the average monthly inventory in 2003, prior to the start of the program.Return to text
Governor Kevin Warsh At the American Enterprise Institute, Washington, D.C. Thank you for the opportunity to speak today on financial conditions and economic activity in the corporate sector. A striking feature of this economic expansion has been the historically high holdings of cash and short-term securities that the corporate sector has accumulated since 2001. But business attitudes seem to be in the process of change--cash has started to decline and borrowing has picked up--so this topic is especially timely. Today, I will first provide a historical perspective on cash balances at corporations, and discuss some factors that may have encouraged firms to hold such large cash balances during this recovery. I will also evaluate whether these factors are likely to persist. Then, I will discuss the more recent indicators that suggest that the buildup in corporate cash balances may be abating, and offer some reasons for that change. In particular, some of the unwinding of cash balances appear, in part, to be due to a renewed focus on capital spending and other business expansion efforts by executives. This renewal has been spurred, notably, by growing external pressures to boost shareholder value. To be sure, such developments may cause the liquidity and credit quality of some corporations to recede a bit from their very high levels but will not, in my view, put at risk their strong balance sheets or impede the solid expansion of business spending. I would like to stress that I willnotbe addressing the immediate economic outlook or the recent conduct of monetary policy. Rather, my comments reflect observations about longer-term trends for business sector activities.1 Corporate Financial Conditions and Cash BalancesIn the past several years, we have witnessed a dramatic improvement in the financial health of the nonfinancial corporate sector. This improvement is clearly evident in the low default rate on corporate bonds and the relatively few delinquencies that have occurred on business loans at commercial banks: Both have dropped markedly since 2002 and have remained close to their historic lows during the past couple of years. Likewise, risk spreads on corporate bonds--the gap between yields on corporate bonds and comparable-maturity Treasuries--narrowed from their peaks in late 2002 to low levels in early 2004. Since then, they have hovered around fairly low rates, suggesting that investors continue to have a favorable outlook for corporate credit quality. Despite some recent turbulence, owing in part to geopolitical events, stock prices have logged robust gains over the past 3-1/2 years, and broad equity indices have now retraced most of the ground lost between 2000 and 2002. Some of the improvement in the financial condition of businesses is due to substantial efficiency gains by firms. Moreover, the resulting robust gains in labor productivity have been well ahead of compensation growth and have dramatically boosted corporate profits. Indeed, profits as a share of sector product--in essence profit margins--jumped to more than 14 percent in the first quarter, the highest level in decades. The improvement in the financial conditions also reflects fundamental changes in firms’ balance sheets. In particular, firms have boosted their liquidity by extending debt maturities, replacing shorter-term debt with longer-term debt; at the same time, they have reduced total leverage. Many firms retired debt using proceeds from equity offerings, asset sales, or mounting profits. As a result, from 2002 to 2004, nonfinancial corporate debt grew at an annual rate of about 2 percent, its slowest pace since the early 1990s. One of the most striking financial developments since 2001 has been the rapid increase in corporate holdings of cash and short-term securities. Since the end of 2001, the ratio of cash holdings to assets has risen sharply (seeexhibit).2This increase is even more pronounced when (on a consolidated basis) cash is measured relative to investment, defined as the sum of capital spending and research and development (R&D) spending during the preceding twelve months. The ratio of cash to investment has averaged about 60 percent during the past few decades. Generally, it is higher in recession periods, consistent with a strong precautionary savings motive by firms that face costly external financing (Almeida, Campello, and Weisbach, 2004). And, in 2001, the ratio of cash to investment was already somewhat elevated. But the ratio then soared to more than 150 percent by year-end 2004, as investment fell far short of cash flow from operations and net financing. This juxtaposition is unusual when the economy is expanding. Indeed, former Federal Reserve Board Chairman Alan Greenspan pointed to this unusual configuration a year and a half ago. "Although capital investment has been advancing at a reasonably good pace," he said, "it has nonetheless lagged the exceptional rise in profits and internal cash flow."3 Subsequently, aggregate cash holdings remained elevated through much of last year, even as the economy continued to advance smartly. Only in the very recent quarters has this trend seemed to abate somewhat. We are left with an overall picture of a highly liquid corporate sector--perhaps more like that which we would expect of corporate balance sheets in the early stages of an expansion. As policymakers and forecasters, we might ask why corporations have built up such a large stock of liquid assets. Is the buildup of cash indicative of a "new equilibrium"? Is there something about the current economic or regulatory environment that requires the maintenance of high liquidity levels? And, does the current level of liquidity portend a more robust surge in corporate spending? Partial Explanations for Large Holdings of CashAlmost by definition, the rise and fall in cash holdings can be linked to fluctuations of operating cash flows and capital expenditures.A simple regression of changes in cash, on changes in operating cash flows, and on changes in capital expenditures--using annual data from 1957 to 2001--accounts reasonably well for historical fluctuations in cash at U.S. nonfinancial corporations, with a regression R-squared of over 50 percent. However, in this framework, the current period appears to be an outlier.4That is,even afterfactoring in the current-cycle dynamics of strong profit growth and relatively modest investment, a good part of the rise in liquid assets remains unaccounted for--as much as one half of the total rise incash-to-assets--according to Federal Reserve staff estimates. A number of explanations have been advanced for this unusual rise, and they have a bearing on judging whether this is a temporary shift born of the current environment or a result of a persistent change in behavior. Foreign OperationsThe first explanation relates to the growing significance of foreign operations of U.S. multinationals in countries with lower corporate tax rates and the recent accumulation of earnings retained by the foreign subsidiaries. When U.S. multinationals receive dividends from their foreign subsidiaries and the host country levies a lower tax rate than the U.S. corporate tax rate, any repatriated dividends are subject to U.S. corporate taxes. Thus, many companies have an incentive to leave those funds with their foreign subsidiaries, even if the funds far exceed plans for foreign capital expenditures. In such circumstances, those funds are often parked in cash or short-term investments overseas and are, thus, less accessible than one might infer from a consolidated balance sheet. It is difficult to determine whether a corporation’s cash is held at home or abroad, but we know that significant holdings of cash are concentrated at large multinational firms. In particular, the Board staff’s analysis (of Standard & Poor’s Compustat data) indicates that the ratio of cash to total assets at domestic-only companies rose slightly less than 20 percent between year-end 2001 and 2004. At the same time, the cash intensity of balance sheets at multinational companies increased more than 50 percent. Moreover, recent research has demonstrated a strong statistical link between the accumulation of cash and the estimated tax burden from repatriating foreign earnings (Hartzell, Titman, and Twite, 2006). As a means of unlocking those offshore cash holdings, the Congress and the President provided U.S. companies a one-time opportunity--through theAmerican Jobs Creation Act of 2004--to repatriate foreign profits at a much reduced statutory tax rate. Indeed, Wall Street estimates indicate that many companies have capitalized on this opportunity: An extra $250 billion may have been repatriated during the past four quarters. That estimate appears consistent with the recent pattern of distributions from foreign income reported in the Commerce Department’s international transactions data. With access to such large holdings of cash, we would expect corporations to disburse an unusually large portion of current cash earnings either through de-leveraging, accelerated dividends, or increased share repurchases. To the extent that any of these firms face financing constraints, the repatriated cash could provide a boost to new fixed investment, R&D projects, or acquisitions. Indeed, during the past few quarters, companies have been raising shareholder payouts and making new investments. The buildup of cash at foreign subsidiaries could account for a good part of the unexplained buildup in corporate cash--that is, the rise in cash that is not explained by the dynamics of profits and investment. Because we expect that foreign subsidiaries will continue to grow, and because of the ongoing tax liability associated with repatriation, we should not be surprised if overall corporate cash balances remained somewhat higher compared to previous decades. Focus on LiquidityA second factor that may contribute to an elevated new equilibrium of cash balances is the renewed emphasis that investors may be placing on balance sheet liquidity, particularly in the aftermath of the commercial paper (CP) defaults that occurred at the end of the previous expansion. At that time, even financially solvent firms faced the prospect that they might have difficulty rolling over their maturing CP. This led investors and rating agencies to scrutinize the ability of firms to manage short-term liquidity events. Consequently, many firms raised cash holdings to mitigate these concerns. Business CautionAs I discussed earlier, regression analysis suggests that the robust growth in profits and the comparatively modest recovery in capital expenditures leaves a good part of the extraordinary cash buildup unexplained.But that analysis takes capital expenditures as given. In doing so, it sidesteps some of the important questions with which economists and policymakers have wrestled: Why did business fixed investment contract so severely in the most recent recession? And, why wasn’t the rebound from the recession more vigorous, particularly in light of such high profitability? Although this expansion is more than four years old, the ratio of business fixed investment to gross domestic product (in current dollars) is still well below its forty-year average. Two hypotheses for the behavior of investment have received a great deal of attention. The first hypothesis is that a capital overhang, caused by excessive investment during the previous boom, held back the recovery in capital spending. While it is difficult to measureexcesscapital, the Federal Reserve Board staff estimates that any broad-based capital overhang was probably eliminated early in the recovery. Of course, more persistent capital overhangs may well have been experienced in some sectors, most notably in telecommunications equipment, though that sector accounts for less than 10 percent of business fixed investment. Another leading hypothesis is that businesses were more risk-averse than warranted by the underlying economic fundamentals, especially early in the expansion. One obvious source of caution was the degree of conviction about the strength and sustainability of the recovery. Concerns about terrorism and other geopolitical uncertainties were likely at play as well. Although many periods of recovery are accompanied by concerns of economic growth and political turmoil, surveys in 2002 and 2003 suggested that business leaders were experiencing a more prolonged sense of gloom, with measures of sentiment dropping to low levels for as long two years beyond the trough in the business cycle. Since the spring of 2003, however, the economy has been expanding briskly and thus the durability of the recovery should be a less significant constraint on capital expenditures now. Indeed, more recently, some surveys of business confidence and capital spending plans have reached or exceeded the levels of the late 1990s. Nonetheless, concerns about global political uncertainties often reemerge in executive suites and board rooms as important factors for business spending plans. Regulatory EnvironmentStill, one corollary of the corporate-caution explanation may have persisted. Many have argued that the conditions created by the corporate governance scandals--and the regulatory response to those events--have contributed to a more cautious attitude toward risk taking. More concretely, the scandals themselves, and the markets’ reaction to them, are said to have caused firms to restrain capital spending. Clearly, Sarbanes-Oxley compliance costs have been substantial, diverting funds and, probably even more importantly, some of the attention of chief executive officers (CEOs) and boards of directors from capital spending and R&D plans. Every meeting that board members and executives spend focused predominantly on compliance issues is, by definition, meeting time generally not being spent on big strategic questions. However, proving the connection between executives’ "mind-share" and capital expenditure rates is difficult. Moreover, firms are benefiting to some degree from reforms arising from Sarbanes-Oxley. Thus, research on the net effects of Sarbanes-Oxley being undertaken by AEI and other institutions should be exceptionally useful as the economic, political, and legal environment continues to evolve. Based on the evidence available to date, I believe that the uncertainty resulting from the regulatory and legal environment has had meaningful economic implications for business investment and cash holdings. Catalysts for ChangeEach of these factors--increased foreign operations, greater investor focus on liquidity, business caution due to geopolitical uncertainty, concerns about the sustainability of the recovery, and a more process-intensive regulatory and legal environment--likely contributed to the buildup in cash through this expansion. But we have recently seen signs that the cash hoarding trend may have abated or reversed. During the past several quarters, the ratios of cash to assets and cash to investment have slipped, and in the first quarter of this year, the ratio of debt to assets edged up. These reversals can be attributed, in part, to the resurgence of share repurchases, the growth in dividend payouts, cash–financed merger activity, and a pickup in capital investment. The pace of share repurchases accelerated strongly in 2005, especially in the fourth quarter, when they exceeded $400 billion at an annual rate. These accelerated shareholder payouts were to be expected given that repatriated profits from firms’ foreign operations had become available to finance investment, acquisitions, and retire debt. In addition, signs of changing business attitudes towards expansion have emerged. Merger and acquisition activity picked up markedly in the second half of 2005 and continued to accelerate in the first half of 2006, also contributing to the drawdown of cash. Cash-financed mergers in the past four quarters resulted in a retirement of public equity of more than $250 billion, four to five times the average rate since the peak of the previous expansion. Investment spending is also expanding at a solid pace. Data from the national accounts through the first quarter indicate that domestic real outlays for new equipment and software have been growing at an annual rate of almost 10 percent since the beginning of 2005. Spending on high-tech equipment has been rising at an annual rate of more than 15 percent, several percentage points faster than in 2003 and 2004, with spending especially strong for telecommunications equipment. Outlays for nonresidential construction firmed in 2005 and turned up notably in the first quarter of this year. Not surprisingly, outlays on structures used in energy production strengthened in response to higher energy prices, but the rise in the first quarter also reflected an increase for office, retail, and industrial structures. At the same time that the growth in cash balances has started to reverse, the pace of debt financing has also picked up. In the first half of this year, the net amount that firms raised from bonds, commercial paper, and bank loans reached its highest level since the current economic expansion began. Unlike the earlier period of this expansion, more of the funds raised of late are being deployed for merger and acquisition activity and other corporate spending. Considerably less is being used to refinance higher-cost debt or to lengthen debt maturities. The recent signs that cash hoards are being trimmed and leverage is increasing suggest a move towards more normal conditions. These developments may be amplified by increased pressure from shareholder groups in conjunction with a more active market for corporate control. A prominent feature of the current environment is the notable amount of leveraged buyout (LBO) activity. An LBO or the threat of an LBO acts to discipline management to raise shareholder value (Jensen, 1986; Kaplan, 1989). LBOs, and other forms of private equity investment, may force management to implement strategic changes rapidly to restore the firm’s return on equity and boost share prices, in part by increasing financial leverage. LBOs increased sharply in late 2005, and they continued apace in the first half of this year. The value of public equity retired by LBOs has accounted for almost one-third of the total retired from total mergers and is at its highest level since the boom in the late 1980s. Many signs point to a continuation of this high pace of equity retirements. Valuations for many firms appear attractive to private equity sponsors. (Although, as I noted earlier, stock prices have risen quite a bit since 2002, their gains have been far outstripped by the boom in earnings.) Lower valuations for firms in industries that are in the throes of downsizing also provide opportunities for LBOs. Perhaps at least as important, private equity funds are flush with funds, having raised more than $100 billion in 2005, a pace that continued in the first quarter of 2006, and general partners of these funds are actively scouting for opportunities to deploy this capital. This robust equity funding, combined with the currently accommodative debt markets, has made many more firms potential targets. Moreover, with the rise of so-called club deals, in which private equity funds pool their capital, even very large corporations--replete with large excess-cash positions--are potential targets. The bottom line is greater pressure on business executives to maximize shareholder value. As a complement to traditional private equity funds, hedge funds are also more active as they seek alternative investments to enhance returns. Many hedge funds have contributed to the deal activity by providing debt financing, either by directly investing in mezzanine debt or by participating in loan syndications. And in a departure from typical past practices, hedge funds are also making investments, sometimes alongside more traditional LBO funds. More often in these types of transactions, hedge funds will purchase large, non-controlling stakes in potential targets to exert greater influence. They will then agitate for changes to boost shareholder value. They may push for asset sales, higher dividends, share repurchases, or other changes that make the firm an attractive target to potential acquirers. In my view, internal and external forces have come together to reduce cash levels from their recent highs, although they remain above historical norms. Private equity investors are increasingly pressuring CEOs to make more fundamental changes in their financial and strategic positions, and CEOs themselves appear to have already shifted their focus somewhat from compliance issues to building their businesses more aggressively through increased capital expenditures and increased cash-financed acquisitions. Debt ratios may rise from their current low levels, and a modest slippage in corporate credit quality may result. Indeed, most forecasts call for a rise in default rates from their near-record lows. And while risk spreads for lower-rated bonds are up a bit this year, they do not suggest that debt investors are anticipating a significant deterioration over the near- to medium-term horizon. Nonetheless, should some emerging trends, such as lower required interest coverage ratios, gain traction, they might induce a more pronounced deterioration in credit quality than is currently expected. Moreover, as recent events highlight, geopolitical developments will continue to be an important component of the risk profile that businesses face. ConclusionIn sum, it appears that firms are likely to continue to draw down their cash balances from the elevated levels witnessed during the past few years. Increasingly, firms appear to be accelerating shareholder buybacks, raising dividends, increasing business spending, and becoming more acquisitive. Notwithstanding these very recent developments, I would expect firms to hold more cash than has been the norm over the previous few decades due to changes in the economic and geopolitical environment, and a more rigorous legal and regulatory setting. Clearly, corporations in the United States have shown a remarkable ability to adapt and thrive in recent years despite these changes, and I expect them to continue to do so in the period ahead. References Almeida, Heitor, Murillo Campello, and Michael Weisbach (2004). "The Cash Flow Sensitivity of Cash,"Journal of Finance, vol. LIX (August), pp. 1777-1804. Hartzell, Jay, Sheridan Titman, and Gary Twite (2006), "Why Do Firms Hold So Much Cash: A Tax-based Explanation," unpublished paper (March). Jensen, Michael (1986). "Agency Costs of Free Cash Flow, Corporate Finance and Takeovers,"American Economic Review:Papers and Proceedings,vol. 76 (May), pp. 323-29. Kaplan, Steven (1989). "The Effects of Management Buyouts on Operating Performance and Value,"Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 24 (Feb.), pp. 215-46. Footnotes 1.I should note that I am expressing my own opinions, which are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve or on the Federal Open Market Committee.Nellie LiangandSteve Sharpe, of the Board’s staff, contributed to these remarks.Return to text 2.Data are for U.S. corporations from Standard and Poor’s Compustat, reported on a consolidated basis.Return to text 3.Testimonyof Chairman Alan Greenspan, February 16, 2005, Federal Reserve Board’s semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress, before the Committee on Banking, Housing, Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate.Return to text 4.Corporate cash holdings also rose in a number of other G-7 countries, but I do not address whether the buildup in those countries might, as in the United States, be unusual, or whether it is adequately explained by its historical relationship with fluctuations in cash flow and investment spending.Return to text Return to text
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel Before the Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit, Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives Chairman Bachus, Representative Sanders and members of the subcommittee, I am pleased to testify today on behalf of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System on the topic of industrial loan companies (ILCs). ILCs are state-chartered banks that have direct access to the federal safety net--deposit insurance and the Federal Reserve’s discount window and payments system--and have virtually all of the deposit-taking, lending, and other powers of a full-service commercial bank. Despite their access to the federal safety net and broad powers, these banks operate under a special exception to the federal Bank Holding Company Act (BHC Act). This special exception allows any type of firm, including a commercial firm or foreign bank, to acquire and operate an ILC chartered in one of a handful of states outside the framework of federal supervision of the parent holding company and without the restrictions on the scope of activities conducted by the ILC’s affiliates that govern the ownership of insured banks by bank holding companies.The special exception for ILCs has important public-policy implications, which are becoming more acute in light of the remarkable recent growth and potential future expansion of banks operating under the exception. This growth threatens to undermine the decisions that Congress has made concerning the separation of banking and commerce in the American economy and the proper supervisory framework for companies that own a federally insured bank. It also creates an unlevel competitive playing field, allowing some firms to own an insured ILC and avoid the prudential limitations, supervisory framework and restrictions on affiliations that apply to corporate owners of competing insured banks.If Congress does not address the ILC exception, the nation’s policies on banking and commerce and the supervisory framework for corporate owners of insured banks are in danger of being decidedforCongress through the expansion of this loophole by individual firms acting in their own self-interest. The Board believes that the decisions on these important policies, which influence the structure and resiliency of our financial system and economy, should be madebyCongress, acting in the public interest, and then applied to all organizations in a competitively equitable manner.Prudential Framework Established for Bank Holding CompaniesTo understand the issues surrounding ILCs, it may be useful first to review the supervisory and prudential framework that has been established for the parent firms of insured banks generally and the origins of the ILC exception in current law. The federal BHC Act, originally enacted in 1956, created a federal framework for the supervision and regulation of companies that own or control a bank and their affiliates. This framework is intended to help protect the safety and soundness of corporately controlled banks that have access to the federal safety net, ultimately backed by the taxpayer, and to maintain the general separation of banking and commerce in the United States.Financial trouble in one part of a business organization can spread, and spread rapidly, to other parts of the organization. That is why Congress for many years has required consolidated federal supervision of all bank holding companies, including financial holding companies formed under the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act of 1999 (GLB Act). It is also why in 1991, following the collapse of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International (BCCI)--a foreign bank that lacked a single supervisor capable of monitoring its global activities--Congress amended the BHC Act to require that foreign banks demonstrate that they are subject to comprehensive supervision on a consolidated basis in their home country before acquiring a bank in the United States. The merits of supervision of the consolidated financial organization--not just the depository institution itself--also have led many developed countries, including those of the European Union, to adopt this supervisory framework.Consolidated federal supervision of bank holding companies by the Federal Reserve complements, and is in addition to, the authority that the primary federal or state bank supervisor has over the company’s subsidiary depository institutions. It allows a federal supervisor to understand the financial and managerial strength and risks within the consolidated organization as a whole and gives the federal supervisor the ability to address significant management, operational, capital or other deficiencies within the overall organizationbeforethey pose a danger to the organization’s subsidiary insured banks and the federal safety net.The hallmarks of this consolidated supervisory framework are broad grants of authority to examine and obtain reports from bank holding companies and each of their subsidiaries, establish consolidated capital requirements for bank holding companies, and take supervisory or enforcement actions against bank holding companies and their nonbank subsidiaries to address unsafe or unsound practices or violations of law. Consolidated capital requirements help ensure that bank holding companies have real capital to support their group-wide activities, do not become excessively leveraged, and are able to serve as a source of strength for their subsidiary banks.Besides requiring consolidated supervision of bank holding companies, the BHC Act also places limits on the types of activities that a bank holding company may conduct, either directly or through a nonbank subsidiary. These activity restrictions, which are designed to maintain the general separation of banking and commerce in the United States, generally allow a bank holding company and its nonbank subsidiaries to engage in only those activities that the Board has determined to be "closely related to banking." Since passage of the GLB Act, a bank holding company that qualifies and elects to become a financial holding company also may engage in other activities determined by Congress or the Board (in consultation with the Treasury Department) to be financial in nature or incidental to a financial activity, including full-scope securities underwriting and dealing, insurance underwriting and sales, and merchant banking. The GLB Act also permits a financial holding company, to a limited extent, to engage in or affiliate with a company engaged in a nonfinancial activity if the Board determines that the activity is "complementary" to the company’s financial activities and does not pose a substantial risk to the safety and soundness of depository institutions or the financial system generally. Importantly, the GLB Act allows a financial holding company to engage in this wider array of financial or complementary activities only if all of the company’s depository institution subsidiaries are--and remain--well capitalized and well managed, and all of its insured depository institution subsidiaries maintain at least a "satisfactory" record of performance under the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA).The ILC Exception and its OriginsAs I noted earlier, a special exception in current law exempts the corporate owners of ILCs that are chartered in one of a handful of states--principally Utah and California--from the supervisory framework established by the BHC Act. Ironically, this exception for ILCs was enacted in 1987 as part of a broader legislative package designed toclosean earlier loophole that allowed firms to evade the nonbanking restrictions and consolidated supervisory requirements of the BHC Act. In particular, prior to 1987, the BHC Act defined the term "bank" narrowly to mean an institution that both accepted demand depositsandwas engaged in the business of making commercial loans. A number of firms--including Sears, Roebuck & Co., Gulf & Western, ITT Transamerica, and Prudential Insurance--took advantage of this narrow definition to establish so-called nonbank banks, which were FDIC-insured banks that either accepted demand depositsormade commercial loans, but did not engage in both activities.In 1987, Congress enacted the Competitive Equality Banking Act (CEBA) to close the nonbank bank loophole and prevent further evasions of the BHC Act. To do so, CEBA expanded the definition of "bank" in the BHC Act to include any FDIC-insured bank (regardless of the activities it conducts)andany banking institution that both offers transaction accounts and makes commercial loans (regardless of whether it is FDIC-insured). Congress enacted this change because of concern that commercial firms were establishing nonbank banks outside of the supervisory framework established by Congress for the corporate owners of insured banks and without regard for the activity restrictions in the BHC Act that were designed to limit the mixing of banking and commerce.In CEBA, Congress also adopted an exception from this new and expanded definition of "bank" for ILCs chartered in those states that, as of March 5, 1987, had in effect or under legislative consideration a law requiring ILCs to have FDIC insurance. The legislative history of CEBA offers little explanation of why this exception was adopted. This may well be because the size, nature and powers of ILCs were quite limited both historically and in 1987. ILCs were first established in the early 1900s to make small loans to industrial workers. For many years, they were not generally permitted to accept deposits or obtain FDIC insurance. In fact, at the time CEBA was enacted, most ILCs were small, locally owned institutions that had only limited deposit-taking and lending powers under state law. In 1987, the largest ILC had assets of less than $400 million and the vast majority of ILCs had assets of less than $50 million. The relevant states also were not actively chartering new ILCs. At the time CEBA was enacted, for example, Utah had only eleven state-chartered ILCs and had a moratorium on the chartering of new ILCs. Moreover, interstate banking restrictions and technological limitations made it difficult for institutions chartered in a grandfathered state to operate a retail banking business regionally or nationally.Changing Character and Nature of ILCsWhat was once an exception with limited and local reach, however, has now become the means through which large national and international commercial, retail, and industrial firms may acquire a federally insured bank and gain access to the federal safety net. Indeed, the changes that have occurred with ILCs in recent years have been dramatic and have made ILCs virtually indistinguishable from other commercial banks. For example, in 1997, Utah lifted its moratorium on the chartering of new ILCs, allowed ILCs to call themselves banks, and authorized ILCs to exercise virtually all of the powers of state-chartered commercial banks. In addition, Utah and certain other grandfathered states recently began to charter new ILCs and to promote them as a method for companies to acquire a federally insured bank while avoiding the requirements of the BHC Act.As a result of these and other changes, the aggregate amount of assets and deposits held by all ILCs operating under this exception increased substantially between 1997 and 2005, with assets increasing nearly 500 percent (from $25.1 billion to $150.1 billion) and deposits increasing by more than 800 percent (from $11.7 billion to $107.9 billion). The number of Utah-chartered ILCs also has tripled since 1997.The nature and size of individual ILCs and their parent companies also has changed dramatically in recent years. While the largest ILC in 1987 had assets of less than $400 million, the largest ILC today has more than $62billionin assets and more than $54billionin deposits, making it the twelfth largest insured bank in the United States in terms of deposits. An additional ten ILCs each control more than $1 billion in deposits and thus rank within the top 200 insured banks in the United States in terms of deposits. And, far from being locally owned, a number of ILCs today are controlled by large, internationally active commercial companies and are used to support various aspects of these organizations’ operations.While the growth of ILCs in recent years is impressive by itself, it also is important to keep in mind that the exception is open-ended and subject to very few statutory restrictions. Only a handful of states have the ability to charter exempt ILCs. However, there isnolimit on the number of exempt ILCs that these states may charter going forward. In fact, several large commercial firms currently have applications pending to establish new ILCs or to acquire existing ones.Moreover, the BHC Act places only limited restrictions on the types of activities that an ILC operating under the exception may conduct. For example, ILCs may operate under the exception so long as they do not accept demand deposits that the depositor may withdraw by check or similar means for payment to third parties. As a substitute, some ILCs offer retail customers negotiable order of withdrawal (NOW) accounts--transaction accounts that are functionally indistinguishable from demand deposit accounts. Small ILCs--those that have assets of less than $100 million--and ILCs that were chartered before August 10, 1987, and have not experienced a change in control since that date, are not subject to even this limited restriction on their powers. Federal law places no restrictions on the ability of ILCs to collect FDIC-insured savings or time deposits from institutional or retail customers.Thus, federal law allows a new or existing ILC of any size to offer a wide range of federally insured retail deposit accounts; commercial, mortgage, credit card, and consumer loans; cash management services; trust services; payment-related services, including Fedwire, automated clearinghouse (ACH) and check-clearing services; and other banking services. Moreover, federal law permits ILCs to branch across state lines to the same extent as other types of insured banks. Importantly, because of advances in telecommunications and information technology, ILCs chartered in one state also now have the ability to conduct their activities throughout the United States, with or without physical branches, through the Internet or through arrangements with affiliated or unaffiliated entities.Bank Affiliations with Commercial and Financial FirmsThe Board is concerned that the recent and potential future growth of ILCs threatens to undermine the decisions that Congress has made in two important areas. First, the exception is eroding Congress’ established policies concerning the mixing of banking and commerce in the United States and diminishing the role of Congress in determining whether or how banking and commerce should be allowed to mix in this country. For many years, Congress has sought to maintain the general separation of banking and commerce and has acted affirmatively to close loopholes that create large breaches in the wall between banking and commerce. For example, one of the primary reasons for enactment of the BHC Act in 1956, and its expansion in 1970 to cover companies that control only a single bank, was to help prevent and restrain combinations of banking and commercial firms under the auspices of a single holding company. And, as noted earlier, when the nonbank bank loophole threatened to undermine the separation of banking and commerce, Congress acted in 1987 to close that loophole.More recently, Congress reaffirmed its desire to maintain the general separation of banking and commerce in 1999 when it passed the GLB Act. That act closed the unitary-thrift loophole, which previously allowed commercial firms to acquire a federally insured savings association. In addition, after lengthy debate, Congress decided to allow financial holding companies to engage in only those activities determined to be financial in nature or incidental or complementary to financial activities. In taking this action, Congress rejected proposals that would have allowed financial holding companies to engage generally in a "basket" of commercial activities or that would have allowed commercial firms to acquire a small bank without becoming subject to the BHC Act.Congress also placed qualifications on the ability of banks to affiliate even with financial firms such as securities firms and insurance companies. The GLB Act allows a financial holding company to affiliate with a full-service securities or insurance firm only if the financial holding company keeps all of its subsidiary depository institutions well capitalized and well managed and all of the company’s subsidiary insured depository institutions maintain at least a satisfactory CRA record.The ILC exception undermines each of these decisions by allowing commercial and financial firms to operate FDIC-insured ILCs while avoiding the restrictions on commercial affiliations applicable to the corporate owners of other insured banks and avoiding the capital, managerial, and CRA requirements applicable to financial holding companies.The question of whether to allow broader mixings of banking and commerce has broad-reaching implications for the structure and soundness of the American economy and financial system particularly because, if permitted, any general mixing of banking and commerce is likely to be difficult to disentangle. Consequently, the nation’s policy on this important issue should be set by Congress only after deliberate and careful consideration; it should not be allowed to occur unintentionally through the exploitation of an exception by individual commercial firms.Importance of Consolidated SupervisionSecond, the ILC exception undermines the supervisory framework that Congress has established for the corporate owners of insured banks. On this point, let me be clear that the Board has no concerns about the adequacy of the existing supervisory framework for ILCs themselves. ILCs are regulated and supervised by the FDIC and their chartering state in the same manner as other types of state-chartered, nonmember insured banks.However, due to the special exception in current law, the parent company of an ILC is not considered a bank holding company and is not subject to federal supervision on a consolidated basis under the BHC Act. This creates a supervisory blind spot because the Federal Reserve’s supervisory authority over bank holding companies and their nonbank subsidiaries under the BHC Act is significantly broader than the supervisory authority that the primary federal supervisor of an ILC has over the holding company and nonbank affiliates of the bank. It was precisely to avoid the risks of this blind spot that Congress established a supervisory framework for bank holding companies and savings and loan holding companies that includes a federal supervisor of the parent holding company and its nonbank subsidiaries as well as a federal supervisor for the insured depository institution itself.For example, the BHC Act provides broad authority to examine a bank holding company and its nonbank subsidiaries, whether or not the company or nonbank subsidiary engages in transactions, or has relationships, with a depository institution subsidiary.1This authority supplements and complements the authority of the primary bank supervisor. Pursuant to this authority, the Federal Reserve routinely conducts examinations of all large, complex bank holding companies and maintains inspection teams on-site at the largest bank holding companies on an on-going basis. These examinations allow the Federal Reserve to review the organization's systems for identifying and managing risk across the organization and its various legal entities and to evaluate the overall financial strength of the organization. By contrast, the primary federal supervisor of a bank, including an ILC, is authorized to examine the parent company and affiliates (other than subsidiaries) of the bank only to the extent necessary to disclose the relationship between the bank and the parent or affiliate and the effect of the relationship on the bank.Federal law also grants the Federal Reserve the authority to require that bank holding companies maintain adequate capital on a consolidated basis to help ensure that the parent company is able to serve as a source of strength, not weakness, for its subsidiary insured banks. The parent companies of exempt ILCs, however, are not subject to the consolidated capital requirements established for bank holding companies. Indeed, among the factors contributing to the failure of a federally insured ILC in 1999 were the unregulated borrowing and weakened capital position of the corporate owner of the ILC and the inability of any federal supervisor to ensure that the parent holding company remained financially strong.In addition, federal law gives the Federal Reserve broad enforcement authority over bank holding companies and their nonbank subsidiaries. This authority includes the ability to stop or prevent a bank holding company or nonbank subsidiary from engaging in an unsafe or unsound practice in connection with its own business operations, even if those operations are not directly connected with the company’s subsidiary banks. On the other hand, the primary federal bank supervisor for an ILC may take enforcement action against the parent company or a nonbank affiliate of an ILC to address an unsafe or unsound practice only if the practice occurs in the conduct of theILC’sbusiness. Thus, unsafe and unsound practices that weaken the parent firm of an ILC, such as significant reductions in its capital, increases in its debt or its conduct of risky nonbanking activities, are generally beyond the scope of the enforcement authority of the ILC’s primary federal bank supervisor.Consolidated supervisory authority is especially helpful in understanding and, if appropriate, controlling the risks to the federal safety net when a subsidiary bank is closely integrated with, or heavily reliant on, its parent organization. In these situations, the subsidiary bank may have no business independent of the bank’s affiliates, and the bank’s loans and deposits may be derived or solicited largely through or from affiliates. In addition, the subsidiary bank may be substantially or entirely dependent on the parent or its affiliates for critical services, such as computer support, treasury operations, accounting, personnel, management, and even premises. This appears to be the case at some of the largest ILCs. In fact, seven of the ten largest ILCs each have more than $3 billion in assets but fewer than 75 full-time employees.In addition to constructing this supervisory framework domestically, Congress has made this type of consolidated supervisory framework a prerequisite for foreign banks seeking to acquire a bank in the United States. In 1991, Congress amended the BHC Act to require a foreign bank to demonstrate that the consolidated organization is subject to comprehensive supervision in its home country before acquiring a U.S. bank or establishing a branch, agency or commercial lending company subsidiary in the United States. Adoption of a framework of consolidated supervision of banking organizations is, in fact, becoming the preferred approach to supervision worldwide. The ILC exception, however, allows a foreign bank that is not subject to consolidated supervision in its home country to evade this requirement and acquire an FDIC-insured bank with broad deposit-taking and lending powers in the United States.Fair Competition and Other IssuesIn considering these issues, it is important that Congress establish a fair and level competitive playing field for firms that seek to own a bank with full access to the federal safety net and carefully consider the potential interplay of its decisions on the multitude of issues associated with ILCs. For example, if Congress determines that broader mixings of banking and commerce should be permitted, that new policy should apply to all banking organizations in a competitively equitable matter. In addition, Congress should carefully consider the type of supervisory framework that best suits the needs and structure of our financial system and protects insured banks and the taxpayer.ConclusionThe issues I have discussed today involve important public-policy matters and the Board applauds the subcommittee for holding this hearing to obtain testimony on these issues. In particular, I appreciate the opportunity to discuss the Board’s views on ILCs. The Board and its staff would be pleased to work with the subcommittee, the full committee, and their staffs in addressing the important issues raised by the ILC exception in current law.Footnotes1.In the case of certain functionally regulated subsidiaries of bank holding companies, the BHC Act directs the Board to rely to the fullest extent possible on examinations of the subsidiary conducted by the functional regulator for the subsidiary, and requires the Board to make certain findings before conducting an independent examination of the functionally regulated subsidiary. 12 U.S.C. §1844(c)(2)(B). These limitations also apply to the FDIC and other federal banking agencies in the exercise of their more limited examination authority over the nonbank affiliates of an insured bank, such as an ILC.See12 U.S.C. § 1831v.Return to text The special exception for ILCs has important public-policy implications, which are becoming more acute in light of the remarkable recent growth and potential future expansion of banks operating under the exception. This growth threatens to undermine the decisions that Congress has made concerning the separation of banking and commerce in the American economy and the proper supervisory framework for companies that own a federally insured bank. It also creates an unlevel competitive playing field, allowing some firms to own an insured ILC and avoid the prudential limitations, supervisory framework and restrictions on affiliations that apply to corporate owners of competing insured banks. If Congress does not address the ILC exception, the nation’s policies on banking and commerce and the supervisory framework for corporate owners of insured banks are in danger of being decidedforCongress through the expansion of this loophole by individual firms acting in their own self-interest. The Board believes that the decisions on these important policies, which influence the structure and resiliency of our financial system and economy, should be madebyCongress, acting in the public interest, and then applied to all organizations in a competitively equitable manner. Prudential Framework Established for Bank Holding CompaniesTo understand the issues surrounding ILCs, it may be useful first to review the supervisory and prudential framework that has been established for the parent firms of insured banks generally and the origins of the ILC exception in current law. The federal BHC Act, originally enacted in 1956, created a federal framework for the supervision and regulation of companies that own or control a bank and their affiliates. This framework is intended to help protect the safety and soundness of corporately controlled banks that have access to the federal safety net, ultimately backed by the taxpayer, and to maintain the general separation of banking and commerce in the United States. Financial trouble in one part of a business organization can spread, and spread rapidly, to other parts of the organization. That is why Congress for many years has required consolidated federal supervision of all bank holding companies, including financial holding companies formed under the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act of 1999 (GLB Act). It is also why in 1991, following the collapse of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International (BCCI)--a foreign bank that lacked a single supervisor capable of monitoring its global activities--Congress amended the BHC Act to require that foreign banks demonstrate that they are subject to comprehensive supervision on a consolidated basis in their home country before acquiring a bank in the United States. The merits of supervision of the consolidated financial organization--not just the depository institution itself--also have led many developed countries, including those of the European Union, to adopt this supervisory framework. Consolidated federal supervision of bank holding companies by the Federal Reserve complements, and is in addition to, the authority that the primary federal or state bank supervisor has over the company’s subsidiary depository institutions. It allows a federal supervisor to understand the financial and managerial strength and risks within the consolidated organization as a whole and gives the federal supervisor the ability to address significant management, operational, capital or other deficiencies within the overall organizationbeforethey pose a danger to the organization’s subsidiary insured banks and the federal safety net. The hallmarks of this consolidated supervisory framework are broad grants of authority to examine and obtain reports from bank holding companies and each of their subsidiaries, establish consolidated capital requirements for bank holding companies, and take supervisory or enforcement actions against bank holding companies and their nonbank subsidiaries to address unsafe or unsound practices or violations of law. Consolidated capital requirements help ensure that bank holding companies have real capital to support their group-wide activities, do not become excessively leveraged, and are able to serve as a source of strength for their subsidiary banks. Besides requiring consolidated supervision of bank holding companies, the BHC Act also places limits on the types of activities that a bank holding company may conduct, either directly or through a nonbank subsidiary. These activity restrictions, which are designed to maintain the general separation of banking and commerce in the United States, generally allow a bank holding company and its nonbank subsidiaries to engage in only those activities that the Board has determined to be "closely related to banking." Since passage of the GLB Act, a bank holding company that qualifies and elects to become a financial holding company also may engage in other activities determined by Congress or the Board (in consultation with the Treasury Department) to be financial in nature or incidental to a financial activity, including full-scope securities underwriting and dealing, insurance underwriting and sales, and merchant banking. The GLB Act also permits a financial holding company, to a limited extent, to engage in or affiliate with a company engaged in a nonfinancial activity if the Board determines that the activity is "complementary" to the company’s financial activities and does not pose a substantial risk to the safety and soundness of depository institutions or the financial system generally. Importantly, the GLB Act allows a financial holding company to engage in this wider array of financial or complementary activities only if all of the company’s depository institution subsidiaries are--and remain--well capitalized and well managed, and all of its insured depository institution subsidiaries maintain at least a "satisfactory" record of performance under the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA). The ILC Exception and its OriginsAs I noted earlier, a special exception in current law exempts the corporate owners of ILCs that are chartered in one of a handful of states--principally Utah and California--from the supervisory framework established by the BHC Act. Ironically, this exception for ILCs was enacted in 1987 as part of a broader legislative package designed toclosean earlier loophole that allowed firms to evade the nonbanking restrictions and consolidated supervisory requirements of the BHC Act. In particular, prior to 1987, the BHC Act defined the term "bank" narrowly to mean an institution that both accepted demand depositsandwas engaged in the business of making commercial loans. A number of firms--including Sears, Roebuck & Co., Gulf & Western, ITT Transamerica, and Prudential Insurance--took advantage of this narrow definition to establish so-called nonbank banks, which were FDIC-insured banks that either accepted demand depositsormade commercial loans, but did not engage in both activities. In 1987, Congress enacted the Competitive Equality Banking Act (CEBA) to close the nonbank bank loophole and prevent further evasions of the BHC Act. To do so, CEBA expanded the definition of "bank" in the BHC Act to include any FDIC-insured bank (regardless of the activities it conducts)andany banking institution that both offers transaction accounts and makes commercial loans (regardless of whether it is FDIC-insured). Congress enacted this change because of concern that commercial firms were establishing nonbank banks outside of the supervisory framework established by Congress for the corporate owners of insured banks and without regard for the activity restrictions in the BHC Act that were designed to limit the mixing of banking and commerce. In CEBA, Congress also adopted an exception from this new and expanded definition of "bank" for ILCs chartered in those states that, as of March 5, 1987, had in effect or under legislative consideration a law requiring ILCs to have FDIC insurance. The legislative history of CEBA offers little explanation of why this exception was adopted. This may well be because the size, nature and powers of ILCs were quite limited both historically and in 1987. ILCs were first established in the early 1900s to make small loans to industrial workers. For many years, they were not generally permitted to accept deposits or obtain FDIC insurance. In fact, at the time CEBA was enacted, most ILCs were small, locally owned institutions that had only limited deposit-taking and lending powers under state law. In 1987, the largest ILC had assets of less than $400 million and the vast majority of ILCs had assets of less than $50 million. The relevant states also were not actively chartering new ILCs. At the time CEBA was enacted, for example, Utah had only eleven state-chartered ILCs and had a moratorium on the chartering of new ILCs. Moreover, interstate banking restrictions and technological limitations made it difficult for institutions chartered in a grandfathered state to operate a retail banking business regionally or nationally. Changing Character and Nature of ILCsWhat was once an exception with limited and local reach, however, has now become the means through which large national and international commercial, retail, and industrial firms may acquire a federally insured bank and gain access to the federal safety net. Indeed, the changes that have occurred with ILCs in recent years have been dramatic and have made ILCs virtually indistinguishable from other commercial banks. For example, in 1997, Utah lifted its moratorium on the chartering of new ILCs, allowed ILCs to call themselves banks, and authorized ILCs to exercise virtually all of the powers of state-chartered commercial banks. In addition, Utah and certain other grandfathered states recently began to charter new ILCs and to promote them as a method for companies to acquire a federally insured bank while avoiding the requirements of the BHC Act. As a result of these and other changes, the aggregate amount of assets and deposits held by all ILCs operating under this exception increased substantially between 1997 and 2005, with assets increasing nearly 500 percent (from $25.1 billion to $150.1 billion) and deposits increasing by more than 800 percent (from $11.7 billion to $107.9 billion). The number of Utah-chartered ILCs also has tripled since 1997. The nature and size of individual ILCs and their parent companies also has changed dramatically in recent years. While the largest ILC in 1987 had assets of less than $400 million, the largest ILC today has more than $62billionin assets and more than $54billionin deposits, making it the twelfth largest insured bank in the United States in terms of deposits. An additional ten ILCs each control more than $1 billion in deposits and thus rank within the top 200 insured banks in the United States in terms of deposits. And, far from being locally owned, a number of ILCs today are controlled by large, internationally active commercial companies and are used to support various aspects of these organizations’ operations. While the growth of ILCs in recent years is impressive by itself, it also is important to keep in mind that the exception is open-ended and subject to very few statutory restrictions. Only a handful of states have the ability to charter exempt ILCs. However, there isnolimit on the number of exempt ILCs that these states may charter going forward. In fact, several large commercial firms currently have applications pending to establish new ILCs or to acquire existing ones. Moreover, the BHC Act places only limited restrictions on the types of activities that an ILC operating under the exception may conduct. For example, ILCs may operate under the exception so long as they do not accept demand deposits that the depositor may withdraw by check or similar means for payment to third parties. As a substitute, some ILCs offer retail customers negotiable order of withdrawal (NOW) accounts--transaction accounts that are functionally indistinguishable from demand deposit accounts. Small ILCs--those that have assets of less than $100 million--and ILCs that were chartered before August 10, 1987, and have not experienced a change in control since that date, are not subject to even this limited restriction on their powers. Federal law places no restrictions on the ability of ILCs to collect FDIC-insured savings or time deposits from institutional or retail customers. Thus, federal law allows a new or existing ILC of any size to offer a wide range of federally insured retail deposit accounts; commercial, mortgage, credit card, and consumer loans; cash management services; trust services; payment-related services, including Fedwire, automated clearinghouse (ACH) and check-clearing services; and other banking services. Moreover, federal law permits ILCs to branch across state lines to the same extent as other types of insured banks. Importantly, because of advances in telecommunications and information technology, ILCs chartered in one state also now have the ability to conduct their activities throughout the United States, with or without physical branches, through the Internet or through arrangements with affiliated or unaffiliated entities. Bank Affiliations with Commercial and Financial FirmsThe Board is concerned that the recent and potential future growth of ILCs threatens to undermine the decisions that Congress has made in two important areas. First, the exception is eroding Congress’ established policies concerning the mixing of banking and commerce in the United States and diminishing the role of Congress in determining whether or how banking and commerce should be allowed to mix in this country. For many years, Congress has sought to maintain the general separation of banking and commerce and has acted affirmatively to close loopholes that create large breaches in the wall between banking and commerce. For example, one of the primary reasons for enactment of the BHC Act in 1956, and its expansion in 1970 to cover companies that control only a single bank, was to help prevent and restrain combinations of banking and commercial firms under the auspices of a single holding company. And, as noted earlier, when the nonbank bank loophole threatened to undermine the separation of banking and commerce, Congress acted in 1987 to close that loophole. More recently, Congress reaffirmed its desire to maintain the general separation of banking and commerce in 1999 when it passed the GLB Act. That act closed the unitary-thrift loophole, which previously allowed commercial firms to acquire a federally insured savings association. In addition, after lengthy debate, Congress decided to allow financial holding companies to engage in only those activities determined to be financial in nature or incidental or complementary to financial activities. In taking this action, Congress rejected proposals that would have allowed financial holding companies to engage generally in a "basket" of commercial activities or that would have allowed commercial firms to acquire a small bank without becoming subject to the BHC Act. Congress also placed qualifications on the ability of banks to affiliate even with financial firms such as securities firms and insurance companies. The GLB Act allows a financial holding company to affiliate with a full-service securities or insurance firm only if the financial holding company keeps all of its subsidiary depository institutions well capitalized and well managed and all of the company’s subsidiary insured depository institutions maintain at least a satisfactory CRA record. The ILC exception undermines each of these decisions by allowing commercial and financial firms to operate FDIC-insured ILCs while avoiding the restrictions on commercial affiliations applicable to the corporate owners of other insured banks and avoiding the capital, managerial, and CRA requirements applicable to financial holding companies. The question of whether to allow broader mixings of banking and commerce has broad-reaching implications for the structure and soundness of the American economy and financial system particularly because, if permitted, any general mixing of banking and commerce is likely to be difficult to disentangle. Consequently, the nation’s policy on this important issue should be set by Congress only after deliberate and careful consideration; it should not be allowed to occur unintentionally through the exploitation of an exception by individual commercial firms. Importance of Consolidated SupervisionSecond, the ILC exception undermines the supervisory framework that Congress has established for the corporate owners of insured banks. On this point, let me be clear that the Board has no concerns about the adequacy of the existing supervisory framework for ILCs themselves. ILCs are regulated and supervised by the FDIC and their chartering state in the same manner as other types of state-chartered, nonmember insured banks. However, due to the special exception in current law, the parent company of an ILC is not considered a bank holding company and is not subject to federal supervision on a consolidated basis under the BHC Act. This creates a supervisory blind spot because the Federal Reserve’s supervisory authority over bank holding companies and their nonbank subsidiaries under the BHC Act is significantly broader than the supervisory authority that the primary federal supervisor of an ILC has over the holding company and nonbank affiliates of the bank. It was precisely to avoid the risks of this blind spot that Congress established a supervisory framework for bank holding companies and savings and loan holding companies that includes a federal supervisor of the parent holding company and its nonbank subsidiaries as well as a federal supervisor for the insured depository institution itself. For example, the BHC Act provides broad authority to examine a bank holding company and its nonbank subsidiaries, whether or not the company or nonbank subsidiary engages in transactions, or has relationships, with a depository institution subsidiary.1This authority supplements and complements the authority of the primary bank supervisor. Pursuant to this authority, the Federal Reserve routinely conducts examinations of all large, complex bank holding companies and maintains inspection teams on-site at the largest bank holding companies on an on-going basis. These examinations allow the Federal Reserve to review the organization's systems for identifying and managing risk across the organization and its various legal entities and to evaluate the overall financial strength of the organization. By contrast, the primary federal supervisor of a bank, including an ILC, is authorized to examine the parent company and affiliates (other than subsidiaries) of the bank only to the extent necessary to disclose the relationship between the bank and the parent or affiliate and the effect of the relationship on the bank. Federal law also grants the Federal Reserve the authority to require that bank holding companies maintain adequate capital on a consolidated basis to help ensure that the parent company is able to serve as a source of strength, not weakness, for its subsidiary insured banks. The parent companies of exempt ILCs, however, are not subject to the consolidated capital requirements established for bank holding companies. Indeed, among the factors contributing to the failure of a federally insured ILC in 1999 were the unregulated borrowing and weakened capital position of the corporate owner of the ILC and the inability of any federal supervisor to ensure that the parent holding company remained financially strong. In addition, federal law gives the Federal Reserve broad enforcement authority over bank holding companies and their nonbank subsidiaries. This authority includes the ability to stop or prevent a bank holding company or nonbank subsidiary from engaging in an unsafe or unsound practice in connection with its own business operations, even if those operations are not directly connected with the company’s subsidiary banks. On the other hand, the primary federal bank supervisor for an ILC may take enforcement action against the parent company or a nonbank affiliate of an ILC to address an unsafe or unsound practice only if the practice occurs in the conduct of theILC’sbusiness. Thus, unsafe and unsound practices that weaken the parent firm of an ILC, such as significant reductions in its capital, increases in its debt or its conduct of risky nonbanking activities, are generally beyond the scope of the enforcement authority of the ILC’s primary federal bank supervisor. Consolidated supervisory authority is especially helpful in understanding and, if appropriate, controlling the risks to the federal safety net when a subsidiary bank is closely integrated with, or heavily reliant on, its parent organization. In these situations, the subsidiary bank may have no business independent of the bank’s affiliates, and the bank’s loans and deposits may be derived or solicited largely through or from affiliates. In addition, the subsidiary bank may be substantially or entirely dependent on the parent or its affiliates for critical services, such as computer support, treasury operations, accounting, personnel, management, and even premises. This appears to be the case at some of the largest ILCs. In fact, seven of the ten largest ILCs each have more than $3 billion in assets but fewer than 75 full-time employees. In addition to constructing this supervisory framework domestically, Congress has made this type of consolidated supervisory framework a prerequisite for foreign banks seeking to acquire a bank in the United States. In 1991, Congress amended the BHC Act to require a foreign bank to demonstrate that the consolidated organization is subject to comprehensive supervision in its home country before acquiring a U.S. bank or establishing a branch, agency or commercial lending company subsidiary in the United States. Adoption of a framework of consolidated supervision of banking organizations is, in fact, becoming the preferred approach to supervision worldwide. The ILC exception, however, allows a foreign bank that is not subject to consolidated supervision in its home country to evade this requirement and acquire an FDIC-insured bank with broad deposit-taking and lending powers in the United States. Fair Competition and Other IssuesIn considering these issues, it is important that Congress establish a fair and level competitive playing field for firms that seek to own a bank with full access to the federal safety net and carefully consider the potential interplay of its decisions on the multitude of issues associated with ILCs. For example, if Congress determines that broader mixings of banking and commerce should be permitted, that new policy should apply to all banking organizations in a competitively equitable matter. In addition, Congress should carefully consider the type of supervisory framework that best suits the needs and structure of our financial system and protects insured banks and the taxpayer. ConclusionThe issues I have discussed today involve important public-policy matters and the Board applauds the subcommittee for holding this hearing to obtain testimony on these issues. In particular, I appreciate the opportunity to discuss the Board’s views on ILCs. The Board and its staff would be pleased to work with the subcommittee, the full committee, and their staffs in addressing the important issues raised by the ILC exception in current law. Footnotes 1.In the case of certain functionally regulated subsidiaries of bank holding companies, the BHC Act directs the Board to rely to the fullest extent possible on examinations of the subsidiary conducted by the functional regulator for the subsidiary, and requires the Board to make certain findings before conducting an independent examination of the functionally regulated subsidiary. 12 U.S.C. §1844(c)(2)(B). These limitations also apply to the FDIC and other federal banking agencies in the exercise of their more limited examination authority over the nonbank affiliates of an insured bank, such as an ILC.See12 U.S.C. § 1831v.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its discount rate meetings from May 22 through June 29, 2006. The minutes are attached.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Thursday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on June 28-29, 2006. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board's Annual Report. The summary description of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes is based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's web site atwww.federalreserve.gov/fomc. Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, June 28-29, 2006
Vice Chairman Donald L. Kohn At the European Economics and Financial Centre Seminar, House of Commons, London, England I am pleased to have the opportunity to return to the Houses of Parliament. I say "return" because I appeared here once previously, before the Treasury Select Committee to testify on my report on monetary policy processes at the Bank of England. Two memories stand out from that visit: One is of the mouse that ran across the floor as we were eating lunch--I am sure it could not have been a rat in these precincts; the other is of the thoughtful, informed character of the give and take with the members of the committee, who, perhaps, were just being relatively nice to a visitor from a central bank with only ninety years of history at the time. In the past few years, the global economy has enjoyed low inflation and robust growth. This is an experience to which policymakers of all varieties have contributed. But today I am not going to address the prospects for the global economy to extend that progress in the near term. Chairman Bernanke, in his congressional testimony later this month, will address the immediate outlook for activity and prices in the United States and the global economy more generally, and the recent conduct of monetary policy. Instead, I thought I would step back and think about the implications of some longer-term trends for economic performance and for policies, monetary and other. In particular I want to concentrate on several aspects of the reduction of barriers to trade, capital flows, and labor migration--often encapsulated in the word "globalization." First, I will talk about the extent to which globalization has itself contributed to the low-inflation environment in the United States. But the freer flows around the globe have probably also contributed to the size and persistence of global imbalances--the current account deficit of the United States and the surplus of the rest of the world. I will next spend a few minutes on the causes of these imbalances, how they might unwind, and the policies that should be put in place to raise the odds on orderly adjustment.1 Globalization and InflationAlthough inflation is ultimately a monetary phenomenon, it is important to stress the word "ultimately" in that formulation. The long run in which monetary policy exerts its influence on nominal magnitudes is the summation of individual short runs in which pressures in labor and product markets help to shape price dynamics. In the world in which we live, it seems natural to expect, as others have argued, that the greater integration of product and financial markets would have exerted some downward pressure on inflation. I cannot look back at the experience in the United States over the past decade without discerning the imprint of such forces. The opening up of China and India, in particular, represents a potentially huge increase in the global supply of mainly lower-skilled workers. And it is clear that the low cost of production in these and other emerging economies has led to a geographic shift in production toward them; from a U.S. perspective, the ratio of imported goods to domestically produced goods has risen noticeably in recent years. However, the extent of the disinflationary forces let loose by this shift in the pace of globalization is less obvious. The United States is more open, but it is also large in size and scope. Many U.S. goods and most services are still produced domestically with little competition from abroad. In addition, the significant expansion of production in China and elsewhere has put substantial upward pressure on the prices of oil and other commodities, many of which are imported for use as inputs to production in the United States. While we can point to types of goods for which prices are restrained by forces from abroad, the net effects of globalization on domestic inflation of all goods and services need not even be negative, especially in today’s environment of strong global growth. One challenge in assessing the effect of increased globalization is the paucity of empirical research on this issue, which is understandable given the shortness of the span over which these forces have been particularly acute. Nevertheless, the existing research does highlight several channels through which globalization might have helped to hold down domestic inflation in recent years. These channels include the direct and indirect effects on domestic inflation of lower import prices, a heightened sensitivity of domestic inflation to foreign demand conditions and perhaps less sensitivity to domestic demand conditions, downward pressure on domestic wage growth, and upward pressure on domestic productivity growth. Let me summarize the empirical evidence from work on U.S. inflation my colleagues and I have done at the Federal Reserve Board, as well as from our readings of other studies. In the United States, the increase in core import prices since the mid-1990s has averaged about 1-1/2 percentage points less per year than the increase in core consumer prices. According to our model, the direct and indirect effects of this decline in the relative price of imports held down core inflation by between 1/2 and 1 percentage point per year over this period, an estimated effect that is substantially larger than it would have been in earlier decades. However, much of the decline in import prices during this period was probably driven by the appreciation of the dollar in the late 1990s and the effects of technological change on goods prices rather than by the growing integration of world markets. In addition, import prices have risen at least as rapidly as core consumer prices over the past several years and thus no longer appear to be acting as a significant restraint on inflation in the United States. A second aspect of the hypothesis is that as economies become more integrated, their domestic inflation will be less sensitive to domestic demand pressures and more sensitive to foreign demand conditions than it was earlier. While this seems eminently plausible, recognize that this is a partial-equilibrium effect, identifying one, among many, determinants of inflation, and consequently difficult to verify empirically. Most researchers, in fact, agree that inflation in the United States is less sensitive to domestic demand conditions today than it was twenty years ago. But numerous researchers have attributed this persistently low inflation to the improved credibility of monetary policy. In that regard, most of the decline in the sensitivity of U.S. inflation to the domestic unemployment gap occurred in the 1980s--too early to be associated with the more recent acceleration in the pace of globalization and more coincident with the sea change in the attitude toward inflation worldwide. This aspect of the globalization hypothesis, however, would be bolstered if the decline in the sensitivity of inflation to domestic demand was accompanied by an increased sensitivity to foreign demand. Efforts to find such a link have met with mixed results, with some researchers having found large effects and others having found no effect. Our own analysis of this issue indicates that these results are sensitive to how the foreign output gap is defined and to how the inflation model is specified, suggesting that any effect may not be especially robust. That said, the difficulties with measuring slack in the U.S. economy are compounded when describing the global economy, making settlement of this issue especially difficult. Similarly, the evidence that globalization has helped to restrain unit labor costs in recent years is not definitive. One hypothesis is that the increase in the supply of low-skilled workers associated with the emergence of China and other East Asian countries as low-cost centers of production has damped the growth of nominal wages in the United States. But a stable statistical relationship between labor compensation and various measures of globalization has eluded researchers. However, many of the changes are relatively recent, giving empiricists few observations. And, in that regard, the recent behavior of some, though not all, measures of aggregate compensation seem to have been somewhat lower than models would have predicted. Of course, several purely domestic factors could help to account for any shortfall, such as the aftereffects of the unusually sluggish recovery in job growth early in this expansion or a possible downward drift in the natural rate of unemployment. But it also is a pattern that would be consistent with downward pressures from an expansion in global labor supply. In support of this link, some studies have found a relationship between industry wage growth and import penetration, and between the relative decline in wages of low-skilled workers and trade, but the effects are generally small. A second possibility is that globalization has restrained unit labor costs by raising productivity. Increasing volumes of trade should bolster productivity as economies concentrate their resources in those sectors in which they are relatively more efficient. But I have seen little direct evidence on the extent to which globalization may have boosted aggregate productivity growth in the United States in recent years. Nevertheless, research at the Board finds that multinational corporations, which may have greater opportunities to realize efficiencies by shifting production locations, accounted for a disproportionate share of aggregate productivity growth in the late 1990s. And some microeconomic studies have found a relationship between global engagement and productivity at the firm level. Thus, it seems possible that the persistently high growth rates of multifactor productivity in recent years in the United States may partly be due to the productivity-enhancing effects of globalization. However, these effects should not be unique to the United States. The fact that many other advanced economies facing similar competitive pressures are not experiencing the same outcome gives me pause. This evidence suggests that the old line of Churchill--that two economists give three different answers to any question--still holds. My own assessment is that, quite naturally, the greater integration of the U.S. economy into a rapidly evolving world economy has affected the dynamics of inflation determination. Unfortunately, huge gaps and puzzles remain in our analysis and empirical testing of various hypotheses related to these effects. But, for the most part, the evidence seems to suggest that to date the effects have been gradual and limited: a greater role for the direct and indirect effects of import prices; possibly some damping of unit labor costs, though less so for prices from this channel judging from high profit margins; and potentially a smaller effect of the domestic output gap and a greater effect of foreign output gaps, but here too the evidence is far from conclusive. In particular, the entry of China, India, and others into the global trading system probably has exerted a modest disinflationary force on prices in the United States in recent years. Moreover, we should recognize that these could be one-off effects to the extent that they reflect the global imbalances that I will speak about next, rather than just the integration of emerging-market economies into the global-trading system. If so, any disinflationary effects could dissipate or even be reversed in coming years. For example, the fact that China and some other emerging-market economies have resisted upward pressure on their exchange rates and are running trade surpluses has undoubtedly contributed to their disinflationary effects on the rest of the world. The prices of their exports are lower than they would be if market forces were given greater scope in foreign exchange markets, and they are supplying more goods and services to the rest of the world than they themselves are demanding. These imbalances are not likely to be sustained indefinitely. The elevated rates of national saving in these economies--and, in some, relatively restrained rates of investment--are not likely to persist in the face of ongoing improvements in the functioning of their financial markets, increases in the depth of their product markets, and fuller development of economic safety nets. As individuals in these countries are increasingly drawn to investing at home and consuming more of their wealth and as their real wages catch up to past productivity gains, the upward pressures on these countries’ currencies will intensify, their demand will come into better alignment with their capacity to produce, cost advantages will decline, and these economies will exert less, if any, downward pressure on inflation in the United States or other advanced economies. Global ImbalancesThe first thing to keep in mind about global imbalances is their scale. The U.S. current account deficit is enormous--on the order of $800 billion or 6-1/2 percent of gross domestic product--and it is not likely to shrink substantially in the immediate future, given the current configuration of economic activity and prices around the world. Obviously, the U.S. deficit has as a counterpart an equal current account surplus in the rest of the world combined, after allowance for gaps in the statistical reporting system. The size and persistence of these imbalances reflects two interrelated forces. First is the gap between spending and production in the United States and a similar gap of opposite sign in the rest of the world. The United States as a whole is spending much more than it is producing. Saving rates are especially low in our household and federal government sectors--both of which are spending more than their current income. This configuration is not so unusual for the government, but it is for households, where low interest rates (until recently) and the rising value and easier accessibility of housing wealth apparently have boosted spending relative to income. Outside the United States, the shortfall of domestic demand relative to production capacity has importantly reflected weak business investment along with high saving rates, a mechanism identified by my colleague, Chairman Bernanke. Low levels of investment relative to profits, sales, and the cost of capital are global, including in the United States. Indeed, it is one reason interest rates have been so low through much of the recent global expansion. In the United States, the shortfall in business demand has been made up for largely by the household sector, as I just noted; for a variety of reasons, that has been less the case in many other countries, especially in Asia, and these countries have, in effect, relied on exports to fill the gap between demand and potential production. The second force affecting global imbalances has been the continuing strong demand for dollar assets, without which exchange rates and other prices already would have adjusted to limit the growth of the imbalances. Arguably, it was this strong demand, in response to the step-up in productivity growth in the United States and the Asian financial crisis, that appreciated the dollar in the late 1990s and initiated the string of large U.S. current account deficits. But the demand has continued this decade, albeit with some fluctuations, financing the growing U.S. current account deficit. Private investors apparently perceive opportunities for relatively high returns on dollar assets in light of the more rapid growth of productivity in the United States than in many other industrialized economies. The attraction of dollar assets likely also is enhanced by the liquid nature of the markets in which they trade and because as collateral these assets are protected by the rule of law and have been a safe haven in times of stress. The globalization of financial markets and the increased willingness of investors to look beyond their own borders for opportunities may well have facilitated the transfer of savings needed to sustain the U.S. current account deficit. In that regard, both the pull of global demands for our assets as well as the push of our needs to finance our trade imbalance explains the current conjuncture. Foreign official holdings of dollar assets also have risen substantially, especially in Asia. Governments there apparently read one lesson of the financial crisis of the 1990s as the need for a large war chest of reserves. In addition, against the backdrop of very high private saving rates, they may be concerned about their ability to generate sufficient domestic demand to provide employment opportunities, in some cases for the growing numbers of people who want to shift from agriculture to higher productivity jobs often in urban areas. Although private and government demands for dollar assets have allowed the U.S. current account deficit and foreign surpluses to persist, these imbalances are not sustainable indefinitely. In the United States, both public and private saving will need to rise to meet the oncoming needs of an aging population. At some point, risk-adjusted returns on investments in the rest of the world will begin to look favorable relative to holding dollar assets. Dollar assets are becoming an increasing proportion of non-U.S. portfolios; this can continue for a time, but not forever. At some point, the United States is going to need to finance its imports with the proceeds of its exports, not with foreign saving. Experience with current account adjustments by industrialized economies--for example, by the United States in the 1980s--suggests that the transition to a more sustainable configuration is not likely to be disruptive. But we cannot be sure, particularly because the U.S. experience is unique given the dollar’s role as a reserve currency and Americans’ relatively favorable returns on assets held abroad. The world economy is in uncharted territory with regard to the size of the imbalances. Various asset markets have experienced rather sharp fluctuations in prices in recent decades, some of which have threatened disruption in the United States and have contributed to sluggish growth elsewhere, as in Japan following the real estate boom and bust; we certainly cannot rule out the possibility of further sharp asset price movements as product prices and spending adjust. Recent research reinforces the common-sense conclusion that no single policy or private action will be sufficient to effect the necessary changes. Adjustment will need to proceed along several dimensions at the same time, including changes in relative prices and in domestic demand around the globe. The Role of PolicyThat observation brings me to my final topic--the role of public policy in addressing these imbalances. Sound public policies will enhance the chances that any transition will be smooth. They can contribute by facilitating needed adjustments in spending, production, and relative prices and by taking steps to foster strong, flexible product and financial markets that are resilient to more abrupt changes in asset prices and spending patterns, cushioning the effect of any such fluctuations on output and product prices. A permanent correction to the spending imbalances in the United States must involve further progress on fiscal discipline and a long-run solution to the financing problems of entitlement programs--Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid. Without a resolution of these fiscal problems, it would be all the more difficult to bring aggregate production and spending into balance and the resultant intensified pressures on interest rates, as the flow of foreign saving into the United States levels out or declines, would exacerbate adjustment difficulties in other sectors. Smooth adjustment of global current account imbalances cannot be brought about by actions of the United States alone. Our trading partners also need to take steps. Indeed, were U.S. domestic demand to moderate and provide less stimulus abroad in the form of reduced demand for exports from our trading partners, central banks in those countries would need to adjust the stance of monetary policy to maintain full utilization of resources. Moreover, in many cases, the root cause of deficient domestic demand seems to be more structural than cyclical in nature, calling for more micro-oriented measures to promote flexible and efficient labor and product markets. Such initiatives should yield higher productivity growth and more vigorous spending, boosting rates of return on capital investment outside the United States. These changes in turn would boost the demand for U.S. exports and would likely shift portfolio preferences away from dollar-denominated assets. Other public policies, here and abroad, can have an important influence on the transition process by working to facilitate market flexibility. For example, increased exchange rate flexibility in key Asian currencies will be essential to enable the monetary authorities to contain inflation through market-oriented policies rather than inefficient direct controls. Greater flexibility also will enhance the ability of all the world’s economies to adapt to the huge increases in the effective supply of labor and its productivity and in demand that has resulted from these economies becoming part of the global trading system. In addition, the United States and its trading partners should vigorously protect the current degree of the openness of their labor and product markets and should continue to pursue the difficult goal of reducing trade barriers further. These and other types of market flexibility help facilitate needed shifts in spending and prices; without them, rigidities might impede such stabilizing changes, causing adjustments to break out forcefully in other, more disruptive ways. Increased market flexibility would also ease the macroeconomic stabilization burden placed on fiscal and monetary policy--an important consideration, given that policymakers cannot anticipate the nature and incidence of all the elements of the adjustment process. In this regard, prudential regulation is also important because it increases the ability of policymakers to focus on stabilizing aggregate output and inflation. By ensuring that financial institutions are adequately capitalized and are managing risks well, and are in general well prepared to deal with major changes in asset prices, they are in a better position to weather any necessary changes in policy settings. Prudential regulation also decreases the risk that the actions of impaired financial institutions could disrupt the flow of credit and thereby intensify what might already be difficult adjustments. A surge in financial market innovations and shift in trading participants has paralleled the rise in global imbalances in recent years. The Federal Reserve, under the leadership of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, has been working with other regulators in the United States and elsewhere, including the Financial Services Authority in London, along with the private sector to strengthen the infrastructures and risk management around these new markets and participants. Finally, monetary policy plays a role in reacting to these imbalances and their inevitable unwinding. I start my thinking on this topic from the premise that monetary policy--in the United States or elsewhere--has not been a major factor behind the increases in global imbalances. As I argued a little while ago, the imbalances reflect saving and investment behavior along with demands for assets in various economies. To be sure, spending and production respond to changes in interest rates, but how the balance between the two is affected by policy is not clear. Policies to affect demand might have offsetting influences on relative prices. For example, a tighter monetary policy in the United States might damp demand but could also appreciate the exchange rate, with ambiguous effects on the current account. As a consequence, monetary policies are not well suited to initiate current account adjustments. These imbalances certainly affect the forces of supply and demand and have consequences for price stability. At the Federal Reserve and at other central banks, we have been reacting to the changes in spending and prices that have accompanied the buildup of these imbalances in ways intended to keep inflation low and stable and our economies producing near their maximum sustainable potential. The imbalances are important to us in so far as they affect the macroeconomy, and in this regard they are just a few of the factors that the Federal Reserve considers in assessing the prospects for price and output stability. Similarly, we will need to take account of any influences on the macroeconomy of the unwinding of the imbalances when that occurs. Continued strong demand for dollar assets will be critical to keeping that unwinding smooth and not disruptive. The Federal Reserve can contribute by being sure the public remains confident that the purchasing power of their dollar assets will not erode unexpectedly. As long as inflation expectations remain contained, relatively faster growth of the prices of imported goods for a time would be associated with only a temporary bulge in inflation and would result in a needed change in relative prices. The lesson from the 1970s, however, is that an unchecked or permanent increase in inflation would only feed back adversely on demand for dollars. Such an unmooring of the anchor of price stability could only elevate the odds on abrupt changes in interest rates and asset prices, instability in the U.S. economy, and disorder in global adjustments. Footnotes 1.These views are my own and not necessarily those of other members of the Board of Governors and the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate Chairman Bernanke presented identical testimony before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, on July 20, 2006 Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee, I am pleased to be here again to present the Federal Reserve'sMonetary Policy Report to the Congress. Over the period since our February report, the U.S. economy has continued to expand. Real gross domestic product (GDP) is estimated to have risen at an annual rate of 5.6 percent in the first quarter of 2006. The available indicators suggest that economic growth has more recently moderated from that quite strong pace, reflecting a gradual cooling of the housing market and other factors that I will discuss. With respect to the labor market, more than 850,000 jobs were added, on net, to nonfarm payrolls over the first six months of the year, though these gains came at a slower pace in the second quarter than in the first. Last month the unemployment rate stood at 4.6 percent. Inflation has been higher than we had anticipated in February, partly as a result of further sharp increases in the prices of energy and other commodities. During the first five months of the year, overall inflation as measured by the price index for personal consumption expenditures averaged 4.3 percent at an annual rate. Over the same period, core inflation--that is, inflation excluding food and energy prices--averaged 2.6 percent at an annual rate. To address the risk that inflation pressures might remain elevated, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) continued to firm the stance of monetary policy, raising the federal funds rate another 3/4 percentage point, to 5-1/4 percent, in the period since our last report. Let me now review the current economic situation and the outlook in a bit more detail, beginning with developments in the real economy and then turning to the inflation situation. I will conclude with some comments on monetary policy. The U.S. economy appears to be in a period of transition. For the past three years or so, economic growth in the United States has been robust. This growth has reflected both the ongoing re-employment of underutilized resources, as the economy recovered from the weakness of earlier in the decade, and the expansion of the economy's underlying productive potential, as determined by such factors as productivity trends and growth of the labor force. Although the rates of resource utilization that the economy can sustain cannot be known with any precision, it is clear that, after several years of above-trend growth, slack in resource utilization has been substantially reduced. As a consequence, a sustainable, non-inflationary expansion is likely to involve a modest reduction in the growth of economic activity from the rapid pace of the past three years to a pace more consistent with the rate of increase in the nation's underlying productive capacity. It bears emphasizing that, because productivity growth seems likely to remain strong, the productive capacity of our economy should expand over the next few years at a rate sufficient to support solid growth in real output. As I have noted, the anticipated moderation in economic growth now seems to be under way, although the recent erratic growth pattern complicates this assessment. That moderation appears most evident in the household sector. In particular, consumer spending, which makes up more than two-thirds of aggregate spending, grew rapidly during the first quarter but decelerated during the spring. One likely source of this deceleration was higher energy prices, which have adversely affected the purchasing power of households and weighed on consumer attitudes. Outlays for residential construction, which have been at very high levels in recent years, rose further in the first quarter. More recently, however, the market for residential real estate has been cooling, as can be seen in the slowing of new and existing home sales and housing starts. Some of the recent softening in housing starts may have resulted from the unusually favorable weather during the first quarter of the year, which pulled forward construction activity, but the slowing of the housing market appears to be more broad-based than can be explained by that factor alone. Home prices, which have climbed at double-digit rates in recent years, still appear to be rising for the nation as a whole, though significantly less rapidly than before. These developments in the housing market are not particularly surprising, as the sustained run-up in housing prices, together with some increase in mortgage rates, has reduced affordability and thus the demand for new homes. The slowing of the housing market may restrain other forms of household spending as well. With homeowners no longer experiencing increases in the equity value of their homes at the rapid pace seen in the past few years, and with the recent declines in stock prices, increases in household net worth are likely to provide less of a boost to consumer expenditures than they have in the recent past. That said, favorable fundamentals, including relatively low unemployment and rising disposable incomes, should provide support for consumer spending. Overall, household expenditures appear likely to expand at a moderate pace, providing continued impetus to the overall economic expansion. Although growth in household spending has slowed, other sectors of the economy retain considerable momentum. Business investment in new capital goods appears to have risen briskly, on net, so far this year. In particular, investment in nonresidential structures, which had been weak since 2001, seems to have picked up appreciably, providing some offset to the slower growth in residential construction. Spending on equipment and software has also been strong. With a few exceptions, business inventories appear to be well aligned with sales, which reduces the risk that a buildup of unwanted inventories might act to reduce production in the future. Business investment seems likely to continue to grow at a solid pace, supported by growth in final sales, rising backlogs of orders for capital goods, and high rates of profitability. To be sure, businesses in certain sectors have experienced financial difficulties. In the aggregate, however, firms remain in excellent financial condition, and credit conditions for businesses are favorable. Globally, output growth appears strong. Growth of the global economy will help support U.S. economic activity by continuing to stimulate demand for our exports of goods and services. One downside of the strength of the global economy, however, is that it has led to significant increases in the demand for crude oil and other primary commodities over the past few years. Together with heightened geopolitical uncertainties and the limited ability of suppliers to expand capacity in the short run, these rising demands have resulted in sharp rises in the prices at which those goods are traded internationally, which in turn has put upward pressure on costs and prices in the United States. Overall, the U.S. economy seems poised to grow in coming quarters at a pace roughly in line with the expansion of its underlying productive capacity. Such an outlook is embodied in the projections of members of the Board of Governors and the presidents of Federal Reserve Banks that were made around the time of the FOMC meeting late last month, based on the assumption of appropriate monetary policy. In particular, the central tendency of those forecasts is for real GDP to increase about 3-1/4 percent to 3-1/2 percent in 2006 and 3 percent to 3-1/4 percent in 2007. With output expanding at a pace near that of the economy's potential, the civilian unemployment rate is expected to finish both 2006 and 2007 between 4-3/4 percent and 5 percent, close to its recent level. I turn now to the inflation situation. As I noted, inflation has been higher than we expected at the time of our last report. Much of the upward pressure on overall inflation this year has been due to increases in the prices of energy and other commodities and, in particular, to the higher prices of products derived from crude oil. Gasoline prices have increased notably as a result of the rise in petroleum prices as well as factors specific to the market for ethanol. The pickup in inflation so far this year has also been reflected in the prices of a range of non-energy goods and services, as strengthening demand may have given firms more ability to pass energy and other costs through to consumers. In addition, increases in residential rents, as well as in the imputed rent on owner-occupied homes, have recently contributed to higher core inflation. The recent rise in inflation is of concern to the FOMC. The achievement of price stability is one of the objectives that make up the Congress's mandate to the Federal Reserve. Moreover, in the long run, price stability is critical to achieving maximum employment and moderate long-term interest rates, the other parts of the congressional mandate. The outlook for inflation is shaped by a number of factors, not the least of which is the course of energy prices. The spot price of oil has moved up significantly further in recent weeks. Futures quotes imply that market participants expect petroleum prices to roughly stabilize in coming quarters; such an outcome would, over time, reduce one source of upward pressure on inflation. However, expectations of a leveling out of oil prices have been consistently disappointed in recent years, and as the experience of the past week suggests, possible increases in these and other commodity prices remain a risk to the inflation outlook. Although the costs of energy and other raw materials are important, labor costs are by far the largest component of business costs. Anecdotal reports suggest that the labor market is tight in some industries and occupations and that employers are having difficulty attracting certain types of skilled workers. To date, however, moderate growth in most broad measures of nominal labor compensation and the ongoing increases in labor productivity have held down the rise in unit labor costs, reducing pressure on inflation from the cost side. Employee compensation per hour is likely to rise more quickly over the next couple of years in response to the strength of the labor market. Whether faster increases in nominal compensation create additional cost pressures for firms depends in part on the extent to which they are offset by continuing productivity gains. Profit margins are currently relatively wide, and the effect of a possible acceleration in compensation on price inflation would thus also depend on the extent to which competitive pressures force firms to reduce margins rather than pass on higher costs. The public's inflation expectations are another important determinant of inflation. The Federal Reserve must guard against the emergence of an inflationary psychology that could impart greater persistence to what would otherwise be a transitory increase in inflation. After rising earlier this year, measures of longer-term inflation expectations, based on surveys and on a comparison of yields on nominal and inflation-indexed government debt, have edged down and remain contained. These developments bear watching, however. Finally, the extent to which aggregate demand is aligned with the economy's underlying productive potential also influences inflation. As I noted earlier, FOMC participants project that the growth in economic activity should moderate to a pace close to that of the growth of potential both this year and next. Should that moderation occur as anticipated, it should help to limit inflation pressures over time. The projections of the members of the Board of Governors and the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks, which are based on information available at the time of the last FOMC meeting, are for a gradual decline in inflation in coming quarters. As measured by the price index for personal consumption expenditures excluding food and energy, inflation is projected to be 2-1/4 percent to 2-1/2 percent this year and then to edge lower, to 2 percent to 2-1/4 percent next year. The FOMC projections, which now anticipate slightly lower growth in real output and higher core inflation than expected in our February report, mirror the somewhat more adverse circumstances facing our economy, which have resulted from the recent steep run-up in energy costs and higher-than-expected inflation more generally. But they also reflect our assessment that, with appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of significant unforeseen developments, the economy should continue to expand at a solid and sustainable pace and core inflation should decline from its recent level over the medium term. Although our baseline forecast is for moderating inflation, the Committee judges that some inflation risks remain. In particular, the high prices of energy and other commodities, in conjunction with high levels of resource utilization that may increase the pricing power of suppliers of goods and services, have the potential to sustain inflation pressures. More generally, if the pattern of elevated readings on inflation is more protracted or more intense than is currently expected, this higher level of inflation could become embedded in the public's inflation expectations and in price-setting behavior. Persistently higher inflation would erode the performance of the real economy and would be costly to reverse. The Federal Reserve must take account of these risks in making its policy decisions. In our pursuit of maximum employment and price stability, monetary policy makers operate in an environment of uncertainty. In particular, we have imperfect knowledge about the effects of our own policy actions as well as of the many other factors that will shape economic developments during the forecast period. These uncertainties bear importantly on our policy decisions because the full influence of policy actions on the economy is felt only after a considerable period of time. The lags between policy actions and their effects imply that we must be forward-looking, basing our policy choices on the longer-term outlook for both inflation and economic growth. In formulating that outlook, we must take account of the possible future effects of previous policy actions--that is, of policy effects still "in the pipeline." Finally, as I have noted, we must consider not only what appears to be the most likely outcome but also the risks to that outlook and the costs that would be incurred should any of those risks be realized. At the same time, because economic forecasting is far from a precise science, we have no choice but to regard all our forecasts as provisional and subject to revision as the facts demand. Thus, policy must be flexible and ready to adjust to changes in economic projections. In particular, as the Committee noted in the statement issued after its June meeting, the extent and timing of any additional firming that may be needed to address inflation risks will depend on the evolution of the outlook for both inflation and economic growth, as implied by our analysis of the incoming information. Thank you. I would be happy to take questions. July 2006 Monetary policy report
The Federal Open Market Committee on Thursday announced its tentative meeting schedule for 2007:January 30-31 (Tuesday-Wednesday)March 20-21 (Tuesday-Wednesday)May 9 (Wednesday)June 27-28 (Wednesday-Thursday)August 7 (Tuesday)September 18 (Tuesday)October 30-31 (Tuesday-Wednesday)December 11 (Tuesday)January 29-30, 2008 (Tuesday-Wednesday)Compared with the practice of recent years, the number of two-day meetings was increased from two to four to allow more opportunity for in-depth discussion of economic issues.Additionally, the Committee announced a change in its tentative schedule for 2006. The October meeting will be expanded to two days to allow time for discussion of communications issues; it will begin on Tuesday, October 24 and continue on Wednesday, October 25. The Committee's statement will be released around 2:15 p.m. EDT on Wednesday. January 30-31 (Tuesday-Wednesday)March 20-21 (Tuesday-Wednesday)May 9 (Wednesday)June 27-28 (Wednesday-Thursday)August 7 (Tuesday)September 18 (Tuesday)October 30-31 (Tuesday-Wednesday)December 11 (Tuesday)January 29-30, 2008 (Tuesday-Wednesday) Compared with the practice of recent years, the number of two-day meetings was increased from two to four to allow more opportunity for in-depth discussion of economic issues. Additionally, the Committee announced a change in its tentative schedule for 2006. The October meeting will be expanded to two days to allow time for discussion of communications issues; it will begin on Tuesday, October 24 and continue on Wednesday, October 25. The Committee's statement will be released around 2:15 p.m. EDT on Wednesday.
The Federal Reserve Board and the New York State Banking Department on Friday announced the execution of a Written Agreement by and among Banco Industrial de Venezuela, C.A., Caracas, Venezuela, its agencies in New York, New York and Miami, Florida; the Federal Reserve Bank of New York; the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta; the New York State Banking Department; and the State of Florida Office of Financial Regulation. The Federal Reserve Board and the New York State Banking Department simultaneously announced the termination of the April 21, 2005 Written Agreement by and among Banco Industrial de Venezuela, C.A., Caracas, Venezuela, its agencies in New York, New York and Miami, Florida; the Federal Reserve Bank of New York; the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta; the New York State Banking Department; and the State of Florida Office of Financial Regulation. A copy of the 2006 Written Agreement is attached.