Governor Susan Schmidt Bies At the American Bankers Association Annual Convention, Phoenix, Arizona Good morning. It is always an honor to address the American Bankers Association. Having been a banker, I find it particularly interesting to address this group in my current role as supervisor and central banker. I hope my past private sector experience helps provide a useful perspective on our current regulatory and supervisory policies. Today I would like to focus on the topic of enterprise risk management. I am quite pleased to see more and more sessions at conferences devoted to risk management, analyzing its different facets and exploring ways to tailor it to specific institutions and situations. Indeed, there is a growing understanding that good risk management should be an integral part of running any type of business. A key theme I would like to highlight today is that all banking institutions should seek ways to improve risk management, but that the methods to improve risk management should depend on the size and sophistication of the institution. In my remarks I will look at some recent cases in which we believe bankers and supervisors have learned some key lessons about enterprise risk management, or ERM. These lessons demonstrate how good risk management increases business efficiency and profitability. But before I start discussing particular examples, I want to take a step back and give you my thoughts on ERM generally. General Thoughts on Enterprise Risk ManagementThe financial services industry continues to evolve to meet the challenges posed by emerging technologies and business processes, new financial instruments, the growing scale and scope of financial institutions, and changing regulatory frameworks. A successful ERM process can help an organization meet many of these challenges by providing a framework for managers to explicitly consider how risk exposures are changing, determine the amount of risk they are willing to accept, and ensure they have the appropriate risk mitigants and controls in place to limit risk to targeted levels. Of course, ERM is a fairly broad topic that can mean different things to different people. For our purposes here today, I will define ERM as a process that enables management to effectively deal with uncertainty and associated risk and opportunity, enhancing the capacity to build stakeholder value. Borrowing from ERM literature, I would say that ERM includesaligning the entity's risk appetite and strategies,enhancing the rigor of the entity's risk-response decisions,reducing the frequency and severity of operational surprises and losses,identifying and managing multiple and cross-enterprise risks,proactively seizing on the opportunities presented to the entity, andimproving the effectiveness of the entity's capital deployment.Some of you are probably familiar with the ERM framework published over a year ago by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission, or COSO. The COSO framework provides a useful way to look at ERM and helps generate further discussion. In the COSO framework, ERM consists of eight interrelated components derived from the way management runs an enterprise and integrated with the management process: (1) internal environment, (2) objective setting, (3) event identification, (4) risk assessment, (5) risk response, (6) control activities, (7) information and communication, and (8) monitoring. Each of these is described in more detail in the COSO literature.Notably, the COSO framework states explicitly that, while its components will not function identically within every entity, its principles should apply to all sizes of institutions. Small and mid-size entities, for example, may choose to apply the framework in a less formal and less structured way and scale it to their own needs--as long as quality is maintained. This underscores the message from bank supervisors that good risk management is expected of every institution, regardless of size or sophistication. Naturally, there will still be some tension between what supervisors expect and what bankers do, but we hope that supervisory expectations for risk management are becoming more and more aligned with the way that bankers run their businesses.And as most of you know, running a smaller or less complex bank presents different types of challenges and requires a risk management framework appropriately tailored to the institution. For example, smaller organizations often face a challenge of ensuring independent review of processes and decisions since officers and staff members often have multiple responsibilities that can present conflicts of interest.Having made some general points, I would now like to discuss a few recent examples from banking that highlight the importance of ERM. With the benefit of hindsight, the financial regulators and the industry have been trying to distill the lessons learned from these recently identified weaknesses in risk management and internal control in the financial services sector.Compliance RiskOne area in which ERM provides tangible value is compliance risk. This type of risk may arise when an organization fails to comply with the laws, regulations, or codes of conduct that are applicable to its business activities and functions. The Federal Reserve expects banking organizations to have in place an infrastructure that can identify, monitor, and effectively control the compliance risks that they face. Needless to say, the infrastructure should be commensurate with the nature of the organization's compliance risk. For a large complex banking organization, dealing with compliance risk can be particularly challenging unless it has a well-developed risk management program. On the other hand, smaller organizations with limited staffs face a challenge in keeping up to date with changing regulations.To create appropriate compliance-risk controls, organizations should first understand compliance risk across the entire entity. Understandably, this can be a daunting task, but I think most would agree that an effective risk assessment is critical. Managers should be expected to evaluate the risks and controls within their scope of authority at least annually. An enterprise-wide compliance-risk management program should be dynamic and proactive. It should assess evolving risks when new business lines or activities are added, when existing activities and processes are altered, or when there are regulatory changes. The process should include an assessment of how those changes may affect the level and nature of risk exposures, and whether mitigating controls are effective in limiting exposures to targeted levels. To avoid having a program that operates on autopilot, an organization must continuously reassess its risks and controls and communicate with all employees who are part of the compliance process. If compliance is seen as a one-off project, an organization faces the risk that its compliance program will not keep up with the changes in its services or customer mix. The board of directors needs to ensure the organization has a top-to-bottom compliance culture that is well communicated by senior management so that all staff members understand their compliance responsibilities. Clear lines of communication and authority help to avoid conflicts of interest.Compliance-risk management can be more difficult for management to integrate into an organization's regular business processes because it often reflects mandates set out by legislation or regulation that the organization itself does not view as key to its success. For example, bankers understand how vital credit-risk management and interest-rate risk management are to their organizations, because they reduce the volatility of earnings and limit losses. However, regulations enacted for broader societal purposes can be viewed as an expensive mandate. For example, the Patriot Act requires significant reporting of transactions to the government, and many in the banking industry have expressed frustration about the burden associated with such reporting. I can assure you, we recognize banking organizations' investment in and commitment to compliance with regulatory requirements, including those imposed by anti-money-laundering and counter-terrorism regulations. The Federal Reserve will continue to work with our counterparts in the federal government to encourage feedback to the industry on how reporting is contributing to our common fight against money laundering and terrorism.Operational RiskOver the past few years, the Federal Reserve has been increasing its focus on operational risk. For many nonfinancial organizations, the largest share of enterprise risk is likely to be operational risk, as opposed to credit and interest-rate risk. Banks have learned much from the practices that nonfinancial firms have developed over the years. Operational risk has more relevance today for bankers largely because they are able to shed much of their interest-rate and credit risk through sales of loans, use of financial derivatives and sound models to manage the risks that are retained. Further, the fastest-growing revenue streams are increasingly related to transaction processing, servicing accounts, and selling sophisticated financial products. To be successful, organizations must have complex systems to execute these activities. Banks are also utilizing advanced models to estimate and manage credit risk and market risk exposures. Growing use of sophisticated models requires stronger risk management practices since weaknesses in the models' operational design and data integrity can lead to significant losses. Thus, effective risk management requires financial institutions to have more-knowledgeable employees to identify system requirements, monitor their effectiveness, and interpret model results appropriately.We have learned quite a bit about operational risk from our examinations of banking organizations. For example, during routine examinations we look at the adequacy of banks' procedures, processes, and internal controls. Such reviews include transaction testing of control routines in higher-risk activities. For example, a bank's wire transfer activities and loan administration functions are often targeted for review, and our experiences have identified some common weaknesses in operational control that are worthy of attention.With wire transfers and similar transactions, a banking organization could suffer a significant financial loss from unauthorized transfers and incur considerable damage to its reputation if operational risks are not properly mitigated. A few recurring recommendations from our reviews are to (1) establish reasonable approval and authorization requirements for wire transactions to ensure that an appropriate level of management is aware of the transaction and to establish better accountability; (2) establish call-back procedures, passwords, funds transfer agreements, and other authentication controls related to customers' wire transfer requests; and (3) pay increased attention to authentication controls, since this area may also be particularly susceptible to external fraud.Loan administration is another area where banking organizations could suffer significant financial losses from inappropriate segregation of duties or lack of dual controls. An institution could also incur considerable damage to its reputation if operational risk factors are not properly mitigated. A few recurring recommendations from these types of reviews that may be applied to corporations more generally are to (1) ensure that loan officers do not have the ability to book and maintain their own loans; (2) confine employee access to only those loan system computer applications that are consistent with their responsibilities; and (3) provide line staff with consistent guidance, in the form of policies and procedures, on how to identify and handle unusual transactions.Mortgage LendingEffectively managing the risk of a mortgage portfolio involves much more than prudent underwriting. Experienced risk managers should understand the need to temper their enthusiasm during boom times by considering carefully the accompanying risks. These risks include the possibility that expectations for future income growth for marginal borrowers may be optimistic. In addition, there could be an accumulation of outsized portfolio concentrations that leave the institution exposed to a downturn in that sector. And the need to consider these risks is most pronounced when competition among lenders for market share is most intense.During the recent housing boom, faced with soaring home prices and rising interest rates, many borrowers have sought to lower their debt service obligations by turning to mortgages with nonstandard payment and amortization schedules. Much of the new loans extended in the past two years have been nontraditional mortgages, including adjustable-rate mortgages with teaser rates and negative amortization features. At the same time, some banks have weakened proof of income and appraisal standards, and did not fully assess borrowers' ability to pay when interest rates rise and full amortization begins. In addition, a fair share of the recent lending with nontraditional products has been in the subprime market.Net housing wealth (as a multiple of income) also jumped over the same period. To some extent this increase is a source of comfort, providing larger collateral cushions to lenders. And a solid base of household housing wealth has been important to household confidence and influenced their appetite for consumption spending. But we know from experience the risks of extending credit with too much emphasis on collateral values. A borrower's equity in his or her home matters most when a property is foreclosed, something that both lenders and borrowers would prefer to avoid. Having equity in a home can provide an added incentive for borrowers to stay current on their loans, of course, especially for second homes and investment properties. Most important, borrowers want their home mortgage payments to remain current, and that requires cash flow that is adequate to comfortably service the loan.At present, mortgage delinquencies remain low, although delinquencies on subprime mortgages have risen in recent months. The recent rise in subprime mortgage delinquencies has been concentrated among adjustable-rate subprime loans, which is probably related to interest rates resetting--as the first reset tends to occur much earlier for subprime ARMs than prime ARMs. The outlook for mortgage credit quality remains favorable, but modestly cautionary signs are on the horizon. We have had clear initial signals in recent months that housing prices are no longer rising as they had been and are declining modestly in some key markets. Growth in housing wealth may slow or stagnate while the debt service obligation continues to rise, as teaser rates expire and fully-indexed loan rates eventually catch up with increases in market rates. While we continue to expect that mortgage delinquencies will remain manageable, lenders should closely monitor future developments.Information SecurityIssues involving information security and identity theft have received quite a bit of attention from the federal government over the past several years. Not too long ago, President Bush signed an executive order that created an Identity Theft Task Force for the purpose of strengthening federal efforts to protect against identity theft. The heads of the federal bank regulatory agencies are designated members of this task force; and as supervisors of financial institutions, I believe we can offer a valuable perspective on this issue.As you have probably noticed, cyber attacks and security breaches involving nonpublic customer information appear in the headlines almost every week. These events have cost the financial services industry millions of dollars in direct losses and have done considerable reputational damage. The cost of identity theft to affected consumers is also significant. Banking organizations' increased use of the Internet as a communication and delivery channel have resulted in the need for and use of more-sophisticated control mechanisms, such as enterprise-wide firewall protections, multifactor authentication schemes, and virtual private-network connections.While many of the widely publicized information security breaches have involved parties outside the affected banking organization accessing the organization's customer information, organizations also remain at risk for breaches or misuses of information by an insider. During our examination activities, we have seen operating losses that were traced back to weak controls over insiders' access to information technology systems interfacing with electronic funds transfer networks. Further investigation into these situations suggests that the duration and magnitude of the fraud and resulting losses is a direct function of the internal party's access to accounting and related systems.Several lessons have emerged. First, institutions should tightly control access to funds transfer systems and ensure that access settings enforce separation of duties, dual controls, and management sign-offs. Second, an institution's senior management should be restricted from regular access to business-line functional systems, especially funds transfer systems. When such restriction is impractical, additional controls must be in place and functioning effectively. Finally, effective management of information security risk, even when focused on a specific function, requires an enterprise-wide approach to yield a true and complete evaluation of the associated risks.Portfolio Credit RiskPortfolio credit risk also should be recognized and managed across the entire organization. In some cases, firms may be practicing good credit risk management on an exposure-by-exposure basis, but they may not be paying close enough attention to aggregation of exposures across the entire organization.Practicing good portfolio credit risk management is not easy. Institutions often encounter challenges in aggregating exposures and identifying and measuring credit concentrations within the entire portfolio. Naturally, supervisors from time to time have concerns about growing credit risk concentrations at banks and bankers' ability to manage them. A current example is commercial real estate (CRE). Recently, the U.S. banking agencies issued proposed supervisory guidance on managing CRE concentrations.While banks' underwriting standards are generally stronger than they were in the 1980s, the agencies are proposing the CRE guidance now to reinforce sound portfolio management principles that a bank should have in place when pursuing a CRE lending strategy. A bank should be monitoring performance both on an individual loan basis as well as on a collective basis for loans collateralized by similar property types or in the same markets. In addition, while lending to different geographic areas can provide diversification, bankers should be mindful of potential problems when they begin to lend outside their market or "footprint," where they normally have better market intelligence. In recent years, supervisors have observed banks lending outside their established footprint--to maintain a customer relationship--into real estate markets with which they have less experience.One misconception about our draft CRE guidance relates to the proposed explicit thresholds. Contrary to what many think, these thresholds are not intended as hard limits. Rather, the thresholds should be viewed as supervisory screens that examiners should use to identify banks with potential CRE concentration risk. Examiners would expect organizations to strengthen their portfolio risk management as CRE concentrations grow. This would include effective monitoring of emerging conditions in the real estate market segments where a bank is lending. Institutions are expected to conduct their own analyses of CRE concentration risk and establish their own concentration limits. Institutions, after all, are in the best position to identify and understand their concentration risk and it is the job of supervisors to confirm that institutions are indeed doing so.ConclusionAt the Federal Reserve, we believe that all banking organizations need good risk management. An enterprise-wide approach is appropriate for setting objectives across the organization, instilling an enterprise-wide culture, and ensuring that key activities and risks are being monitored regularly. Clearly, there is always an opportunity to improve upon ERM strategies and maintain the proper discipline to implement them effectively. In addition, bankers should be mindful that problems can sometimes quickly arise in a business line or unit that has presented no past difficulties. Accordingly, it is always helpful to evaluate the "what if" scenarios even for the most pristine of business units.But the manner in which risk management challenges are addressed can--and should--vary across institutions, based on their size, complexity, and individual risk profile. In many cases, it simply does not make sense for small organizations to adopt the most sophisticated risk management practices--but that does not absolve such smaller institutions of their responsibility to improve risk management. Additionally, as supervisors, we want to ensure that institutions are not only identifying, measuring, and managing their risks but also developing and maintaining appropriate corporate governance structures to keep up with their business activities and risk taking. Our hope is that the guidance we offer to bankers on these various topics is becoming more consistent with their own risk management practices. Some of you are probably familiar with the ERM framework published over a year ago by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission, or COSO. The COSO framework provides a useful way to look at ERM and helps generate further discussion. In the COSO framework, ERM consists of eight interrelated components derived from the way management runs an enterprise and integrated with the management process: (1) internal environment, (2) objective setting, (3) event identification, (4) risk assessment, (5) risk response, (6) control activities, (7) information and communication, and (8) monitoring. Each of these is described in more detail in the COSO literature. Notably, the COSO framework states explicitly that, while its components will not function identically within every entity, its principles should apply to all sizes of institutions. Small and mid-size entities, for example, may choose to apply the framework in a less formal and less structured way and scale it to their own needs--as long as quality is maintained. This underscores the message from bank supervisors that good risk management is expected of every institution, regardless of size or sophistication. Naturally, there will still be some tension between what supervisors expect and what bankers do, but we hope that supervisory expectations for risk management are becoming more and more aligned with the way that bankers run their businesses. And as most of you know, running a smaller or less complex bank presents different types of challenges and requires a risk management framework appropriately tailored to the institution. For example, smaller organizations often face a challenge of ensuring independent review of processes and decisions since officers and staff members often have multiple responsibilities that can present conflicts of interest. Having made some general points, I would now like to discuss a few recent examples from banking that highlight the importance of ERM. With the benefit of hindsight, the financial regulators and the industry have been trying to distill the lessons learned from these recently identified weaknesses in risk management and internal control in the financial services sector. Compliance RiskOne area in which ERM provides tangible value is compliance risk. This type of risk may arise when an organization fails to comply with the laws, regulations, or codes of conduct that are applicable to its business activities and functions. The Federal Reserve expects banking organizations to have in place an infrastructure that can identify, monitor, and effectively control the compliance risks that they face. Needless to say, the infrastructure should be commensurate with the nature of the organization's compliance risk. For a large complex banking organization, dealing with compliance risk can be particularly challenging unless it has a well-developed risk management program. On the other hand, smaller organizations with limited staffs face a challenge in keeping up to date with changing regulations. To create appropriate compliance-risk controls, organizations should first understand compliance risk across the entire entity. Understandably, this can be a daunting task, but I think most would agree that an effective risk assessment is critical. Managers should be expected to evaluate the risks and controls within their scope of authority at least annually. An enterprise-wide compliance-risk management program should be dynamic and proactive. It should assess evolving risks when new business lines or activities are added, when existing activities and processes are altered, or when there are regulatory changes. The process should include an assessment of how those changes may affect the level and nature of risk exposures, and whether mitigating controls are effective in limiting exposures to targeted levels. To avoid having a program that operates on autopilot, an organization must continuously reassess its risks and controls and communicate with all employees who are part of the compliance process. If compliance is seen as a one-off project, an organization faces the risk that its compliance program will not keep up with the changes in its services or customer mix. The board of directors needs to ensure the organization has a top-to-bottom compliance culture that is well communicated by senior management so that all staff members understand their compliance responsibilities. Clear lines of communication and authority help to avoid conflicts of interest. Compliance-risk management can be more difficult for management to integrate into an organization's regular business processes because it often reflects mandates set out by legislation or regulation that the organization itself does not view as key to its success. For example, bankers understand how vital credit-risk management and interest-rate risk management are to their organizations, because they reduce the volatility of earnings and limit losses. However, regulations enacted for broader societal purposes can be viewed as an expensive mandate. For example, the Patriot Act requires significant reporting of transactions to the government, and many in the banking industry have expressed frustration about the burden associated with such reporting. I can assure you, we recognize banking organizations' investment in and commitment to compliance with regulatory requirements, including those imposed by anti-money-laundering and counter-terrorism regulations. The Federal Reserve will continue to work with our counterparts in the federal government to encourage feedback to the industry on how reporting is contributing to our common fight against money laundering and terrorism. Operational RiskOver the past few years, the Federal Reserve has been increasing its focus on operational risk. For many nonfinancial organizations, the largest share of enterprise risk is likely to be operational risk, as opposed to credit and interest-rate risk. Banks have learned much from the practices that nonfinancial firms have developed over the years. Operational risk has more relevance today for bankers largely because they are able to shed much of their interest-rate and credit risk through sales of loans, use of financial derivatives and sound models to manage the risks that are retained. Further, the fastest-growing revenue streams are increasingly related to transaction processing, servicing accounts, and selling sophisticated financial products. To be successful, organizations must have complex systems to execute these activities. Banks are also utilizing advanced models to estimate and manage credit risk and market risk exposures. Growing use of sophisticated models requires stronger risk management practices since weaknesses in the models' operational design and data integrity can lead to significant losses. Thus, effective risk management requires financial institutions to have more-knowledgeable employees to identify system requirements, monitor their effectiveness, and interpret model results appropriately. We have learned quite a bit about operational risk from our examinations of banking organizations. For example, during routine examinations we look at the adequacy of banks' procedures, processes, and internal controls. Such reviews include transaction testing of control routines in higher-risk activities. For example, a bank's wire transfer activities and loan administration functions are often targeted for review, and our experiences have identified some common weaknesses in operational control that are worthy of attention. With wire transfers and similar transactions, a banking organization could suffer a significant financial loss from unauthorized transfers and incur considerable damage to its reputation if operational risks are not properly mitigated. A few recurring recommendations from our reviews are to (1) establish reasonable approval and authorization requirements for wire transactions to ensure that an appropriate level of management is aware of the transaction and to establish better accountability; (2) establish call-back procedures, passwords, funds transfer agreements, and other authentication controls related to customers' wire transfer requests; and (3) pay increased attention to authentication controls, since this area may also be particularly susceptible to external fraud. Loan administration is another area where banking organizations could suffer significant financial losses from inappropriate segregation of duties or lack of dual controls. An institution could also incur considerable damage to its reputation if operational risk factors are not properly mitigated. A few recurring recommendations from these types of reviews that may be applied to corporations more generally are to (1) ensure that loan officers do not have the ability to book and maintain their own loans; (2) confine employee access to only those loan system computer applications that are consistent with their responsibilities; and (3) provide line staff with consistent guidance, in the form of policies and procedures, on how to identify and handle unusual transactions. Mortgage LendingEffectively managing the risk of a mortgage portfolio involves much more than prudent underwriting. Experienced risk managers should understand the need to temper their enthusiasm during boom times by considering carefully the accompanying risks. These risks include the possibility that expectations for future income growth for marginal borrowers may be optimistic. In addition, there could be an accumulation of outsized portfolio concentrations that leave the institution exposed to a downturn in that sector. And the need to consider these risks is most pronounced when competition among lenders for market share is most intense. During the recent housing boom, faced with soaring home prices and rising interest rates, many borrowers have sought to lower their debt service obligations by turning to mortgages with nonstandard payment and amortization schedules. Much of the new loans extended in the past two years have been nontraditional mortgages, including adjustable-rate mortgages with teaser rates and negative amortization features. At the same time, some banks have weakened proof of income and appraisal standards, and did not fully assess borrowers' ability to pay when interest rates rise and full amortization begins. In addition, a fair share of the recent lending with nontraditional products has been in the subprime market. Net housing wealth (as a multiple of income) also jumped over the same period. To some extent this increase is a source of comfort, providing larger collateral cushions to lenders. And a solid base of household housing wealth has been important to household confidence and influenced their appetite for consumption spending. But we know from experience the risks of extending credit with too much emphasis on collateral values. A borrower's equity in his or her home matters most when a property is foreclosed, something that both lenders and borrowers would prefer to avoid. Having equity in a home can provide an added incentive for borrowers to stay current on their loans, of course, especially for second homes and investment properties. Most important, borrowers want their home mortgage payments to remain current, and that requires cash flow that is adequate to comfortably service the loan. At present, mortgage delinquencies remain low, although delinquencies on subprime mortgages have risen in recent months. The recent rise in subprime mortgage delinquencies has been concentrated among adjustable-rate subprime loans, which is probably related to interest rates resetting--as the first reset tends to occur much earlier for subprime ARMs than prime ARMs. The outlook for mortgage credit quality remains favorable, but modestly cautionary signs are on the horizon. We have had clear initial signals in recent months that housing prices are no longer rising as they had been and are declining modestly in some key markets. Growth in housing wealth may slow or stagnate while the debt service obligation continues to rise, as teaser rates expire and fully-indexed loan rates eventually catch up with increases in market rates. While we continue to expect that mortgage delinquencies will remain manageable, lenders should closely monitor future developments. Information SecurityIssues involving information security and identity theft have received quite a bit of attention from the federal government over the past several years. Not too long ago, President Bush signed an executive order that created an Identity Theft Task Force for the purpose of strengthening federal efforts to protect against identity theft. The heads of the federal bank regulatory agencies are designated members of this task force; and as supervisors of financial institutions, I believe we can offer a valuable perspective on this issue. As you have probably noticed, cyber attacks and security breaches involving nonpublic customer information appear in the headlines almost every week. These events have cost the financial services industry millions of dollars in direct losses and have done considerable reputational damage. The cost of identity theft to affected consumers is also significant. Banking organizations' increased use of the Internet as a communication and delivery channel have resulted in the need for and use of more-sophisticated control mechanisms, such as enterprise-wide firewall protections, multifactor authentication schemes, and virtual private-network connections. While many of the widely publicized information security breaches have involved parties outside the affected banking organization accessing the organization's customer information, organizations also remain at risk for breaches or misuses of information by an insider. During our examination activities, we have seen operating losses that were traced back to weak controls over insiders' access to information technology systems interfacing with electronic funds transfer networks. Further investigation into these situations suggests that the duration and magnitude of the fraud and resulting losses is a direct function of the internal party's access to accounting and related systems. Several lessons have emerged. First, institutions should tightly control access to funds transfer systems and ensure that access settings enforce separation of duties, dual controls, and management sign-offs. Second, an institution's senior management should be restricted from regular access to business-line functional systems, especially funds transfer systems. When such restriction is impractical, additional controls must be in place and functioning effectively. Finally, effective management of information security risk, even when focused on a specific function, requires an enterprise-wide approach to yield a true and complete evaluation of the associated risks. Portfolio Credit RiskPortfolio credit risk also should be recognized and managed across the entire organization. In some cases, firms may be practicing good credit risk management on an exposure-by-exposure basis, but they may not be paying close enough attention to aggregation of exposures across the entire organization. Practicing good portfolio credit risk management is not easy. Institutions often encounter challenges in aggregating exposures and identifying and measuring credit concentrations within the entire portfolio. Naturally, supervisors from time to time have concerns about growing credit risk concentrations at banks and bankers' ability to manage them. A current example is commercial real estate (CRE). Recently, the U.S. banking agencies issued proposed supervisory guidance on managing CRE concentrations. While banks' underwriting standards are generally stronger than they were in the 1980s, the agencies are proposing the CRE guidance now to reinforce sound portfolio management principles that a bank should have in place when pursuing a CRE lending strategy. A bank should be monitoring performance both on an individual loan basis as well as on a collective basis for loans collateralized by similar property types or in the same markets. In addition, while lending to different geographic areas can provide diversification, bankers should be mindful of potential problems when they begin to lend outside their market or "footprint," where they normally have better market intelligence. In recent years, supervisors have observed banks lending outside their established footprint--to maintain a customer relationship--into real estate markets with which they have less experience. One misconception about our draft CRE guidance relates to the proposed explicit thresholds. Contrary to what many think, these thresholds are not intended as hard limits. Rather, the thresholds should be viewed as supervisory screens that examiners should use to identify banks with potential CRE concentration risk. Examiners would expect organizations to strengthen their portfolio risk management as CRE concentrations grow. This would include effective monitoring of emerging conditions in the real estate market segments where a bank is lending. Institutions are expected to conduct their own analyses of CRE concentration risk and establish their own concentration limits. Institutions, after all, are in the best position to identify and understand their concentration risk and it is the job of supervisors to confirm that institutions are indeed doing so. ConclusionAt the Federal Reserve, we believe that all banking organizations need good risk management. An enterprise-wide approach is appropriate for setting objectives across the organization, instilling an enterprise-wide culture, and ensuring that key activities and risks are being monitored regularly. Clearly, there is always an opportunity to improve upon ERM strategies and maintain the proper discipline to implement them effectively. In addition, bankers should be mindful that problems can sometimes quickly arise in a business line or unit that has presented no past difficulties. Accordingly, it is always helpful to evaluate the "what if" scenarios even for the most pristine of business units. But the manner in which risk management challenges are addressed can--and should--vary across institutions, based on their size, complexity, and individual risk profile. In many cases, it simply does not make sense for small organizations to adopt the most sophisticated risk management practices--but that does not absolve such smaller institutions of their responsibility to improve risk management. Additionally, as supervisors, we want to ensure that institutions are not only identifying, measuring, and managing their risks but also developing and maintaining appropriate corporate governance structures to keep up with their business activities and risk taking. Our hope is that the guidance we offer to bankers on these various topics is becoming more consistent with their own risk management practices.
Governor Susan Schmidt Bies At the British Bankers' Association 10th Annual Supervision Conference, London, England Good morning. I would like to thank the British Bankers' Association for the invitation to speak at this important conference. Today, I want to focus on some current supervisory issues to illustrate how financial stability, portfolio concentration, regulatory capital, enterprise compliance, and clear consumer disclosures all reflect varying types of risk exposures and risk mitigation. When banks determine their business strategies and the inherent risks they create, supervisors expect banks to develop appropriate risk management practices to ensure that mitigating controls are in place to limit risks to the desired levels. Assessing Recent ConditionsAs a central banker, I realize that a strong, stable financial system is necessary for the health of the broader economy. Excessive volatility in financial markets can significantly raise the cost of capital for business investment and adversely affect real economic expansion. Moreover, a weak financial sector can significantly impede the monetary transmission mechanism, potentially limiting the ability of the central bank to stimulate the economy. Since commercial banks are crucial players in the financial system, efforts to improve their risk management can help mitigate the impact of shocks on the financial system and the real economy. Further, in order to foster the stability of the financial system, we need to support the resiliency of our financial infrastructure and promote sound supervisory oversight. Despite a number of notable shocks, financial markets have generally remained stable in recent years. Investors currently seem optimistic about the economic and financial outlook, with risk spreads relatively narrow and implied volatilities fairly low. Businesses have been reporting strong profits and solid balance sheets. Financial market functioning has remained good, with most measures of financial market liquidity remaining within typical ranges. At this point, investors do not appear to believe that financial institutions are unduly exposed to any particular risk type or to risks in the aggregate. The natural follow-on from any central banker or supervisor to such a positive description of financial conditions is predictable: We should not necessarily expect such relative calm to continue indefinitely. Clearly, the evolution of financial institutions and markets has not removed the underlying risks and uncertainties associated with financial transactions, and, in fact may create new forms of risk that may not be clearly understood. Financial institutions and other market participants must still make decisions and take actions with incomplete knowledge about the condition of their counterparties. CRE Concentration RiskWhile credit quality has been very good in recent years in the U.S., regulators are concerned about some emerging practices. One example is commercial real estate (CRE) in the United States, an area in which some banks have become increasingly concentrated. In fact, the aggregate CRE concentrations for small-to-medium-sized U.S. banks, relative to capital, are now twice the exposures before the substantial real estate downturn in the late 1980s. As supervisors, we want to ensure that risk management practices and capital levels are appropriate given the level of concentrations, and that institutions have thought through the possible consequences of a market downturn in CRE. U.S. regulators recently issued for comment proposed new guidance for examiners on CRE. Historically, CRE has been a highly volatile asset class. Borrowers and bankers with properties in distress can disrupt their local real estate market by cutting rents or offering leasehold improvements and other incentives to attract or keep tenants in an effort to generate cash flow. This can negatively affect the local real estate market as a whole, and adversely affect even good projects. CRE is a highly volatile asset class in that credit losses in most years are relatively low compared with many other types of bank loans. But in times of stress, the loss rate on CRE can jump considerably higher relative to the good years, compared with the behavior of other types of loans. As banks' concentration of CRE grows, they must upgrade their portfolio risk management practices, especially monitoring proposed projects and conditions in the sector of the CRE market in which they are lending. Since CRE losses tend to cluster in times of stress, bankers must focus more intently on their risk appetite for losses as their concentration grows. This means considering how much capital can be placed at risk if the portfolio of CRE loans hits a stress period and comparing that loss exposure to the relative returns in CRE lending. As banks increase their concentration in CRE, supervisors will expect to see bankers pay greater attention to strengthening their portfolio risk management practices. Improving Bank Capital MeasuresOf course, banking is, and should be, a business in which banks take and manage risks. Bankers implicitly accept risk as a consequence of providing services to customers and also take explicit risk positions that offer profitable returns relative to their risk appetites. The job of bank supervisors is to ensure that bank capital represents an adequate cushion against losses, especially during times of financial instability or stress. Supervisors should continue to support approaches that minimize the negative consequences of risk taking by financial institutions, particularly those institutions that could contribute to financial instability. One such approach is the Basel II framework. By now most of you are aware that last month the U.S. banking agencies released their latest proposals with respect to Basel II and are now seeking comment on those proposals. I imagine that many of you have already read these extensive documents. The U.S. banking agencies are eagerly awaiting comments on the proposals and now expect to engage in a continuing dialogue with all interested parties as to whether the proposals meet our stated objectives and how they can be improved. We hope that those reviewing the documents understand that Basel II is intended to promote the stability of the U.S. financial system by ensuring the safety and soundness of the largest U.S. banks. Thus, the ability of Basel II to promote safety and soundness is the first criterion on which the proposed Basel II framework should be judged. Indeed, the Federal Reserve's main reason for pursuing the advanced approaches of Basel II is the growing inadequacy of current Basel I regulatory capital rules for the large, internationally active banks that are offering ever more complex and sophisticated products and services. We need a more risk-sensitive capital framework for these particular banks, and we believe that Basel II is such a framework. In addition, Basel II promotes risk-management enhancements and improves market discipline, as well as providing supervisors with a more conceptually consistent and more transparent framework for evaluating systemic risk, particularly through credit cycles. Basel II should be able to establish a more coherent relationship between regulatory measures of capital adequacy and day-to-day supervision of banks, enabling examiners to better evaluate whether banks are holding prudent levels of capital given their risk profiles. The reasons for pursuing Basel II also provide justification for the recent Basel revisions to the 1996 Market Risk Amendment (MRA). Since adoption of the MRA, banks' trading activities have become more sophisticated and have given rise to a wider range of risks that are not easily captured in their existing value-at-risk (VaR) models. For example, more products related to credit risk, such as credit default swaps and tranches of collateralized debt obligations, are now included in the trading book. These products can give rise to default risks that are not captured well in methodologies required by the current rule specifying a ten-day holding period and a 99 percent confidence interval, thereby creating potential arbitrage opportunities between the banking book and the trading book. The U.S. agencies issued their proposals to revise Market Risk capital requirements at the same time as the Basel II proposals, and we seek comment on the market risk proposals as well. Notably, in the United States we would continue to have banks with significant trading book activity hold additional capital for the risks inherent in that line of business, whether they remain Basel I banks or move to Basel II. Given the international composition of this audience, I want to offer a few thoughts about the cross-border issues related to Basel II implementation. As you know, the U.S. agencies participate with other national supervisors in the Accord Implementation Group and other groups to identify differences in implementation and discuss possible ways to harmonize rules and thereby reduce burden on cross-border banking organizations. We recognize that the adoption of differing approaches to Basel II by various countries may create challenges for banking organizations that operate in multiple jurisdictions, but it is good to remember that cross-border banking has always raised specific challenges that supervisors from various countries have worked hard to address. Let me assure all bankers here that supervisors are aware that the process of adopting national versions of Basel II has heightened concerns about home-host issues. The Federal Reserve and other U.S. agencies have, for many years, worked with international counterparts to limit the difficulty and burden that have arisen as foreign banks have entered U.S. markets and as U.S. banks have established operations in other jurisdictions. We encourage bankers that have questions and concerns about home-host issues to promptly communicate with their regulators in all jurisdictions so that the issues can be addressed. Enterprise Compliance Risk Management and BSA/AMLI would now like to turn to another area of the financial sector that regulators are focused on: compliance-risk management. This type of risk may result when an organization fails to comply with the laws, regulations, or standards or codes of conduct that are applicable to its business activities and functions. The Federal Reserve expects each banking organization to have a compliance infrastructure and culture in place across the entire institution that can identify and effectively control the compliance risks it faces. To create appropriate compliance-risk controls, organizations must first understand risks across the entire entity. Managers should be expected to evaluate the risks and controls within their scope of authority at least annually. I also emphasize the need for the board of directors and senior management to ensure that staff members throughout their organizations understand the compliance objectives and each member's role in implementing the compliance program. The compliance function should be independent of management whose activities it reviews and monitors. An enterprise-wide compliance-risk management program should be dynamic and proactive, meaning it constantly assesses evolving risks when new business lines or activities are added or when existing services or processes are altered. To avoid having a program that operates on "autopilot," an organization must continuously reassess its risks and controls and train employees to effectively implement those controls. An integrated approach to compliance-risk management can be particularly effective for U.S. Bank Secrecy Act and anti-money-laundering (BSA/AML) compliance. Often, the identification of a BSA/AML risk or deficiency in one business activity or subsidiary can indicate potential problems or concerns in other activities across the organization. A primary concern for international banking organizations continues to be controlling BSA/AML risk effectively across their various operating units in the United States. We recognize the commitment that organizations have made to compliance with BSA/AML requirements, and, in return, we continue to work to ensure that obligations in this area are clearly communicated to banking organizations and examiners alike. The Federal Reserve strives to provide clear and comprehensive guidance that directly communicates our expectations to the institutions we supervise. This year, the U.S. banking agencies published an updated Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC)BSA/AML Examination Manualto cover new regulatory issuances and respond to industry requests for further guidance. We expect to issue annual updates to the manual to cover developments in this evolving area of risk. TheFFIEC BSA/AML Examination Manualreflects a common view of the federal banking agencies and the U.S. Treasury Department's Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) with regard to BSA/AML compliance expectations. The agencies universally stress that the purpose of a BSA/AML examination is to assess the overall adequacy of a banking organization's BSA/AML controls, in view of that particular organization's lines of business and customer mix. Focusing on the BSA/AML process across the enterprise is critical to ensuring that resulting controls are risk-based, so that resources are directed appropriately. Together with our U.S. Treasury and law enforcement counterparts, we are working to disseminate information about perceived money-laundering or terrorist-financing threats. By identifying emerging vulnerabilities, we can better collaborate with banking organizations to develop systems and procedures to combat criminals' abuse of the financial sector. For example, the interagencyMoney Laundering Threat Assessment(4.1 MB PDF)is one step we have taken--with fifteen other U.S. government bureaus, offices and agencies, including law enforcement--to identify significant concerns and communicate them to banking organizations. We are also working on an international basis to advance sound principles for compliance risk management. Last year, the Basel Committee published supervisory guidance on the compliance function in banks. That guidance lays out several key principles around which a successful compliance risk program should be organized. They include responsibilities of the board of directors and senior management, the need for proper independence and adequate resources in the compliance risk function, the specific duties of the compliance function, and the relationship with internal audit. Despite strong efforts by many bankers, there are still some indications that more work needs to be done. Indeed, some of the recently publicized compliance incidents may have been avoided if the institutions involved had more closely adhered to the Basel Committee's guidance. Consumer ProtectionIn addition to overall compliance risk management, the Federal Reserve is also concerned with consumer protection. Of course, consumer protection laws vary from country to country and bankers must ensure they measure up to each national standard. However, we think it is also simply good business sense for bankers to make sure that their customers clearly understand the price, features, and risks of products and services being offered to them. Recent advances in risk management and financial instruments have allowed financial institutions to offer a variety of new products to a wider range of customers. This is particularly prominent in mortgage products. Traditionally, in the United States, the majority of borrowers had mortgages with fixed rates and equal monthly payments that were sufficient to cover the accrued interest and pay down the principal. While nontraditional mortgages, including "interest only" mortgages and "payment option" adjustable-rate mortgages, have been available for many years, they were largely designed for higher-income borrowers who needed payment flexibility. The initial lower monthly payments make these mortgages attractive to borrowers who expect their income to increase. Payment flexibility also provides benefits to borrowers with seasonal or irregular income. In recent years, however, these products have been offered to a broader array of consumers, including some for whom they may not be well suited. Borrowers may not fully recognize the risks of nontraditional mortgages, particularly the "payment shock" if the loan's interest rate increases, or when the consumer is required to make fully amortizing payments. It is important for consumers to have the information necessary to understand the features and risks of these types of mortgages. As bankers create more complex products, they should pay particular attention to improving the quality of their disclosures and sales practices, so that consumers can clearly understand the features of those products. The Federal Reserve is committed to improving the information consumers receive about these products, including improving the disclosures required under the U.S. Truth in Lending Act. As we work to improve the understanding of disclosure information to consumers, the Federal Reserve also engages in outreach activities and conducts research to help us better understand consumer behavior and inform our judgment with regard to the best approaches to achieve consumer understanding. To this end, we sponsor consumer surveys, hold public hearings, discuss issues with our Consumer Advisory Council, and conduct consumer focus groups and other types of consumer testing. ConclusionThe topics I have focused on this morning, portfolio concentration risk in CRE, improved risk sensitivity of Basel II, enterprise wide compliance of BSA/AML and clear communication to consumers about complex products, emphasize that risk management needs to be integrated into daily operations of banks. As an organization chooses to accept more risk exposure to implement its strategies, it is imperative that the organization strengthen its risk management practices appropriately. A bank should clearly understand the implications of the risks it chooses to accept, ensure that the risk mitigants it has chosen work effectively, and that capital is strong enough to support the bank throughout an extended period of unexpected losses. I would also like to note that the Federal Reserve has an excellent working relationship with the Financial Services Authority and the Bank of England. We have worked together effectively on bank-specific issues and broader questions of regulatory policy and financial stability. While there is a wide range of issues with which supervisors must grapple, including those I have discussed today, I believe that supervisory cooperation can indeed create a safe and sound global marketplace while allowing financial institutions to remain prosperous.
The federal bank, thrift, and credit union regulatory agencies today announced the publication of a new resource that can help consumers make more informed choices when considering nontraditional mortgage loans. Interest-Only Mortgage Payments and Payment-Option ARMs--Are They for You?features a glossary of lending terms, a mortgage shopping worksheet, and a list of additional information sources. This information can help consumers, whether buying a house or refinancing a mortgage, decide if an interest-only mortgage (an I-O mortgage) or an adjustable-rate mortgage (ARM) with the option to make a minimum payment (a payment-option ARM) is right for them. The publication stresses the importance of understanding key mortgage loan terms, warns of the risks consumers may face, and urges borrowers to be realistic about whether they can handle future payment increases. If consumers are not comfortable with these risks, the publication suggests that they ask about other mortgage products. Many lenders offer home loans that allow consumers to (1) pay only the interest on the loan during the first few years of the loan term; or (2) make only a specified minimum payment that could be less than the monthly interest on the loan. Lenders have a variety of names for these loans, but with I-O mortgages and payment-option ARMs, consumers could face "payment shock." Monthly payments may double or even triple following the interest-only period or when the payments adjust. In addition, consumers with payment-option ARMs could face negative amortization, a situation in which the monthly payments do not cover all of the interest owed for that month. The unpaid interest is added to the mortgage balance so that the amount owed on the mortgage exceeds the amount originally borrowed. The interagency information is available on each agency's web site. A PDF (Portable Document Format) version is provided so that consumer groups, financial institutions, agencies, and other organizations can download and print copies for distribution to their clients and customers. It includes a space on the back panel for organizations to provide their own contact information. The web addresses are: http://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/mortgage_interestonly/default.htmhttp://www.fdic.gov/consumers/consumer/interest-only/index.htmlhttp://www.occ.treas.govhttp://www.ncua.gov/Publications/Index.htmhttp://www.ots.treas.gov Single copies of the brochure are available free of charge from: Publications, Mail Stop 127, Federal Reserve Board, 20th and C Streets, N.W., Washington, DC 20551; 202-452-3245 FDIC Public Information Center, 3501 North Fairfax Drive, Room E-1002, Arlington VA 22226; 877-ASK-FDIC, 703-562-2200
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the annual indexing of the low reserve tranche and of the reserve requirement exemption amount for 2007. These amounts are used in the calculation of reserve requirements of depository institutions. The Board also announced the annual indexing of the nonexempt deposit cutoff level and the reduced reporting limit that will be used to determine deposit reporting panels effective 2007. All depository institutions must hold a percentage of certain types of deposits as reserves in the form of vault cash, as a deposit in a Federal Reserve Bank, or as a deposit in a pass-through account at a correspondent institution. Reserve requirements currently are assessed on the depository institution's net transaction accounts (mostly checking accounts). Depository institutions must also regularly submit deposit reports of their deposits and other reservable liabilities. For net transaction accounts in 2007, the first $8.5 million, up from $7.8 million in 2006, will be exempt from reserve requirements. A 3 percent reserve ratio will be assessed on net transaction accounts over $8.5 million up to and including $45.8 million, down from $48.3 million in 2006. A 10 percent reserve ratio will be assessed on net transaction accounts in excess of $45.8 million. These annual adjustments, known as the low reserve tranche adjustment and the reserve requirement exemption amount adjustment, are based on growth in net transaction accounts and total reservable liabilities, respectively, at all depository institutions between June 30, 2005 and June 30, 2006. For depository institutions that report weekly, the low reserve tranche adjustment and the reserve requirement exemption amount adjustment will apply to the fourteen-day reserve computation period that begins Tuesday, November 21, 2006 and the corresponding fourteen-day reserve maintenance period that begins Thursday, December 21, 2006. For depository institutions that report quarterly, the low reserve tranche adjustment and the reserve requirement exemption amount adjustment will apply to the seven-day reserve computation period that begins Tuesday, December 19, 2006, and the corresponding seven-day reserve maintenance period that begins Thursday, January 18, 2007. The Board also announced changes in two other amounts, the nonexempt deposit cutoff level and the reduced reporting limit, that are used to determine the frequency with which depository institutions must submit deposit reports. The attached Federal Register notice contains a description of the new boundaries for deposit reporting that will be effective 2007. The Board's notice is attached. Attachment56 KB PDF|TEXT
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced its approval of the notice filed by National City Corporation, Cleveland, Ohio, to acquire Harbor Florida Bancshares, Inc. and its subsidiaries, Harbor Federal Savings Bank and Appraisal Analysis, Inc., all of Fort Pierce, Florida. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced its approval of the proposal by Regions Financial Corporation to acquire AmSouth Bancorporation and its subsidiary bank, AmSouth Bank, all of Birmingham, Alabama. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced its approval of the application by Sky Financial Group, Inc., Bowling Green, to acquire Wells River Bancorp, Inc. and its subsidiary bank, Perpetual Savings Bank, both of Wellsville, all of Ohio. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke Before the Annual Convention of the American Bankers Association, Phoenix, Arizona, and the Annual Convention of Americas Community Bankers, San Diego, California(via satellite) Today I will discuss bank regulation and supervision from a cost-benefit perspective, focusing on how the Federal Reserve and our fellow bank regulators take benefits and costs into account when we develop rules and supervisory policies. As you know, the Federal Reserve's regulatory powers and responsibilities derive ultimately from statutes passed by the Congress and signed by the President. Historically, the goals of banking regulation have included the safety and soundness of bank operations, the stability of the broader financial system, the promotion of competition and efficiency in banking, assistance to law enforcement, consumer protection, and broader social objectives. Whatever the motivation, once the Congress decides that a particular issue must be addressed, it typically (though not always) gives the federal banking agencies significant discretion to devise the regulations and supervisory policies that implement the statute. Often, the agencies collaborate in developing rules, and we rely heavily on input from the public received both through formal requests for comment and through other channels, such as consultations with industry or consumer groups. In setting regulatory and supervisory policy, we are first concerned with ensuring that the rules reflect the intent of the Congress. We also seek to implement the will of Congress in a manner that provides the greatest benefit at the lowest cost to society as a whole. Perhaps I should emphasize the phrase "society as a whole." We are ever mindful that banks and their customers bear a large share of the costs of regulation. Minimizing the regulatory burden on banks is very important. But other parts of society, besides enjoying some of the benefits of regulation, also share some of the costs, both direct and indirect. Making good regulatory policy requires that we take a broad view of the way our rules affect our economy and our society, while maintaining a suitable degree of humility about our ability to accurately quantify the relevant benefits and costs. In the rest of my remarks, I will briefly illustrate how the Federal Reserve, along with the other federal banking agencies, applies these principles in three major areas of bank regulation and supervision: the Bank Secrecy Act, bank capital standards, and the Community Reinvestment Act. Finally, I will highlight some elements of the Regulatory Relief Act, which the Congress passed this year. Periodically the Congress reviews the federal banking laws to determine if the costs imposed by some laws are no longer justified by the associated benefits, and this act is its latest effort in this area. The Federal Reserve supported and actively contributed to the development of this legislation. The Bank Secrecy ActThe prevention and detection of the criminal misuse of the financial system, including threats to national security such as the financing of terrorist activities, are among the highest of public policy priorities. The primary goal of the Bank Secrecy Act (BSA), passed by the Congress in 1970, is to help deter, detect, and investigate money laundering and other financial crimes, including terrorist financing. As you know, this act gives U.S. banking institutions the responsibility to obtain sufficient customer information to detect and report suspicious activity. The potential benefits of the information obtained through the BSA are large, but implementation of the act should not ignore other public policy considerations, including the need to maintain a reasonable expectation of financial privacy for legitimate bank customers and to ensure that reporting requirements do not unduly impede the efficient operation of the payments system. The principal concern about the BSA that we hear from the banking industry, of course, is the cost of compliance. The Federal Reserve recognizes that the provisions of the BSA require considerable effort by banks to obtain, document, and provide the required information. Deterring and identifying misuse of the financial system, as important as that is, should not be so onerous that it stifles innovation, interferes with the critical economic functions of financial intermediaries, places undue burden on bank shareholders and customers, or reduces the international competitiveness of U.S. banks. To address these important concerns, the Federal Reserve has worked and will continue to work closely with the other federal banking agencies and the Treasury Department's Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN), the administrator of the BSA, to look for ways to streamline the reporting processes created by the BSA without diminishing the value to law enforcement of the information produced. The regulatory burden of the BSA is also affected by supervisory policy. From a supervisory perspective, I see at least three areas in which progress could be made in reducing the burden on banks. First, the industry should have the opportunity to receive feedback about the usefulness of reporting suspicious activity as well as guidance about how better to identify the most significant risks. Some useful steps have been taken. For example, FinCEN's publication,The SAR Activity Review, includes aggregate information and case studies about suspicious activity report (SAR) filings and use, and law enforcement representatives have undertaken outreach efforts to communicate to the financial services industry the importance of BSA reports in investigations and prosecutions. Efforts to further increase feedback would help banks allocate their compliance resources more efficiently while complying with the act and preventing misuse of the financial system. Second, the banking industry should have effective channels for voicing concerns about burden or about lack of clarity regarding regulatory standards and supervisory expectations. One such channel is the Bank Secrecy Act Advisory Group, created by the Congress, which includes representatives from government and the financial services industry. In particular, the examination subcommittee of the advisory group can serve as a conduit for the industry to raise issues of supervisory concern. The Federal Reserve will continue to seek industry input through a variety of channels, including meetings with banking groups and as part of the supervisory process itself. Third, supervisors should continue to work to improve the consistency of their approach to compliance and to ensure that adequate guidance is provided to assist banks in the assessment and management of risks. The release of theBank Secrecy Act/Anti-Money Laundering Examination Manualin June 2005 was, I believe, an important step in that direction. The five federal banking agencies in collaboration with FinCEN developed the manual, with input from state banking agencies and the Office of Foreign Assets Control. The manual, which was revised this year, emphasizes that supervision of compliance efforts should be risk-based; that is, supervisors should focus on banks' policies and procedures, not on isolated incidents, with particular attention to the areas in which the most serious problems might arise. In a difficult area like this one, it is also particularly important that supervisors be flexible, using good judgment and a collaborative approach to help banks achieve the objectives of the act. Your feedback on the manual and on the related supervisory procedures is welcome. Bank Capital StandardsBank capital standards provide a second illustration of our efforts to balance the benefits and costs of regulation and supervision. Capital regulation is the cornerstone of bank regulators' efforts to maintain a safe and sound banking system, a critical element of overall financial stability. For example, supervisory policies regarding prompt corrective action are linked to a bank's leverage and risk-based capital ratios. Moreover, a strong capital base significantly reduces the moral hazard risks associated with the extension of the federal safety net. The banking regulators broadly agree that the current risk-based capital regime, known as Basel I, is inadequate for the largest and most complex banking organizations. For this reason, in 2004, all the U.S. banking agencies joined other members of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision in supporting a new international capital adequacy framework, called Basel II. Basel II capital requirements will be much more risk-sensitive than those in Basel I and will provide stronger incentives for institutions to improve the measurement and management of risk. Basel II will also give supervisors a better framework for evaluating the adequacy of a bank's capital buffer above the regulatory minimums and should improve market discipline by providing financial markets with better information on banks' risk-taking. The U.S. banking agencies recentlyasked for public commenton a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (NPR) for implementing the Basel II advanced approaches in the United States. In developing this proposal, our paramount concern has been ensuring the safety and soundness of the U.S. banking system. This concern can be seen, for example, in the proposal's transitional safeguards, which go beyond those in the 2004 Basel Committee text by providing greater protection against unintended declines in minimum capital requirements during the initial years of Basel II implementation. At the same time, we have tried to reduce regulatory burdens in several ways. In particular, the advanced elements of Basel II are intended to apply only to the very largest and most internationally active U.S. banking organizations, not to the great majority of U.S. banks. For banks not adopting Basel II, the agencies have been developing a modernized but easier-to-implement capital framework, known as Basel IA. Under Basel IA, the capital treatments for certain activities will be more risk-sensitive than those under Basel I, thus better aligning the treatments with those in Basel II. The NPR for Basel IA should be issued soon. Some bankers have suggested that Basel I may still be suitable for many small banks and that, consequently, they should have the option of whether to move to Basel IA. We will consider this possibility carefully. We have also been working to promote a level playing field internationally for U.S. banking organizations that adopt Basel II. Indeed, maintaining competitive equity was one of our key motivations for developing Basel II jointly with foreign supervisors through the Basel Committee. More recently, we have been working through the Basel Committee's Accord Implementation Group to mitigate home-host conflicts while promoting consistent implementation of Basel II internationally. Despite these efforts, some significant differences do exist between the United States and other countries in the proposed implementation of Basel II's advanced approaches, beyond the transitional safeguards. Early comments on the Basel II NPR suggest that, whatever the merits of these international differences in rules, they are likely to add to implementation costs and home-host issues, particularly for globally active banks operating in multiple jurisdictions. Before we issue a final rule, we intend to review all international differences to assess whether the benefits of rules specific to the United States outweigh the costs. In particular, we will look carefully at differences in the implementation of Basel II that may adversely affect the international competitiveness of U.S. banks. Many other opportunities may exist to reduce the burden of the new capital regulations. Public comments will be critical in shaping the final rules, and we will look to banking organizations for help in identifying aspects of the NPR that would impose competitive inequities or undue costs. I am confident that, working together, we can do more to level the competitive landscape and reduce burden without compromising our primary objective of maintaining the stability of the U.S. banking and financial system. Community Reinvestment ActI now want to shift from the role of bank regulation and supervision in the national and global context and discuss one aspect of its place in local markets. Clearly, banks strengthen their local communities by providing a range of services and facilitating the flow of credit necessary to support economic development. However, economic development in some communities, particularly lower-income communities, may be hampered by what economists call "market failures." For example, if information about economic opportunities is particularly costly to obtain in lower-income neighborhoods, then potentially profitable loans and investments may not get made. Another form of market failure may arise because of so-called neighborhood effects: Because the values of homes and businesses are affected by the overall economic vitality of the neighborhood in which they are located, the returns to an individual bank's investments in a given area may depend on whether other banks are investing in that area as well. But if no bank is willing to go first, so to speak, the neighborhood may be underserved and potentially profitable opportunities may be missed. To address these possible market failures, to ensure that depository institutions help to meet the credit needs of their communities, and to achieve broader social goals such as expanding home ownership, the Congress in 1977 passed the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA). A key goal of the CRA is to induce banking institutions to invest in acquiring the knowledge and expertise needed to find profitable lending opportunities in lower-income neighborhoods, thereby removing an important barrier to the extension of credit in those neighborhoods. Likewise, to the extent that the CRA leads a number of banks to provide credit and services to an underserved area, the returns to each bank's investments in that neighborhood should improve, reducing the "first mover" problem. Indeed, many banks have found that lending and investment in lower-income neighborhoods can be profitable, which has led them to expand their activities in those areas. As you know, the CRA requires that each banking institution's record of serving lower-income areas be regularly evaluated and that these ratings be made public. The Congress has given the banking agencies substantial discretion to determine the methods by which they assign CRA ratings. As experience with the CRA has accumulated and as the economic environment has changed, the agencies, with the benefit of public input, have exercised that discretion with an eye toward both increasing the effectiveness of the act and reducing its costs. For example, the early CRA rules emphasized process over performance, and major changes were made to the regulations in 1995 to make the CRA evaluations more oriented toward performance. These changes increased reporting burdens for some institutions, as the new rules required them to collect and submit data concerning their lending performance. In the judgment of the agencies, the broader social benefits of a more-quantitative, performance-based method of assigning CRA ratings justified the increase in regulatory burden. However, aware of that burden, the agencies exempted the smallest community banks and thrifts from the data-reporting requirement and allowed them to undergo streamlined evaluations of their retail lending and services. Beginning in 2001, the agencies revisited the issue, undertaking a careful review of the benefits and costs of the data-reporting requirements applied to non-exempt community banks and thrifts, as well as the associated rules that determined eligibility for streamlined CRA evaluations. As part of this effort, members of the Federal Reserve Board staff published a study comparing the retail lending and services of community banks and thrifts eligible for streamlined evaluations and exempt from data reporting with the activities of comparable institutions without those exemptions (Avery and others, 2005). The analysis suggested that exempting a larger number of relatively small institutions from the more onerous requirements would not adversely affect the provision of retail lending or services in lower-income communities. Consistent with that analysis, in 2005 the agencies substantially increased the number of community banks and thrifts eligible for streamlined evaluation and exempt from the data-reporting requirement. At the same time, the agencies also addressed several concerns about the effectiveness of CRA regulations in encouraging these institutions to invest in community development. Among the concerns expressed was that the method for evaluating the community development records of larger community banks and thrifts was inflexible and produced unintended costs. After reviewing public input and the available evidence on the costs and benefits of the current process, the agencies adopted a new evaluation method that considers all of the community development activities of such institutions under one test. Although we recognize that this change is very recent, we welcome feedback on how well it is working for financial institutions and communities alike. Regulatory ReliefMy focus thus far has been on how the Federal Reserve and the other banking agencies develop regulatory and supervisory approaches to implement the applicable laws. But regulatory agencies may also play a role in the legislative process itself, for example by raising issues that may require legislative remedy, commenting on proposed legislation, and providing technical assistance in the drafting of bills. Our extensive practical experience in implementing legislation makes us particularly well placed to advise the Congress when legislation is not achieving its intent or is imposing costs on banks or on society that exceed its benefits. In this regard, I am pleased that Congress recently passed, and the President signed, the Financial Services Regulatory Relief Act of 2006. Certainly, the act does not address every concern that banks and regulators have raised about regulatory burden, and I hope that the Congress will continue to revisit these issues. But the legislation does include a number of provisions that, when implemented, should provide substantial relief to banking organizations and increase efficiency in the banking system while enhancing the Federal Reserve's tools for conducting monetary policy. Among the act's most important provisions are two that relate to reserve requirements. Federal law currently obliges the Board to establish reserve requirements on transaction accounts and prohibits the Board from setting these reserve requirements below 8 percent for amounts above the so-called low-reserve tranche. Because the Federal Reserve is not permitted to pay interest on the balances held at Reserve Banks to meet reserve requirements, depositories have an incentive to reduce their required reserve balances to a minimum. Institutions use various techniques to minimize required reserves, such as sweep programs that move funds between deposit accounts subject to reserve requirements and money market accounts not subject to those requirements. From the perspective of society as a whole, sweep programs have little or no economic value to justify their cost of implementation. The Regulatory Relief Act will allow the Federal Reserve to pay depository institutions interest on the balances held to meet reserve requirements; it also gives the Board the discretion to lower the ratio of required reserves to transaction accounts. The Board has long sought these amendments, which were also supported by the American Bankers Association and America's Community Bankers. Unfortunately, for reasons related to congressional budget scoring, these amendments will not become effective until October 2011. Nevertheless, when the Federal Reserve is able to begin paying interest on required reserve balances, much of the regulatory incentive for depositories to engage in resource-wasting efforts to minimize reserve balances will be eliminated, to the economic benefit of banks, their depositors, and their borrowers. The act will also allow the Federal Reserve to pay interest on contractual clearing balances and excess reserve balances, two types of balances that depository institutions hold voluntarily at Reserve Banks. By helping to stabilize the demand for voluntary reserve balances, this authority may allow the Federal Reserve to implement monetary policy without the need for required reserve balances. In these circumstances, the Board--as authorized by the act--could consider reducing or even eliminating reserve requirements, thereby reducing a regulatory burden for all depository institutions. Other important provisions of the act will provide banking organizations immediate regulatory relief. For example, the act immediately raises to $500 million, from $250 million, the asset threshold below which a well-capitalized and well-managed insured depository institution may qualify for an extended eighteen-month cycle for safety and soundness examinations. We estimate that this change will allow about 1,200 additional federally-insured institutions to qualify for an extended examination cycle without compromising safety and soundness. The act also requires that the Board and the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) jointly issue a new, single set of rules to implement the "broker" exceptions for banks that were adopted as part of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act. The act requires that our agencies jointly issue new proposed rules within 180 days of enactment, but Chairman Cox of the SEC has actively engaged with the banking regulators on this issue and has already indicated that he would like to have proposed rules ready for public comment by the end of this year. We look forward to continuing to work with Chairman Cox, the SEC's other commissioners and staff, and our fellow federal banking agencies in developing workable rules that do not disrupt the traditional activities of banks. ConclusionI have covered a lot of ground today. My central theme has been that good regulatory and supervisory policies should implement congressional intent in ways that maximize social benefits and minimize social costs. The regulatory burden on banks is not the only element of social cost, but it is an important component. Accordingly, in developing regulatory and supervisory policies, the Federal Reserve and the other banking agencies will continue to pay close attention to the implications of those policies for regulatory burden, competitiveness, and efficiency in banking. In practice, our ability to accurately assess those costs and benefits depends greatly on close collaboration with and feedback from the banking industry. We look forward to working with you on these issues. Reference Avery, Robert B., Glenn B. Canner, Shannon C. Mok, and Dan S. Sokolov (2005). "Community Banks and Rural Development: Research Relating to Proposals to Revise the Regulations That Implement the Community Reinvestment Act,"Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 91 (Spring), pp. 202-35.
Vice Chairman Donald L. Kohn At the Money Marketeers of New York University, New York, New York I am pleased to be with you tonight to discuss my views on current economic conditions and the economic outlook. These have been challenging times for economic forecasters and policymakers. Since the summer of 2005, the economy has absorbed a wide variety of shocks--major hurricanes, ongoing geopolitical tensions, and substantial increases in energy prices--and has adapted to a rise in short-term interest rates to more normal levels. Yet real gross domestic product (GDP) increased a respectable 3-1/2 percent from the second quarter of 2005 to the second quarter of 2006, and the unemployment rate fell to 4-3/4 percent. At the same time, however, headline consumer price inflation has been quite high, and an upward movement in core inflation has raised concerns about the persistence in price pressures, a very worrisome development from the point of view of a monetary policy maker. The economic outlook for the next few years will be importantly shaped by ongoing responses to these developments. Reflecting those responses, economic activity has slowed noticeably over the course of the year, and inflation, though down from its level earlier this year, remains uncomfortably elevated. However, I expect that the continuing adjustment will be relatively benign overall: The economy will grow at a moderate pace for a while, somewhat below the rate of increase of its potential, and then growth will begin to strengthen. In addition, as the cost pressures from the run-up in energy and materials prices begin to play out, or perhaps even partly reverse, and as pressures on resources ease slightly, I think we will likely see much lower headline inflation and a gradual diminution of core consumer price inflation. I know that to some this story of a soft landing seems too good to be true--the triumph of hope over experience. One question is whether it is even feasible. Can inflation pressures decrease with only a modest shortfall of economic growth from potential? And is it possible that a modest decline in resource utilization will not cumulate into something more serious, as it has tended to do in the past--at least without a major adjustment of policy? My view is that this economy is capable of generating the type of favorable outcome that I have just sketched, but, as in any period of transition, policymakers must be aware of heightened risks on all sides of the forecast. I must emphasize that these views are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC).1 Economic ActivityBased on the data we now have, the growth of real GDP in the third quarter appears to have remained as subdued as it was in the second quarter and may well have slowed further. As we enter the fourth quarter, little in the way of hard economic data or anecdotal information suggests any sharp shift in the pace of economic activity. If that is so, the economy could be in the process of registering several consecutive quarters of growth below its potential rate, the first time it has done so since early 2003. After three years of growth above potential, some slowing was inevitable and desirable. Trees do not grow to the sky, and neither do the stocks of houses and durable goods held by households and businesses. In addition, the run-up in energy prices sapped consumers' purchasing power and cut into firms' profit margins. These hits to real incomes have restrained the growth of household and business spending. The effects of the high relative price of energy that we have experienced for much of the past year do appear to be reducing the demand for energy-intensive products. In particular, the major domestic automakers are cutting production to eliminate unwanted stocks of gas-guzzlers, and these cuts are exerting a further drag on the growth of real GDP in the second half of this year. Spending is also being restrained by the removal of monetary policy accommodation over the past two years. Without these policy actions, the developing pressures of demand on potential supply would have added to inflationary pressures. As anticipated, higher interest rates have been felt most clearly in the market for residential real estate. The adjustment in these markets has proven to have been more rapid and deeper than many economists had predicted, and we have yet to see signs that indicate just how the process will work itself out. Given the importance of housing markets in the evolution of the economy, I will spend a bit more time discussing the performance of this sector over the past five years and the factors that are likely to shape the adjustment process that is now under way. From a trough of fewer than 1.5 million units at an annual rate during the recession of 2000, starts of new single-family and multifamily homes rose to a post-World War II high of 2.2 million units last year. Sales of new and existing homes followed the same broad pattern, and the boom in residential real estate markets was a powerful force driving the post-2000 economic expansion. Monetary policy played an important role in these developments: Responding to the weakness in other sectors of the economy, the FOMC held short-term interest rates at unusually low levels over much of this period. With inflation expectations well contained, with investment weak relative to saving in other countries, and with investors requiring much less extra compensation for holding longer-term obligations, long-term mortgage rates also dropped to historically low levels. Housing affordability increased substantially, and the homeownership rate hit new highs. In addition, a speculative element may have emerged in this market as investors projected rapid price increases into the future. And those price increases were considerable. Between the beginning of 2001 and the end of 2005, the constant-quality price index for new homes rose 30 percent and the purchase-only price index of existing homes published by the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight (OFHEO) increased 50 percent. These increases boosted the net worth of the household sector, which further fueled the growth of consumer spending directly through the traditional "wealth effect" and possibly through the increased availability of relatively inexpensive credit secured by the capital gains on homes. By the end of last year, however, the high price of houses and rising interest rates had begun to take a meaningful toll on demand for homes. Determining the exact timing of the recent peak in the housing market is difficult given the effects of last year's hurricanes, the volatility in the data, and timing differences in the evolutions of home sales and housing starts. That said, the fourth quarter of last year seems to provide a reasonable reference point: Since that time, housing starts have fallen about 20 percent, and home sales are down 10 percent. Home-price appreciation has also slowed dramatically since late last year, and some local markets have experienced outright price declines. Homebuilders report that cancellations have increased sharply, especially for second homes. Realtors note that existing houses are staying on the market longer, and sellers must increasingly make concessions to buyers. How much longer will the correction in housing last, and how much deeper will it go? I do not have a definitive answer but would venture four observations. First, the reported declines in new home prices in a number of areas should help to facilitate the rebalancing of supply and demand in those markets--though it may accentuate the adverse spillover of the housing market correction to other sectors. Deeper price cuts would allow builders to clear out their inventories of unsold homes sooner, helping to stabilize the pace of residential construction activity faster, but the near-term hit to household wealth presumably would also be greater. Second, calculations about the sustainable level of housing starts based on demographic factors, such as population growth and household formations, suggest that starts may be closer to their trough than to their peak. Although such calculations are, in general, not particularly useful for near-term forecasting, they do suggest that any overbuilding in 2004 and 2005 was small enough to be worked off over coming quarters at close to the current level of housing starts. Third, the Federal Reserve has returned short-term interest rates only to more-normal levels and long-term rates are unusually low relative to those short-term rates. This situation stands in sharp contrast to some past downturns in the housing market that followed actions by the Federal Reserve to tighten credit conditions significantly. And fourth, continuing growth in real incomes should underpin the demand for housing and, as home prices stop rising, help to erode affordability constraints. To date there is little evidence that this correction in the housing market has had any significant adverse spillover effects on other parts of the economy. The production of construction supplies has decelerated, but in general, resources freed up in the residential market appear to have been largely absorbed in nonresidential building or elsewhere. Indeed, after languishing for many years, the market for nonresidential structures seemed to revive around the time that the residential market was starting to show signs of slowing. This shifting of resources can likely continue for a while longer given the declines seen in office and commercial vacancy rates and the higher rates of capacity utilization in manufacturing. Still, adverse spillovers will occur, and, as I indicated, their extent depends in part on the changing mix of prices and quantities as the housing market adjusts. In the past, outright declines in the nominal prices of houses have been relatively rare and localized. If something like this pattern prevails again, the decline in real housing wealth relative to incomes will be modest, and household saving rates should trend gradually higher. Such a rise in personal saving would not be an adverse outcome for an economy that generates relatively little saving domestically. One reason I expect the economic expansion to continue despite the retrenchment in housing markets is the recent declines in energy prices. Oil prices have fallen around $15 a barrel from their recent highs this summer, and because of abundant supplies and cooperative weather, the spot price of natural gas is down significantly as well. If sustained, these lower prices are likely to boost consumers' purchasing power and help to offset to some extent the adverse spillover effects from weakness in the housing market. In addition, financial conditions remain quite supportive of borrowing and spending. Market interest rates are not high in nominal or real terms; credit spreads are narrow and equity prices continue to rise, conditions that keep the cost of business finance down and suggest investor confidence in the future course of the economy. As the inventory overhangs in residential housing and automobiles are worked off, economic growth should pick up again to a rate closer to the growth rate of its potential. One potential pitfall in this argument is that, in the past, a noticeable and sustained shortfall of growth from its potential and an accompanying decrease in resource utilization have often cumulated into a full-fledged recession. Several features of the current financial situation, however, support my contention that "this time will be different." These recessions have often been triggered by a highly restrictive stance of policy and a generalized tightening of credit conditions through high long-term rates, wide risk spreads, and a pull-back of bank lending. Obviously, these conditions are not present today. Although one cannot rule out the possibility that a withdrawal from risk-taking could impinge on credit supplies and intensify downward pressure on activity, the preconditions for such a response do not seem to be in place. Business balance sheets are in very good shape and financial institutions are quite well capitalized. To be sure, the risks to these expectations of a limited shortfall of growth from potential seem to me to be weighted toward a weaker outcome. The housing market is not yet clearing, prices are still elevated relative to rents, the overhang could be larger than I perceive, and the attendant readjustment could be more abrupt and destabilizing--and could possibly even overshoot on the downside. And spillovers from the housing market could extend well beyond wealth effects if households had been relying on easy access to rising housing equity to finance a substantial portion of their consumption spending. Consumer confidence could erode as job growth and income gains slow, thereby sparking a steeper rise in saving. But, given current information, including on consumer confidence and spending, I judge my more benign scenario the more likely outcome. InflationWould such an outcome for economic activity be consistent with an abatement of inflation pressures? As you know from our announcements, minutes, and public utterances, the members of the FOMC are very concerned about the rise in core consumer price inflation over the past year. From a pace of 2 percent in the twelve months ending in August 2005, the rate of core personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation has risen to 2-1/2 percent. One of the key issues in the analysis of core inflation is the role of the pass-through of energy cost increases into the prices of other goods and services. The pass-through turns out to be harder to find either econometrically or in the price data themselves than any savvy consumer might think. Turning first to the data, a detailed breakdown of the consumer price index shows that the prices of the most energy-intensive services, such as air travel or refuse collection, have picked up considerably, a result likely attributable, at least in part, to the run-up in fuel prices over the past few years. But these items represent a relatively small part of the core index; the small acceleration in many other nonshelter portions of the index, while consistent with a small pass-through of energy costs, could also be attributable to non-energy factors. When we try to model energy pass-through econometrically, the results indicate that a break occurred in pricing patterns in the early 1980s: Pass-through is clearly evident before 1980 but it is difficult to find thereafter. I suspect this pattern has something to do with the monetary policy reaction to those shocks and its effect on inflation expectations. In the 1970s, monetary policy not only accommodated the initial shocks but also allowed second-round effects to become embedded in more persistent increases in inflation. Since the early 1980s, the pass-through to core prices has been limited or non-existent, at least in part because households and firms have expected the Federal Reserve to counter any lasting inflationary impulse that they might produce. This result reinforces the need today to keep inflation expectations well anchored. In addition, movements in relative oil prices were more persistent before 1980 and less persistent after--until recently. After 1980, households and firms probably expected deviations of energy prices from long-run averages to be largely reversed and saw less reason to try to adjust wages and prices in response to what they viewed as transitory changes in energy costs. In the final analysis, I think we probably saw some pass-through of higher energy costs into core inflation once price and wage setters came to believe that the rise in energy prices would not soon be reversed. But the magnitude of the effect has been small--perhaps on the order of a cumulative 1/2 percentage point or less since the end of 2003. If crude oil prices hold at close to current levels over the next few years, the resulting absence or even partial reversal of these energy cost shocks should, all else equal, put some modest downward pressure on core inflation. Consumer energy prices have already flattened out according to the August data, and we will probably see a big decline in September's report. This decrease will not erase the increases of the past few years, but I believe that it will contribute to a lessening of consumers' fears that continued energy-price increases will lead to a ratcheting up of inflation in the long run. Indeed, the most recent readings on inflation expectations from the University of Michigan Survey Research Center showed a noticeable decline in September, especially in the inflation rate expected twelve months ahead. In financial markets, the spread of nominal over indexed yields has also retreated substantially at the near end of the yield curve. To a monetary policy maker focused on the evolution of inflation expectations, these developments are indeed steps (albeit small) in the right direction. Another major force driving up core consumer price inflation over the past year has been shelter costs, especially tenants' rent and owners' equivalent rent. Together, these two components account for a substantial part of the core price indexes--38 percent for the consumer price index (CPI) and 17 percent of PCE prices--and as a result, small shifts in price trends in these areas can have a noticeable effect on core inflation. For example, after running at about a 2-1/2 percent pace for several years, increases in owners' equivalent rent stepped up to an annual rate of 5 percent in the six months ending in August. As you know, these prices are imputed from the rental housing market, and quite possibly this acceleration resulted from a shift in demand toward rental housing as higher interest rates and home prices, along with reduced expectations of capital gains, made the owner-occupied market increasingly less attractive. In response to greater demand, the supply of rental housing should increase over time, in part by drawing from the overhang of owner-occupied units; hence, I do not expect rents to be a major influence on core inflation a year or two from now, the horizon that is the focus of monetary policymaking. Clearly, however, the band of uncertainty about such a forecast is rather wide. Not only should the contribution of energy and shelter costs to underlying inflation be diminishing over coming quarters, but the generalized pressure of demand on supply should also decrease if, as I am anticipating, economic growth falls short of potential for a time. I would not expect modest changes in the output gap to exert more than a marginal influence on inflation. But the anticipated slower pace of growth will result in an environment in which firms will be less able to pass on increases in costs. One potential source of higher costs comes from the labor market. I would not be surprised to see a gradual rise in labor costs as workers capture a greater share of the productivity gains of recent years. However, compensation per hour, a measure derived from unemployment insurance tax records, indicates that labor costs accelerated sharply, to a pace of 7-3/4 percent from the second quarter of 2005 to the second quarter of 2006. In contrast, readings from the employer cost index (ECI), which is derived from a probability sample of firms, shows labor costs decelerating. Some of the divergence appears to be the result of an increased volume of stock option exercises in early 2006--an occurrence captured by the compensation per hour measure but not by the ECI--and these option exercises should not represent costs that firms actually internalize when calculating their marginal cost of production. Thus, in my own thinking, I have tended to discount, though not dismiss, the latest readings on labor costs. However, I acknowledge that rising labor costs are an upside risk to my inflation outlook, especially if they occur under product-market conditions in which firms can readily pass costs through. In sum, I think that the odds favor a gradual reduction in core inflation over the next year or so, but the risks around this outlook do not seem symmetric to me: Important upside risks to the outlook for inflation warrant continued vigilance on the part of the central bank. I say that not only because of the questions about underlying labor costs and about the future direction of energy and shelter prices but also because our understanding of the inflation process is limited, and I cannot rule out the possibility that the upward movement earlier this year reflected a more persistent impulse that I cannot now identify. Although I believe I have offered plausible explanations for the acceleration of inflation this spring and summer and reasonable rationales for expecting inflation to moderate, I would feel much more confident about where we are heading if I had a more accurate bearing on the direction from whence we have come. In addition, in my view, if inflation failed to abate it could impose considerable costs on economic performance over time, a concern that brings me to the topic of monetary policy. Monetary PolicyEven if my relatively favorable forecast comes true, the level of short-term interest rates that will produce this forecast remains uncertain. Obviously, as my FOMC voting record indicates, I believe that, for now, the current level of short-term rates has the best chance of fostering this outcome. Looking ahead, policy adjustments will depend on the implications of incoming data for the projected paths of economic activity and inflation. I must admit I am surprised at how little market participants seem to share my sense that the uncertainties around these paths and their implications for the stance of policy are fairly sizable at this point, judging by the very low level of implied volatilities in the interest rate markets. As I have outlined tonight, I think that the risks to my outlook for economic activity may be skewed a bit to the downside, while those to my forecast of gradually declining inflation are tilted to the upside. In my view, in the current circumstances, the upside risks to inflation are of greater concern. Although to date inflation expectations have remained contained, failure to check and then reverse the greater inflation pressures of earlier this year would risk embedding those higher inflation rates in the decisions of households and businesses, an outcome that would be costly to reverse and would impinge on the economy's long-term performance. Footnotes 1.Charles Struckmeyer, of the Board's staff, contributed to these remarks.Return to text
The Federal Open Market Committee decided today to keep its target for the federal funds rate at 5-1/4 percent. Economic growth has slowed over the course of the year, partly reflecting a cooling of the housing market. Going forward, the economy seems likely to expand at a moderate pace. Readings on core inflation have been elevated, and the high level of resource utilization has the potential to sustain inflation pressures. However, inflation pressures seem likely to moderate over time, reflecting reduced impetus from energy prices, contained inflation expectations, and the cumulative effects of monetary policy actions and other factors restraining aggregate demand. Nonetheless, the Committee judges that some inflation risks remain. The extent and timing of any additional firming that may be needed to address these risks will depend on the evolution of the outlook for both inflation and economic growth, as implied by incoming information. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Ben S. Bernanke, Chairman; Timothy F. Geithner, Vice Chairman; Susan S. Bies; Donald L. Kohn; Randall S. Kroszner; Frederic S. Mishkin; Sandra Pianalto; William Poole; Kevin M. Warsh; and Janet L. Yellen. Voting against was Jeffrey M. Lacker, who preferred an increase of 25 basis points in the federal funds rate target at this meeting.
Governor Frederic S. Mishkin Weissman Center Distinguished Lecture Series, Baruch College, New York, New York It is a great pleasure, for very personal reasons, to be here at Baruch College to deliver my first speech as a Federal Reserve Governor. My now-deceased father, Sidney Mishkin, whom I still miss every day, proudly graduated more than seventy years ago from Baruch, then called City College. Indeed, you might have noticed the Sidney Mishkin Gallery when you came into the building. The gallery was part of a gift that my father made to this institution upon his death fifteen years ago. The education he got at Baruch during the depths of the Great Depression--attending class at night because he had to work to support not only himself but also his parents--helped give him the opportunity to become a successful businessman. I hope that the students here will likewise take advantage of the opportunities bestowed by their education and make important contributions to our economy. Now, let me turn to the topic at hand: Can more globalization--in particular, financial globalization--be a force for good? The globalization of trade and information over the past half century has lifted vast numbers of the world's people out of extreme poverty. Despite the doom and gloom that you often hear, world economic growth since the Second World War has been at the highest pace ever recorded. What we are seeing in countries that are export oriented, and thus able to take advantage of the present age of globalization, is a reduction in poverty and a convergence of income per capita toward industrial-country levels. In India and China, for example, globalization in recent years has lifted the incomes of more than 1 billion people above the levels of extreme poverty. Although economic globalization has come a long way, in one particular dimension--finance--it is very far from complete. As documented in the superb book by Maurice Obstfeld and Alan Taylor,Global Capital Markets, financial globalization has made its greatest strides in rich countries. Gross international capital flows, which have risen enormously in recent years, move primarily among rich countries. The exchange of assets in these flows is undertaken to a large extent to enable individuals and businesses to diversify their portfolios, putting some of their eggs in the baskets of other rich countries. International capital is generally not flowing to poor countries and is thus not enhancing their development. The gross amount of capital flowing each year to emerging-market economies increased dramatically in the 1990s and is now more than $600 billion. That amount may sound like a lot, but it is only one-seventh of total international capital flows excluding official reserves. The situation is even more remarkable when one adds into the picture the capital flows out of developing countries, especially the governmental acquisition of international reserves; then we see that emerging-market economies have, on net, actually been sending capital to rich countries. The United States is currently running very large trade and current account deficits--more than $800 billion--because Americans are buying more goods and services from abroad than they are selling overseas. These deficits are being financed by the foreign acquisition of U.S. assets, especially bonds, with emerging-market economies providing the United States with about $300 billion per year. The Chinese government, for example, has accumulated nearly $1 trillion of foreign assets; much of this is invested in the United States, and China is now one of the largest holders of U.S. Treasury securities in the world. Also remarkable is that capital flows from rich countries to developing countries relative to total capital are far smaller than they were in the first age of globalization, during the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. By 1914, about half of the stock of capital in Argentina was supplied by rich foreign countries, particularly the United Kingdom. Today, less than 6 percent of Argentine capital has been supplied by foreigners. And this change in the pattern of capital flows has not been confined to Argentina. As Nobel laureate Robert Lucas has pointed out, this feature of international capital flows is a paradox: Why doesn't capital flow from rich to poor countries? We know that labor is cheap in poor countries, and so we might think that capital would be especially productive there. Just think of how hugely profitable a factory might be in a country where wages are one-tenth of those in the United States. Capital should, therefore, have extremely high returns in such countries, and we should expect massive flows of capital from rich countries (where the returns on capital should be relatively low) to poor countries (where they should be far higher). In fact, there has been a big increase in the amount of capital moving to emerging-market economies in recent years, but capital primarily still flows from one rich country to another, where the returns on capital are similar. Thus, financial globalization is far from complete, and that fact raises a set of questions. Should financial systems in developing countries become more integrated with the rest of the world? If so, what should be done to accomplish that integration? Let me pause here to address an underlying issue that obscures much of the debate about financial globalization. The important role of the financial system in the economy is not well understood by the average person, and even many economists are shocked by the high salaries paid to investment bankers and other financial professionals. "After all," many wonder, "what do these financial professionals produce? Nothing concrete comes from their highly paid work." This view, although common, betrays a fatal misunderstanding. Getting the financial system to work well is critical to the success of an economy. To understand why, think of the financial system as the brain of the economy: That is, it acts as a coordinating mechanism that allocates capital, the lifeblood of economic activity, to its most productive uses by businesses and households. If capital goes to the wrong uses or does not flow at all, the economy will operate inefficiently, and ultimately economic growth will be low. No work ethic can compensate for a misallocation of capital and the resulting failure to invest in the most profitable ventures. Hard work will not be productive unless it is accompanied by the right amount and kinds of capital. Indeed, workers in poor countries often work longer hours than their counterparts in rich countries, and yet they remain poor. When they emigrate to countries with a developed financial system and the resulting superior endowment of capital, they often become rich. Financial globalization--opening a country's financial markets to foreign capital and financial institutions--will confer several important benefits on developing countries. First, by bringing in new capital, financial globalization will lower the cost of capital, thereby encouraging investment, which in turn promotes growth. Second, when foreign capital and financial institutions are allowed to enter a country, they improve the allocation of capital. Third--the most important benefit and one not usually emphasized--globalization of a country's financial system, if it is designed to promote competition in domestic financial markets, helps promote the development of better property rights and institutions. Better property rights and institutions make the domestic financial sector work better. They facilitate the movement of capital to productive uses and prepare the domestic financial sector to better handle the increased capital flows that would come with the opening of the country's financial sector. The benefits of globalization of trade in goods and services are not controversial among economists. Polls of economists indicate that one of few things on which they agree is that the globalization of international trade, in which markets are opened to flows of foreign goods and services, is desirable. Butfinancialglobalization, the opening up to flows of foreign capital, is highly controversial, even among economists, despite benefits of the sort I just mentioned. For example, in his best-selling bookGlobalization and its Discontents, Nobel laureate Joseph Stiglitz is very critical of globalization because he sees the opening up of financial markets in emerging-market economies to foreign capital as leading to economic collapse. Even Jagdish Bhagwati, one of the leading economists defending globalization of trade (after all, his book is titledIn Defense of Globalization), is highly skeptical offinancialglobalization, stating that "the claims of enormous benefits from free capital mobility are not persuasive."1George Soros, the prominent financier, opens his bookOn Globalizationwith a chapter entitled "The Deficiencies of Global Capitalism." One reason for the controversy is that opening up the financial system to foreign capital flows has led to some disastrous financial crises causing great pain, suffering, and even violence. These crises can arise when bad policies encourage excessive risk taking by financial institutions, policies that rich elites in the developing countries often advance for their own profit. There are those (including Stiglitz and Bhagwati) who put the primary blame for the failures of financial globalization in emerging-market economies on outsiders, specifically on the International Monetary Fund, or what they refer to as the Wall Street-Treasury complex. The evidence has brought me to the conclusion that institutions like the IMF or the U.S. Treasury are not primarily to blame, although neither are they blameless--public and private financial institutions active in the international capital markets have often aided and abetted poorly designed financial globalization, although that was not their intention. Another objection to focusing on financial development and globalization as key factors in economic growth is that it is far from clear that emerging-market economies are finance constrained: In other words, they often do not have trouble getting money for investments. But throwing money at investments does not work. Indeed, as the experience of recent years indicates, too much money flowing into these countries often resulted in bad loans and investments, which led to financial crises. The argument for the importance of developing a good financial infrastructure in these countries is not so much that it increases investment but that it promotes the allocation of investment to the uses that will do the most good for the economy. That result--improving the allocation of investments--is something that foreign aid has generally not been able to accomplish. Although many people lament the paltry amount of aid that rich countries provide to poor countries, and although aid tightly focused on technical assistance or the financing of local projects has often had important successes, large aid projects have generally not worked well in promoting development because typically they have not provided the right incentives. In his bookThe Elusive Quest for Growth, William Easterly cites the extraordinary example of Zambia: If the $2 billion of aid Zambia received from the advanced countries and international aid organizations since its independence had gone into productive investments, Zambia would now have an income of more than $20,000 per capita, putting it in the club of rich nations. Instead, Zambia has a per capita income of $600, one-third lower than its per capita income at independence. I noted that globalization designed to promote competition in domestic financial markets helps promote the development of better property rights and institutions. How do better property rights and institutions improve investment outcomes? Well, consider the opposite: If you live in a country where it is easy for others to take your property away, either by force or through government corruption, you would be crazy to invest there. Without these investments, workers in your country will be unable earn high wages because they won't have sufficient capital--buildings, machines, and other infrastructure--to make them highly productive. Poverty will be severe. Hence, the most basic set of growth-promoting institutions are those that promote property rights--a strong judiciary enforcing the rule of law and a government free of corruption. Beyond these basic arrangements are others that specifically promote an efficient financial system through regulation and oversight of financial institutions. With the protection of property rights, honest government, and financial oversight and enforcement, would-be investors with the best projects will be the ones who actually get external funds to invest--and this is the crucial role of the financial system. We have seen that the repression of the financial system is a great obstacle to economic growth and the reduction of poverty in poorer countries. Yet, if financial development offers such tremendous benefits, why doesn't every country jump on the path to growth and prosperity by imitating the institutions of the advanced economies? Part of the answer is that good institutions need to be home-grown; institutional frameworks that have been developed in the rich countries frequently do not translate well to poorer countries. This is a lesson that many in the advanced economies of the world have yet to learn. The development of good institutions in the advanced countries took hundreds of years; as they grew, they adapted to local conditions. Poor countries must develop their own institutions, and the citizens of these nations must feel they have ownership of the institutions or the institutions will be ineffective and short lived. If it was difficult and time consuming for the advanced economies to develop a good financial infrastructure, it will be even harder in many developing countries because to do so they must overcome what is often a far more dysfunctional political environment. The benefits that accrue from financial development are dispersed over a wide range of people--to those who could then buy houses with the help of a mortgage, obtain an automobile loan to buy a car, get capital to start a new business, and finance new investments in existing businesses. These potential beneficiaries have little power to demand these benefits. In contrast, the costs would be focused on rich elites and special interests, who often have a lot of political clout and have much to lose from institutional development that encourages an efficient financial system and promotes competition. For an example of dysfunctional institutions that obstruct economic growth while benefiting certain narrow interests, consider the importance of collateralized loans. The use of collateral is a crucial tool that helps the financial system make loans because it reduces losses when loans go sour. A person who would pledge land or capital for a loan must, however, legally own the collateral. Unfortunately, as Hernando De Soto has documented in his bookThe Mystery of Capital: Why Capitalism Triumphs in the West and Fails Everywhere Else, legalizing the ownership of capital is extremely expensive and time consuming for the poor in developing countries. To give just one of De Soto's many astonishing examples, obtaining legal title to a dwelling on urban land in the Philippines can require taking 168 bureaucratic steps through 53 public and private agencies over a period of 13 to 25 years. The high cost of setting up a legal business or legally purchasing land is another barrier to establishing clear property rights in many developing countries. Businesses that are not legally established cannot get legally enforceable loans. Setting up a simple business in the United States generally requires only filling out a form and paying a nominal licensing fee. In contrast, De Soto's researchers found that legally registering a small garment workshop in Peru required 289 days, at 6 hours per day; the cost was about $1,200, which was about 30 times the monthly minimum wage. The lack of property rights for all but the very rich, as documented by De Soto, is a serious impediment to financial development. Government is often the primary source of financial repression in developing countries. Strong property rights, a crucial element in financial development, severely constrain a government's ability to expropriate land, factories, or ideas whenever it wants to profit from them. Rapacious governments whose rulers treat their countries as personal fiefdoms are not uncommon: We have seen these governments in Saddam Hussein's Iraq, Robert Mugabe's Zimbabwe, and Ferdinand Marcos's Philippines. Even officials in less tyrannical governments have been known to use the power of the state to get rich. Not surprisingly, then, many governments pay lip service to property rights but do not encourage a rule of law to protect them. So how can emerging-market economies harness their financial systems to make financial globalization work for them and help them get rich? The short answer is, Develop good institutions that allocate capital efficiently. The next question is, How? We know something that developing countries have done and can do to successfully promote development: Pursue an external orientation and create a successful export sector. That strategy not only forces the economy to become more efficient but also creates a demand to improve institutions that encourage financial development. It can do so by weakening the profits and power of the rich elites and special interests who oppose institutional development, and it can even encourage them to support institutional reforms to restore their profits. Globalization can therefore help generate the political will for institutional reform. We have seen this happen in emerging-market economies that have experienced rapid growth, such as China, India, Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan, and Chile. What can the rich countries do? Besides providing technical assistance and incentives for institutional development, advanced countries can help by opening up their own markets to exports from poorer countries--much needs to be done in that regard, particularly in agricultural products. Opening up rich-country markets to goods and services from developing countries is far more important than financial aid in alleviating world poverty, and such openness also promotes financial development and stability in poorer countries. Those who are against opening up markets in the advanced economies are in effect against reducing poverty abroad and even at home, although they often don't realize it. True, closing off markets in rich countries may helpsomeworkers in the short run (although in the long run it will make theaverageworker worse off because it will lower productivity growth), but this help comes at the expense of the far-poorer worker in the developing world. Those in advanced economies who lose their jobs from this opening of markets certainly deserve our sympathy and our support, but that support should come in ways other than trade restrictions. I will conclude by saying that those who oppose any and all globalization have it completely backward: Protectionism, not globalization, is the enemy. It is true that, by itself, globalization in both finance and trade is not enough to ensure economic development and that economies must position themselves to handle foreign capital flows. But as I said, to be against globalization as such is most assuredly to be against poor people, and this is presumably not the position antiglobalizers want to take. Developing countries cannot get rich unless they globalize in both trade and finance. Making financial flows truly worldwide and creating robust, efficient financial markets in developing countries is not optional: It needs to be the focus of the next great globalization. In sum, I want to challenge those who oppose globalization to rethink their objections. As Kofi Annan, the Secretary General of the United Nations, has put it, "The main losers in today's very unequal world are not those who are too much exposed to globalization. They are those who have been left out."2Rather than opposing or limiting globalization, we in the rich countries and those in the developing countries must, as a moral imperative, work together to make globalization work for the general good of people all over the world. Footnotes 1.Jagdish Bhagwati (2004), "The Capital Myth: The Difference between Trade in Widgets and Dollars,"Foreign Affairs77, no. 3 p 7.Return to text 2.From remarks at an UNCTAD conference in February 2000, in Johan Norberg (2003),In Defense of Global Capitalism(Washington: Cato Institute), p. 155.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced its approval of the applications under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act by Grupo Financiero Banorte, S.A. de C.V., and its subsidiaries, Banco Mercantil del Norte, S.A., Institucin de Banca Mltiple, both of Monterrey, Nuevo Len, Mexico, and Banorte USA Corporation, Wilmington, Delaware, to become bank holding companies, and to acquire 70 percent of the voting securities of INB Financial Corporation, McAllen, Texas, and thereby acquire control of its subsidiaries, INB Delaware Corporation, Wilmington, Delaware, and Inter National Bank, McAllen, Texas. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday released the minutes of its discount rate meetings from August 21 through September 19, 2006.The minutes are attached.Attachment The minutes are attached.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on September 20, 2006. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board's Annual Report. The summary description of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes is based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Boards web site atwww.federalreserve.gov. Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, September 20, 2006
Mr. Price, without admitting to any allegations, consented to the issuance of the Order, which was based on his alleged unsafe and unsound practices in connection with the record-keeping at Gold Bank, and agreed to pay a civil money penalty in the amount of $5,000. A copy of the Order is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the termination of the enforcement actions listed below. Terminations of enforcement actions are listed on the Federal Reserves public web site,www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/enforcement, as they occur. J.P. Morgan Chase & Co., New York, N.Y.Written Agreement dated July 28, 2003Terminated October 26, 2006 Prineville Bancorporation andCommunity First Bank, Prineville, Ore.Written Agreement dated December 20, 2004Terminated October 18, 2006
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke Before The Washington Economic Club, Washington, D.C. In coming decades, many forces will shape our economy and our society, but in all likelihood no single factor will have as pervasive an effect as the aging of our population. In 2008, as the first members of the baby-boom generation reach the minimum age for receiving Social Security benefits, there will be about five working-age people (between the ages of twenty and sixty-four) in the United States for each person aged sixty-five and older, and those sixty-five and older will make up about 12 percent of the U.S. population. Those statistics are set to change rapidly, at least relative to the speed with which one thinks of demographic changes as usually taking place. For example, according to the intermediate projections of the Social Security Trustees, by 2030--by which time most of the baby boomers will have retired--the ratio of those of working age to those sixty-five and older will have fallen from five to about three. By that time, older Americans will constitute about 19 percent of the U.S. population, a greater share than of the population of Florida today. This coming demographic transition is the result both of the reduction in fertility that followed the post-World War II baby boom and of ongoing increases in life expectancy. Although demographers expect U.S. fertility rates to remain close to current levels for the foreseeable future, life expectancy is projected to continue rising. As a consequence, the anticipated increase in the share of the population aged sixty-five or older is not simply the result of the retirement of the baby boomers; the "pig in a python" image often used to describe the effects of that generation on U.S. demographics is misleading. Instead, over the next few decades the U.S. population is expected to become progressively older and remain so, even as the baby-boom generation passes from the scene. As you may know, population aging is also occurring in many other countries. Indeed, many of these countries are further along than the United States in this process and have already begun to experience more fully some of its social and economic implications. Even a practitioner of the dismal science like me would find it difficult to describe increasing life expectancy as bad news. Longer, healthier lives will provide many benefits for individuals, families, and society as a whole. However, an aging population also creates some important economic challenges. For example, many observers have noted the difficult choices that aging will create for fiscal policy makers in the years to come, and I will briefly note some of those budgetary issues today. But the implications of demographic change can also be viewed from a broader economic perspective. As I will discuss, the broader perspective shows clearly that adequate preparation for the coming demographic transition may well involve significant adjustments in our patterns of consumption, work effort, and saving. Ultimately, the extent of these adjustments depends on how we choose--either explicitly or implicitly--to distribute the economic burdens of the aging of our population across generations. Inherent in that choice are questions of intergenerational equity and economic efficiency, questions that are difficult to answer definitively but are nevertheless among the most critical that we face as a nation. Demographic Change and the Federal BudgetAs I have already mentioned, the coming demographic transition will have a major impact on the federal budget, beginning not so very far in the future and continuing for many decades. Although demographic change will affect many aspects of the governments budget, the most dramatic effects will be seen in the Social Security and Medicare programs, which provide income support and medical care for retirees and which have until now been funded largely on a pay-as-you-go basis. Under current law, spending on these two programs alone will increase from about 7 percent of the U.S. gross domestic product (GDP) today to almost 13 percent of GDP by 2030 and to more than 15 percent of the nations output by 2050. The outlook for Medicare is particularly sobering because it reflects not only an increasing number of retirees but also the expectation that Medicare expenditures per beneficiary will continue to rise faster than per capita GDP. For example, the Medicare trustees intermediate projections have Medicare spending growing from about 3 percent of GDP today to about 9 percent in 2050--a larger share of national output than is currently devoted to Social Security and Medicare together. The fiscal consequences of these trends are large and unavoidable. As the population ages, the nation will have to choose among higher taxes, less non-entitlement spending, a reduction in outlays for entitlement programs, a sharply higher budget deficit, or some combination thereof. To get a sense of the magnitudes involved, suppose that we tried to finance projected entitlement spending entirely by revenue increases. In that case, the taxes collected by the federal government would have to rise from about 18 percent of GDP today to about 24 percent of GDP in 2030, an increase of one-third in the tax burden over the next twenty-five years, with more increases to follow. (This calculation ignores the possible effects of higher tax rates on economic activity, an issue to which I will return later.) Alternatively, financing the projected increase in entitlement spending entirely by reducing outlays in other areas would require that spending for programs other than Medicare and Social Security be cut by about half, relative to GDP, from its current value of 12 percent of GDP today to about 6 percent of GDP by 2030. In todays terms, this action would be equivalent to a budget cut of approximately $700 billion in non-entitlement spending. Besides tax increases, spending cuts, or reform of the major entitlement programs, the fourth possible fiscal response to population aging is to accommodate a portion of rising entitlement obligations through increases in the federal budget deficit. The economic costs and risks posed by large deficits have been frequently discussed and I will not repeat those points today. Instead, I will only observe that, among the possible effects, increases in the deficit (and, as a result, in the national debt) would shift the burden of paying for government spending from the present to the future. Consequently, the choices that fiscal policy makers make with respect to these programs will be a crucial determinant of the way the economic burden of an aging population is distributed between the current generation and the generations that will follow. A Broader Economic and Generational PerspectiveIndeed, framing the issue in generational terms highlights the fact that the economic implications of the coming demographic transition go well beyond standard considerations of fiscal policy and government finance, important as those are. For reasons that I will explain in a moment, the aging of the population is likely to lead to lower average living standards than those that would have been experienced without this demographic change. How that burden of lower living standards is divided between the present and the future has important implications for both intergenerational fairness and economic efficiency. Why will the coming demographic transition carry a cost in terms of long-run living standards? Assuming it unfolds as expected, the projected aging of the population implies a decline over time in the share of the overall population that is of working age and thus, presumably, in the share of the population that is employed. For any given level of outputper workerthat might be attained at some future date, this decline in the share of people working implies thatthe level of outputper personmust be lower than it otherwise would have been. In a sense, each workers output will have to be shared among more people. Thus, all else being the same, the expected decline in labor force participation will reduce per capita real GDP and thus per capita consumption relative to what they would have been without population aging. These reductions in output and consumption per person represent an economic burden created by the demographic transition. Although some adverse effect of population aging on future per capita output and consumption is probably inevitable, actions that we take today, in both the public and the private spheres, have the potential to mitigate those effects. One such action would be to find ways to increase our national saving rate. If the extra savings were used to increase the nations capital stock--the quantity of plant and equipment available for use by workers--then future workers would be more productive, ameliorating the anticipated effects on per capita output and consumption. Alternatively, using extra saving to acquire financial assets abroad (or to reduce foreign obligations) would also increase the resources available in the future. By saving more today, we can reduce the future burden of demographic change. However, as any economist will tell you, there is no such thing as a free lunch. Saving more requires that we consume less (to free up the needed resources) or work more (to increase the amount of output available to dedicate to such activities). Either case entails some sacrifice on the part of the current generation. Consequently, a tradeoff exists: We can mitigate the adverse effect of the aging population on future generations but only by foregoing consumption or leisure today. This analysis is simple, but it shows why the coming demographic transition has economic implications that go well beyond the effect of aging on the federal budget. In recent work, economists at the Board of Governors have used a stylized model to get a rough estimate of the magnitudes of the intergenerational tradeoffs that we face.1Their analysis takes as a starting point a baseline scenario in which U.S. demographics remain (hypothetically) the same in the future as they are today. In this counterfactual scenario, the ratio of workers to the overall population is assumed to remain at its current level over time and per capita consumption grows with productivity. Now in reality, as I have noted, an aging population will reduce labor force participation, so the likely future trajectory of per capita consumption over time lies below that implied by the baseline scenario that assumes away the demographic change. The shape of the actual consumption trajectory depends, however, on the saving behavior of the current generation. If todays saving rate is low, then the current generation can enjoy consumption close to what it would have been if the aging issue did not exist. However, in this case, the burden on future generations will be relatively great. Alternatively, the current generation could consume less and save more, which would allow the consumption of future generations to be closer to what it would have been in the absence of population aging. How big are these effects? To assess magnitudes, the Board economists first examined the case in which the nation saves at its current rate for the next twenty years, thereby largely insulating the baby-boom generation from the effects of the coming demographic transition. After that, they assumed, consumption falls and saving rates rise, with all future generations experiencing the same percentage reduction in consumption relative to the baseline in which no population aging occurs. Their rough calculations suggest that, in this case, the per capita consumption of future generations would be about 14 percent less than what it would have been in the absence of demographic change. For comparison, they next considered the case in which the burden of demographic change is shared more equally among current and future generations. They considered a case in which the national saving rate, instead of staying at its current level for the next twenty years, rises immediately. Further, they asked by how much todays saving rate would have to increase to lead to equal burden-sharing among current and future generations. ("Equal burden-sharing" is interpreted to mean that the current generation and all future generations experience the same percentage reduction in per capita consumption relative to the baseline scenario without population aging.) They found that equal burden-sharing across generations could be achieved by an immediate reduction in per capita consumption on the order of 4 percent (or, since consumption is about two-thirds of output, by an increase in national saving of about 3 percentage points.) This case obviously involves greater sacrifice by the current generation, but the payoff is that all future generations enjoy per capita consumption that is only 4 percent, rather than 14 percent, below what it would have been in the absence of population aging. The large improvement in the estimated living standards of future generations arises because of the extra capital bequeathed to them by virtue of the current generations assumed higher rate of saving. These numbers shouldnt be taken literally but the basic lesson is surely right--that the decisions that we make over the next few decades will matter greatly for the living standards of our children and grandchildren. If we dont begin soon to provide for the coming demographic transition, the relative burden on future generations may be significantly greater than it otherwise could have been.2 At the heart of the choices our elected representatives will have to make regarding the distribution of these costs across generations will be an issue of fairness: What responsibility do we, who are alive today, have to future generations? What will constitute ethical and fair treatment of those generations, who are not present today to speak for themselves? If current trends continue, the typical U.S. worker will be considerably more productive several decades from now. Thus, one might argue that letting future generations bear the burden of population aging is appropriate, as they will likely be richer than we are even taking that burden into account. On the other hand, I suspect that many people would agree that a fair outcome should involve the current generation shouldering at least some of that burden, especially in light of the sacrifices that previous generations made to give us the prosperity we enjoy today. The choice of which generations should bear the burden of population aging has consequences for economic efficiency as well as for intergenerational equity. If we decide to pass the burden on to future generations--that is, if we neither increase saving now nor reduce the benefits to be paid in the future by Social Security and Medicare--then the children and grandchildren of the baby boomers are likely to face much higher tax rates. A large increase in tax rates would surely have adverse effects on a wide range of economic incentives, including the incentives to work and save, which would hamper economic performance. Alternatively, to avoid large tax increases, the government could decide to sharply reduce non-entitlement spending in the future. However, such actions might also have important social costs that need to be taken into consideration. Sharing the Burden of Population AgingIf, as a nation, we were to accept the premise that the baby-boom generation should share at least some of the burden of population aging, what policy steps might be implied? As I have already noted, from a broad economic perspective, the most useful actions are likely to be those that promote national saving. Perhaps the most straightforward way to raise national saving--although not a politically easy one--is to reduce the governments current and projected budget deficits. To the extent that reduced government borrowing allows more private saving to be used for capital formation or to acquire foreign assets, future U.S. output and income will be enhanced and the future burdens associated with demographic change will be smaller. Increasing private saving, which is the saving of both the corporate sector and the household sector, is likewise desirable. Corporate saving, in the form of retained earnings, is currently at relatively high levels, but household saving rates are exceptionally low.3A broad-based increase in household saving would benefit both the economy and the millions of American families who currently hold very little wealth. Unfortunately, many years of concentrated attention on this issue by policymakers and economists have failed to uncover a silver bullet for increasing household saving. One promising area that deserves more attention is financial education. The Federal Reserve has actively supported such efforts, which may be useful in helping people understand the importance of saving and to learn about alternative saving vehicles. Psychologists have also studied how the framing of alternatives affects peoples saving decisions. For example, studies suggest that employees are much more likely to participate in 401(k) retirement plans at work if they are enrolled automatically--with a choice to opt out-- rather than being required to actively choose to join. The pension bill recently passed by Congress and signed by the President included provisions to increase employers incentives to adopt such opt-out rules; it will be interesting to see whether such rules are adopted and, if so, how effective they are in promoting employee saving. Other steps can also help increase the future productive capacity of the economy and thereby reduce the adverse effects of demographic change. For example, devoting resources to improving our K-12 education system, expanding access to community colleges, increasing on-the-job training, and stimulating basic research could augment the nations capital in the broadest sense of the term and might have desirable distributional effects as well. Another response to population aging is to adopt measures that encourage participation in the labor force, particularly among older workers. In the near term, increases in labor force participation would raise income; some of this income would be saved and would thus be available to augment the capital stock. In the long run, higher rates of labor force participation, particularly by those who would otherwise be in retirement, could help to offset the negative effect of population aging on the share of the population that is working. To some extent, increased labor force participation by older workers may happen naturally. Increased longevity and health will encourage greater numbers of older people to remain longer in the workforce. And slower growth in the labor force will motivate employers to retain or attract older workers--for example through higher wages, more flexibility in work schedules, increased training directed toward older workers, and changes in the retirement incentives provided by pension plans. Reform of our unsustainable entitlement programs should also be a priority. The nature and timing of those reforms will be determined, of course, by our elected representatives. However, the intergenerational perspective does provide a few insights that might be helpful to policymakers as they undertake the needed reforms. First, restructuring the finances of our entitlement programs to minimize their reliance on deficit spending will enhance national saving and reduce the burden on future generations. Second, changes in the structure of entitlement programs should preserve or enhance the incentives to work and to save; for example, we should take care that benefits rules do not penalize those who may wish to work part-time after retirement. Finally, the imperative to undertake reform earlier rather than later is great. As illustrated by the simulation I discussed earlier, the longer the delay in putting our entitlement programs on a sound fiscal footing, the heavier the burden that will be passed on to future generations. Moreover, the sooner any restructuring of entitlement programs takes place, the easier it will be for people now in their working years to prepare, for example, by saving more today. However, if reform is delayed and fiscal exigencies ultimately force changes in these programs with little notice to potential retirees, their ability to adjust their behavior appropriately could be much reduced. ConclusionOver the next few decades, the U.S. population will grow significantly older, a development that will affect our society and our economy in many ways. In particular, the coming demographic transition will create severe fiscal challenges, as the cost of entitlement programs rises sharply. I hope to have persuaded you today, however, that the economic implications of this transition go well beyond fiscal policy. From a broader economic perspective, the question is how the burden of an aging population is to be shared between our generation and the generations that will follow us. A failure on our part to prepare for demographic change will have substantial adverse effects on the economic welfare of our children and grandchildren and on the long-run productive potential of the U.S. economy. References Auerbach, Alan J., Jagadeesh Gokhale, and Laurence J. Kotlikoff (1991). "Generational Accounts: A Meaningful Alternative to Deficit Accounting," in David Bradford, ed.,Tax Policy and the Economy, vol. 5, National Bureau of Economic Research. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, pp. 55-110. Elmendorf, Douglas, and Louise Sheiner (2000). "Should America Save for Its Old Age? Fiscal Policy, Population Aging, and National Saving"Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 14 (Summer), pp. 57-74. Gokhale, Jagadeesh, and Laurence J. Kotlikoff (2001)."Is War Between Generations Inevitable?"Report no. 246, National Center for Policy Analysis. Dallas, November. Sheiner, Louise, Daniel Sichel, and Lawrence Slifman (2006). "A Primer on the Macroeconomic Consequences of Population Aging," unpublished working paper, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Division of Research and Statistics, September. Footnotes 1.See Sheiner, Sichel, and Slifman (2006) and Elmendorf and Sheiner (2000) for discussions of the basic approach.Return to text 2.Another approach for gauging the potential impact of demographic change on future generations is the generational accounting framework developed by Auerbach, Gokhale, and Kotlikoff (1992). This framework begins with the assumption that, for people living today, tax rates will not be increased and benefits will not be cut. On that assumption, one can calculate the taxes (net of transfers received) that future generations will have to pay to achieve long-term balance in the government budget. According to recent estimates using this approach, to achieve long-term budget balance the net tax rate on future generations will have to be about double the tax rate on current taxpayers (Gokhale and Kotlikoff, 2001). This approach looks at the intergenerational issue through the prism of fiscal policy rather than taking the broader economic perspective I have emphasized today, and its underlying assumptions are somewhat different. However, the basic message--that failure by the current generation to address the economic implications of aging will impose significant costs on future generations--is the same.Return to text 3.It is worth noting that a households saving need not equal its change in wealth, since the standard definition of saving excludes capital gains. One plausible explanation of the recent low level of household saving rates is that capital gains in stocks and in residential real estate, by increasing wealth, have reduced the motivation of households to save out of current income. If that explanation is correct, then the recent slowdown in the appreciation of house prices should lead ultimately to some increase in household saving rates, all else equal.Return to text
The Treasury Department, the Federal Reserve Board and the U.S. Secret Service issued their third collaborative report today on the use and counterfeiting of U.S. currency abroad. The report revealed that while more than half of circulated U.S. banknotes are held in other countries, counterfeiting incidents remain low. People all over the world look to American currency for safety and security, said U.S. Treasurer Anna Escobedo Cabral. I am pleased to learn that while counterfeiters may try to undermine the integrity of our money, American vigilance has upheld its reliability. An efficient payment system and healthy economy require a sound currency, said Federal Reserve Vice Chairman Donald L. Kohn. The Federal Reserve recognizes that the dollar is widely used outside the United States, and is deeply committed to preserving its integrity. "U.S. currency is recognized as a symbol of stability and integrity around the world," said Michael Merritt, Deputy Assistant Director, U.S. Secret Service. Thanks in great measure to a three-pronged strategy of public education, aggressive enforcement, and regular currency redesigns, counterfeiting of U.S. currency has remained at consistently low levels. Residents of countries with unpredictable political and economic conditions have used U.S. currency as a means of reliability for decades. The report estimated that about $450 billion of the $760 billion in circulation as of December 2005 is held abroad. The international popularity of U.S. currency makes it an obvious target for counterfeiters. But the report estimates that of U.S. notes in circulation abroad and at home, only about one note in 10,000 is counterfeit. The report attributes this low level of incidents to extensive U.S. data gathering, education efforts, law enforcement and communications with banks around the world. Additionally, the introduction of the new currency design starting in 1996 and related educational outreach around the world made counterfeit detection easier. The study reaches five major conclusions about the counterfeiting of U.S. currency: This study is the last in a series of reports and provides updates to the first reports issued in 2000 and 2003. Much of the information presented in the earlier reports remains valid today. Previous reports can be found at:2003:http://www.treas.gov/press/releases/docs/counterfeit.pdf2000:http://www.treasury.gov/press/releases/reports/counterf.pdf Attachment (4.52 MB PDF)