The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced its approval of the application filed by Fulton Financial Corporation, Lancaster, Pennsylvania, to merge with Columbia Bancorp and acquire its subsidiary bank, The Columbia Bank, both of Columbia, Maryland. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced its approval of the application filed by Huntington Bancshares, Incorporated, Columbus, Ohio, to acquire Unizan Financial Corp. and its subsidiary bank, Unizan Bank, National Association, both of Canton, Ohio. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the approval of the application of Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau, Frankfurt, Germany, to establish a representative office in New York, New York. Attached is the Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced its approval of the application filed by Synovus Financial Corp., Columbus, Georgia, to acquire Riverside Bancshares, Inc. and its subsidiary bank, Riverside Bank, both of Marietta, Georgia. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced its approval of the application filed by The Toronto-Dominion Bank, Toronto, Canada, and its subsidiary, TD Banknorth Inc., Portland, Maine, to acquire Hudson United Bancorp and its wholly owned subsidiary, Hudson United Bank, both of Mahwah, New Jersey. Attached is the Board's Order relating to this action.
A private swearing-in ceremony for Ben S. Bernanke is scheduled for Wednesday, February 1 at approximately 9 a.m. EST at the Federal Reserve Board. The Senate today confirmed Ben S. Bernanke as the Chairman and a member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
The Federal Reserve Board announced on Wednesday that Michelle A. Smith is resigning her position as Assistant to the Board and Director of the Office of Board Members. The Board also announced the appointments of David W. Skidmore and Rose Pianalto Cameron as Assistants to the Board, effective February 1, 2006. Mr. Skidmore will serve as chief spokesperson for the Board and Ms. Pianalto Cameron will oversee other public information activities. Ms. Smith, chief spokesperson for the Board, is leaving to join departing Board Chairman Alan Greenspan in his private sector activities. She became Assistant to the Board in 2001, after serving the U. S. Department of the Treasury from 1993 in positions culminating in Senate confirmation as Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for Public Affairs. Ms. Smith received her graduate and undergraduate degrees from Baylor University in Waco, Texas and she worked previously for Senator Lloyd Bentsen of Texas. Mr. Skidmore joined the Board in 1999 as public affairs specialist and was appointed Special Assistant to the Board with responsibility for media relations in 2000. Prior to joining the Board, Mr. Skidmore was a reporter for The Associated Press, covering economic, banking and tax policy. He is a graduate of the Pennsylvania State University. Ms. Pianalto Cameron joined the Board in 1980 and worked in the divisions of Information Technology and Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems before transferring to the Office of Board Members in 1992. In 2000, she was promoted to Special Assistant to the Board with responsibility for public information activities and publications. She is a graduate of the University of Akron. In addition, the Board is transferring Lynn S. Fox, Senior Adviser, from the Office of Staff Director for Management to the Office of Board Members to provide additional staff resources on a temporary basis. Ms. Fox came to the Board in 1985 and served as Assistant to the Board from 1998 to 2003, when she joined the Office of the Staff Director for Management. She is a graduate of Smith College and the George Washington University.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the issuance of a Consent Order to Cease and Desist against Jean Peyrelevade, the former chairman of Credit Lyonnais, S.A., Paris, France. In December 2003, the Board issued a Notice of Charges against Mr. Peyrelevade, alleging that he participated in violations of the Bank Holding Company Act and its regulations relating to the "Executive Life" matter. Mr. Peyrelevade denied the charges and requested a hearing. The Board's Order resolves those charges. In addition to the Board's Order, the U.S. Attorney in Los Angeles is also announcing today that Mr. Peyrelevade has agreed to enter a plea to pending criminal charges relating to this matter. Under the plea agreement, Mr. Peyrelevade has agreed to pay a $500,000 criminal fine. The Board's Order restricts Mr. Peyrelevade's participation in the conduct of the affairs of foreign banks in the United States. The Board's Order supplements automatic restrictions imposed upon Mr. Peyrelevade upon acceptance of his plea to the criminal charge. By law, Mr. Peyrelevade will be prohibited from participating in the conduct of the affairs of domestic insured depository institutions without the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation's approval. A copy of the Order is attached.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday named ten new members to itsConsumer Advisory Councilfor three-year terms and designated a new Chair and Vice Chair for 2006. The Council advises the Board on the exercise of its responsibilities under the Consumer Credit Protection Act and on other matters relating to consumer financial services. The Council meets three times a year in Washington, D.C. Lori Swanson was designated Chair; her term runs through December 2006. Ms. Swanson is Solicitor General for the Office of the Minnesota Attorney General. Lisa Sodeika was designated Vice Chair; her term on the Council ends in December 2007. Lisa Sodeika is Executive Vice President, Corporate Affairs for HSBC North America Holdings Inc. The ten new members are: Dorothy BridgesMinneapolis, Minnesota Ms. Bridges is the President and Chief Executive Officer of Franklin National Bank, a commercial bank that serves small businesses and non-profit entities. She has experience in analyzing credit risk for loan portfolios, purchasing loan pools from non-profits and government agencies, and working with financial institutions on bank regulatory compliance--specifically in the areas of fair lending and the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA). Tony T. BrownCincinnati, Ohio Mr. Brown is the Chief Executive Officer of the Uptown Consortium Inc. in Cincinnati, a community development corporation formed by executives from five of the largest employers in Cincinnati. The Consortium focuses on the revitalization of Uptown neighborhoods. While serving at the U.S. Department of Treasury, Mr. Brown implemented the $14 billion New Markets Tax Credit Program. Sarah LudwigNew York, New York Ms. Ludwig is founder and Executive Director of the Neighborhood Economic Development Advocacy Project. Ms. Ludwig helps community groups develop local strategies to address redlining and lending discrimination, and conducts training for groups and their members on consumer protection and fair lending laws, predatory mortgage lending and credit issues, and access to financial services. Mark K. MetzCharlotte, North Carolina Mr. Metz is Senior Vice President and Deputy Counsel of Wachovia Corporation. He is responsible for managing the legal affairs of Wachovia's General Bank, which include first and second lien mortgage lending, deposits, student lending, direct and indirect automobile lending, and credit cards. Mr. Metz is lead counsel on fair lending issues and a member of the General Bank Operating Committee. Lance MorganWinnebago, Nebraska Mr. Morgan is President and Chief Executive Officer of Ho-Chunk, Inc., the economic development corporation of the Winnebago Tribe of Nebraska. Since 1995, he has directed the development of Ho-Chunk, Inc., focusing on the creation and operation of businesses that provide employment opportunities for members of his tribe. Joshua PeirezPurchase, New York Mr. Peirez is Senior Vice President and Associate General Counsel for MasterCard International, Inc. He is lead counsel to the President of MasterCard's North America Region business unit; MasterCard’s Chief Product Officer; and President of MasterCard Advisors. He is responsible for advising senior management on new product development and global business strategies, and for working with global regulators, the U.S. Congress, and state legislators. Anna McDonald RentschlerJefferson City, Missouri Ms. Rentschler is the Bank Secrecy Act and Anti-Money Laundering Officer for Central Bancompany. Until recently, she served as Vice President and Compliance Officer for First National Bank of Audrain County, where she was responsible for federal and state compliance supervision and conducting oversight for all mortgage loan activity and sales in the secondary mortgage market. Faith Arnold SchwartzWashington, District of Columbia Ms. Schwartz is Senior Vice President of Government, Housing, and Industry at Option One Mortgage Corporation, a subsidiary of H&R Block. The organization originates mortgage loans, including non-prime residential loans. Ms. Schwartz is responsible for public policy and relationships with legislators, lenders, non-profits, consumer advocacy groups, as well as housing, regulatory, and trade organizations. Edward SivakJackson, Mississippi Mr. Sivak is Director of Policy and Evaluation for the Enterprise Corporation of the Delta (ECD), a community development finance institution. He coordinates the activities of The Emerging Markets Partnership to expand economic opportunities in the Delta. Mr. Sivak also manages the evaluation activities for ECD’s commercial lending, housing, and community development programs. Alan WhitePhiladelphia, Pennsylvania Mr. White is Supervising Attorney for Community Legal Services, Inc., a legal service provider for low-income Philadelphia residents. He represents low-income consumers in such areas as mortgage foreclosure, bankruptcy, real estate, consumer credit, truth-in-lending, debt collection, civil rights, and family law cases. Council members whose terms continue through 2006 are: Dennis L. AlgiereSenior Vice PresidentCompliance and Community AffairsThe Washington Trust CompanyWesterly, Rhode Island Sheila CanavanConsumer AttorneyLaw Office of Sheila CanavanMoab, Utah Anne DiedrickSenior Vice PresidentJPMorgan Chase BankNew York, New York Hattie B. DorseyPresident and Chief Executive OfficerAtlanta Neighborhood DevelopmentPartnershipAtlanta, Georgia Bruce B. MorganChairman, President andChief Executive OfficerValley State BankRoeland Park, Kansas Mary Jane SeebachManaging Director, Public AffairsCountrywide Financial CorporationCalabasas, California Paul J. SpringmanChief Marketing OfficerEquifaxAtlanta, Georgia Forrest F. StanleySenior Vice President and DeputyGeneral CounselKeyBank National AssociationCleveland, Ohio Council members whose terms continue through 2007 are: Stella AdamsExecutive DirectorNorth Carolina Fair Housing CenterDurham, North Carolina Faith L. AndersonVice President,Legal Complianceand General CounselAmerican Airlines Federal Credit UnionFort Worth, Texas Carolyn CarterAttorneyNational Consumer Law CenterGettysburg, Pennsylvania Michael CookVice PresidentWal-Mart Stores, Inc.Bentonville, Arkansas Donald S. CurrieExecutive DirectorCommunity Development Corporationof BrownsvilleBrownsville, Texas Kurt EggertProfessor of Law andDirector of Clinical Legal EducationChapman University School of LawOrange, California Deborah HickokChief Executive Officer and PresidentACH Commerce, LLCOoltewah, Tennessee Anselmo VillarrealExecutive DirectorLaCasa de Esperanza, Inc.Waukesha, Wisconsin Kelly K. WalshFormer Senior Vice PresidentBank of HawaiiCompliance and Community DevelopmentHonolulu, Hawaii Marva E. WilliamsSenior Vice PresidentWoodstock InstituteChicago, Illinois
The federal bank and thrift regulatory agencies on Tuesday issued for comment proposed guidance on sound risk management practices for concentrations in commercial real estate lending. The agencies have observed that some institutions have high and increasing concentrations of commercial real estate loans where repayment primarily is dependent on rental income or from the proceeds of the sale, refinancing, or permanent financing of the property. Such concentrations may expose institutions to unanticipated earnings and capital volatility in the event of adverse changes in the general commercial real estate market. The proposed guidance--from the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the Office of Thrift Supervision--reinforces existing guidelines for real estate lending and safety and soundness. It provides criteria for identifying institutions with commercial real estate loan concentrations that may warrant greater supervisory scrutiny. As provided in the guidance, such institutions should have robust risk-management systems in place and capital levels higher than the regulatory minimums and appropriate to the risk associated with these concentrations. Comments are requested on all aspects of the guidance and are due 60 days after publication in theFederal Register, expected shortly. The guidance is attached. Attachment (84 KB PDF)Note: Comment period has been extended to April 13, 2006.Media Contacts:Federal ReserveDave Skidmore(202) 452-2955FDICDavid Barr(202) 898-6992OCCKevin Mukri(202) 874-5770OTSErin Hickman(202) 906-6677
WASHINGTON, D.C. (January 13, 2006) - The federal financial regulatory agencies today announced a public service campaign to aid in the financial recovery of victims of last year's hurricanes. Although four months have passed since Hurricanes Katrina and Rita made landfall, some bank customers have not yet been in contact with their lenders. Communication is an essential step in the road to financial recovery. The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of Thrift Supervision, the National Credit Union Administration and state financial regulators are encouraging banks, thrifts, and credit unions to continue to work with borrowers affected by the hurricanes. Assistance may include waiving fees, lowering interest rates, extending repayment schedules, or deferring principal or interest for an additional period, where appropriate. For these options to be considered, however, it is essential that the borrower contact his or her lender. The federal financial agencies continue to work to meet the needs of federally insured depository institutions and their customers. Additional guidance is available at the Federal Financial Institution Examination Council's web site (http://www.ffiec.gov). The public service announcements (PSAs) are being distributed to print and radio media outlets with the highest concentrations of people affected by the hurricane. The PSAs are also available for download and use from the OCC web site athttp://www.occ.gov/hurricane.htm. If customers need assistance contacting their lender, please call the toll-free FDIC number, 877-275-3342. Related financial information for hurricane victims:FFIECFederal ReserveFDICNCUAOCCMedia Contacts:Federal ReserveSusan Stawick(202) 452-2955FDICElizabeth A. Ford(202) 898-6993OCCBryan Hubbard(202) 874-5770OTSKevin Petrasic(202) 906-6677NCUANick Owens(703) 518-6336 Media Contacts:Federal ReserveSusan Stawick(202) 452-2955FDICElizabeth A. Ford(202) 898-6993OCCBryan Hubbard(202) 874-5770OTSKevin Petrasic(202) 906-6677NCUANick Owens(703) 518-6336
The Federal Open Market Committee decided today to raise its target for the federal funds rate by 25 basis points to 4-1/2 percent. Although recent economic data have been uneven, the expansion in economic activity appears solid. Core inflation has stayed relatively low in recent months and longer-term inflation expectations remain contained. Nevertheless, possible increases in resource utilization as well as elevated energy prices have the potential to add to inflation pressures. The Committee judges that some further policy firming may be needed to keep the risks to the attainment of both sustainable economic growth and price stability roughly in balance. In any event, the Committee will respond to changes in economic prospects as needed to foster these objectives. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Alan Greenspan, Chairman; Timothy F. Geithner, Vice Chairman; Susan S. Bies; Roger W. Ferguson, Jr.; Jack Guynn; Donald L. Kohn; Jeffrey M. Lacker; Mark W. Olson; Sandra Pianalto; and Janet L. Yellen. In a related action, the Board of Governors unanimously approved a 25-basis-point increase in the discount rate to 5-1/2 percent. In taking this action, the Board approved the requests submitted by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, St. Louis, Kansas City, Dallas, and San Francisco.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its discount rate meetings for December 12 and 13, 2005. The minutes are attached.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Tuesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on December 13, 2005. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board’s Annual Report. The summary description of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes is based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's web site atwww.federalreserve.gov/fomc. Minutes of Federal Open Market Committee, December 13, 2005
Governor Susan Schmidt Bies Before the Tech Council of Maryland's Financial Executive Forum, Bethesda, Maryland I appreciate the opportunity to speak with you today about productivity and the outlook for the U.S. economy. As you know, long-term growth in productivity is critically important to improving the standard of living in any economy. The rate of growth of productivity can significantly affect inflation and economic expansion. But before I comment on productivity, I'd like to begin with a review of recent economic developments. Economic DevelopmentsReal economic activity has continued to expand at a solid pace. Clearly, the tragedy that hurricanes inflicted on New Orleans and surrounding areas of the Gulf Coast will have major implications for the people and the economy in those regions for a long time. However, for the nation as a whole, employment and industrial production indicators were only briefly disrupted by the hurricanes during the late summer and early fall. At the national level, consumer spending has been well maintained, and the fundamentals--such as income growth and household balance sheets--remain supportive. Many news reports and anecdotes suggest that the housing market is cooling and that investors are participating less actively. However, the construction of new homes has remained near recent highs. In the business sector, investment in new equipment continues to expand at a good clip, boosted by robust sales as well as ongoing replacement and upgrading needs. In addition, as I'll discuss in a moment, corporate financial conditions are favorable for investment. Turning to prices, core inflation has stayed relatively low in recent months despite the run-up in energy costs. For example, the twelve-month change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures excluding food and energy, a widely watched indicator of core inflation, moved down from 2.3 percent in November 2004 to 1.8 percent in November 2005. Although energy prices have receded from the highs last fall, crude oil costs are still well above year-earlier levels. As a result, gasoline prices remain elevated despite a decline of about 70 cents per gallon from the peak recorded in the aftermath of the hurricanes. The prices for home heating oil and natural gas will add to consumers' budget pressures this winter; although spot prices have moved lower in recent weeks, they are still well above year earlier levels. Higher energy prices have also affected businesses, particularly in those industries with energy-intensive production processes and those that purchase a large share of energy-intensive products, such as industrial chemicals and plastics. There is only limited evidence, most of it anecdotal, of pass-through to consumer prices from the run-up in energy prices. However, we are seeing the effects in the price data for certain energy-intensive categories, such as transportation. Futures markets currently expect only limited increases in the price of crude oil this year. Nevertheless, tight resource utilization is likely to put pressure on prices. The unemployment rate, at 5 percent in the second half of 2005, was down about 1 1/4 percentage points from its recent peak in early 2003 and at its lowest level in four years. Meanwhile, the factory operating rate--a measure of resource utilization in the manufacturing sector--was 79.6 percent in December, a rate that is approaching its 1972-2004 average of 79.8 percent. Within manufacturing, industries operating at utilization rates above their long-run averages include plastics and rubber products, iron and steel products, machinery, electronic products (excluding computers), and electrical equipment, appliances, and components. And although the overall high technology aggregate is below its long-run average rate of utilization, the operating rate at firms making computers and peripherals is above average, and the rate at manufacturers of communications equipment has risen significantly over the past year. As in the mid- to late-1990s, resilient productivity growth appears to be helping contain the inflationary pressures that might otherwise be expected to accompany a narrowing margin of resource slack. That said, we at the Federal Reserve will remain vigilant for any sign of a deterioration in the inflation outlook. As I mentioned earlier, the core inflation rate has stayed relatively low in recent months, as rapid gains in productivity have tended to offset cost increases. Reflecting these developments is a continued rise in corporate profits, which has allowed firms to further bolster their strong balance sheet positions. Corporate balance sheets have improved dramatically over the past couple of years because of surging profits, low interest rates, and a concerted deleveraging, which have combined to reduce debt burdens and increase liquidity in the form of cash assets. Generally speaking, the growth of profits and the related buildup of cash have been broadly distributed across industries. And with the sound corporate financial positions, credit spreads remain narrow, and bank lending terms remain favorable. These beneficial financial conditions, combined with rising utilization rates, bode well for further increases in business capital expenditures. Indeed, capital expenditures for most types of equipment increased significantly during the third quarter, and Census data on orders and shipments suggest that investment continued to expand in the fourth quarter, with much of the gain in spending for information technology--that is, computers, communications equipment, and software. Productivity and TechnologyLet me now turn from the overall economic outlook to productivity and technology developments. Productivity growth receives a considerable amount of attention from policymakers because its rate is an important determinant of a nation's standard of living. The development of farm machinery in the early 1800s, for example, boosted the productivity of farmers and consequently freed up labor to shift to the industrial sector. More recently, continued increases in industrial productivity have enabled a relative shift of employment into the production of services. Although manufacturing employment has fallen sharply in recent years, both in absolute terms and as a share of total employment, the output of the nation's manufacturers has continued to increase because of impressive productivity gains. Looking beyond manufacturing to the broader nonfarm business sector, we see that productivity growth has risen significantly over the past decade in the United States. Labor productivity gains accelerated from an average annual increase of 1 1/2 percent over 1973-95 to an average annual increase of 2 1/2 percent over 1995-2001. From the first quarter of 2001 through the third quarter of 2005, labor productivity growth picked up even more--to an annual rate of nearly 3 1/2 percent. Thus, despite a recession, a tech-sector meltdown, a stock market correction, terrorism, and corporate governance scandals, our economy has proven remarkably resilient and productive. These productivity gains result from many forces, including business investment that has increased the amount and quality of capital available to the workforce, business process innovations, and the growth of innovative, research-intensive industries such as information technology and biotechnology. Because firms may take a while to absorb a rapid run-up in investment, the productivity payoffs to investment may be drawn out for some time as firms learn more effective ways to use the capital they have acquired. Anecdotal information suggests that some of the recent productivity gains appear to reflect firms making better use of existing capital and improving business processes. As I noted, the growing importance of the innovative technology sector has spurred productivity growth. I will focus on developments in the information technology (IT) sector; we at the Federal Reserve know more about IT than other high technology areas because of the availability of a wide variety of data. Moreover, economists better understand the role of IT in the U.S. economy, particularly its influence on productivity growth, because developments in this sector are more easily quantified than developments in other pioneering fields, such as biotechnology. In thinking about information technology equipment and productivity, I find a useful starting point to be recalling the role of IT capital accumulation during the last business cycle. Work by Federal Reserve economists suggests that a large chunk of the increase in the rate of productivity growth in the late-1990s was due to the accumulation of IT capital. During that period, many firms invested heavily in IT in an effort to stay on top of the so-called "technological revolution." One consequence of this drive to acquire high-tech equipment appears to have been a massive overhang of IT capital that has only recently been largely worked through. An example of this overhang has been the great amount of underutilized fiber optic cable resulting from the race to build fiber optic networks. The accumulation of IT capital boosted productivity growth in many industries. At least some of the capital, however, may have been accumulated without a clear understanding of how to fully utilize the technology to create value for the adopting organizations. As a result, in recent years firms appear to be realizing further productivity gains as they discover new and better methods for using IT. As I'm sure many in this audience know better than I do, one way in which firms have started to use IT more effectively is by exploiting synergies among network equipment, computing equipment, and software. These synergies may spur adoption of new technologies and increase the potential for further productivity gains. For example, in the 1990s, the combination of cheap modems, faster semiconductors, and browser software helped to jumpstart the World Wide Web. More recently, firms have been using leading-edge IT products to consolidate their networks, effectively enabling a single communications network to carry data, voice, and video. Besides innovations in hardware, ongoing developments in software have helped firms augment the capabilities of their communications equipment and computer networks. Increasingly, software upgrades are used to roll out new features without the need for heavy investment in new hardware. For example, a business using an Internet-based telephone system, better known as VoIP (voice over internet protocol), may be able to upgrade the features on its phones through a software update rather than buying new phones or installing new cables. For many years, companies in the United States have been at the forefront of new technology developments. With demand for IT continually evolving, taking a moment to review the U.S. role in the production of IT equipment is worthwhile. Despite the globalization of high-tech production, the U.S. capacity to produce high-tech products is still increasing. The Federal Reserve Board's estimates of capacity in industries that manufacture high-tech equipment--which includes semiconductors and related electronic components, computers, and communications equipment--increased more than 20 percent between the fourth quarter of 2004 and the fourth quarter of 2005, after rising at an annual average rate of about 8 percent during the previous three years. So, what high-tech equipment do we produce in the United States, when every item at the local computer store appears to have been made abroad? A significant portion of the U.S. capacity for high-tech production focuses on leading edge products and on customized products for which close proximity to customers is an advantage. Most desktop computers sold in this country are assembled here, as are many high-end computer servers and storage network devices. Within the category of communications equipment, much of the high-end networking equipment (such as the routers and switches used by telecom service providers) is produced domestically. U.S. factories also produce leading-edge microprocessors, certain flash memory products (used in portable media players, digital cameras, and cell phones), and a variety of semiconductors used in communications equipment. In contrast, laptops tend to be imported in a nearly completed state, and we are largely importers of mobile phones, computer peripherals (monitors, printers, and so forth), consumer communications equipment (such as home routers), and a great variety of semiconductors. But we must keep in mind that, even for products that are produced abroad and imported, U.S. companies continue to perform a significant share of the research and development that those products entail. Because the development and the production of IT products play a vital role in the U.S. economy, the Federal Reserve continually watches for new developments in the pace of technological change and tries to gauge the likely influences of these developments on productivity growth. In most cases, data on the pace of technological change are hard to come by, so we carefully examine data on production and price trends. For example, the production of communications equipment dropped sharply during the last recession, and these products accounted for a large share of the capital overhang in high-tech equipment. However, since its trough in 2002, the Federal Reserve Board's industrial production index for communications equipment has risen about 75 percent, with particularly pronounced increases in the production of high-end routers and switches. These devices are needed to support advanced mobile technologies, the upgrading of telecom service provider equipment, and the attempts to solve the so-called "last-mile" problem--that is, a low-cost way to bring a fiber-optic speed data pipe down your street and into your home or business. The pace of change in communications equipment and computers is, to some degree, related to the pace of change in the components of these products, particularly semiconductors. Even in the semiconductor industry, however, measuring the pace of technological change is difficult and fraught with uncertainty. The difficulty is partly that improvements along one dimension may introduce challenges along other dimensions. For example, as the industry shrinks the features of a semiconductor, such as the microprocessor in your personal computer, the chip can conduct calculations more quickly, but it also produces more heat. Another part of the difficulty is determining exactly when changes occur and how much of any change is due to a particular improvement. Industry data, for example, suggest that the introduction of improvements in calculation speed accelerated in the late 1990s and may have decelerated around the beginning of this decade. However, the exact dates are difficult to pin down, and they tend to vary with the type of semiconductor. In addition, any deceleration in the pace of introducing faster semiconductors may have been offset by innovative efforts to reduce energy consumption or to improve wireless capabilities. With the growing use of mobile, battery-powered communications technologies and computers, energy consumption and connectivity may be just as important as speed. In light of the difficulties and uncertainties that are associated with measuring the pace of technological change, I want to take a moment to comment on the risks for the appropriate conduct of monetary policy that are associated with technology and productivity. Because technology feeds into various macroeconomic aggregates--including household and business spending, productivity, and inflation--its implications for the U.S. economy will continue to necessitate careful observation, improved measurement, and study. Members of the Federal Reserve staff, both at the Board and at the Reserve Banks, have contributed significantly along all three of these dimensions by improving measures of high-tech prices and output and by studying the implications of technology on U.S. productivity. A significant slowing in the pace of technological change could have inflationary consequences. Accordingly, monetary policy makers will remain alert, carefully monitoring technological developments that have the potential to mitigate inflationary pressures as well as developments that could raise the risk of overheating.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released figures that indicate the Federal Reserve Banks distributed approximately $21.454 billion of their $30.246 billion total income to the U.S. Treasury during 2005. Federal Reserve System income is derived primarily from interest earned on U.S. government securities that the Federal Reserve has acquired through open market operations. This income amounted to $28.959 billion in 2005. Additionally, income from fees for the provision of priced services to depository institutions totaled $901 million. The remaining income of $386 million includes earnings on foreign currencies, earnings from loans, and other income. The operating expenses of the twelve Reserve Banks totaled $2.193 billion in 2005, including the System's net pension credit. In addition, the cost of earnings credits granted to depository institutions amounted to $212 million. Assessments against Reserve Banks for Board expenditures totaled $266 million and the cost of currency amounted to $477 million. Net deductions to income amounted to $3.577 billion, primarily representing unrealized losses on assets denominated in foreign currencies that are revalued to reflect current market exchange rates. Total net income for the Federal Reserve Banks in 2005 amounted to $23.521 billion. Under the Board's policy, each Reserve Bank's net income after the statutory dividends of $781 million to member banks and the $1.286 billion necessary to equate surplus to paid-in capital is transferred to the U.S. Treasury.